
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     1. COR. 8. 2.
                     If any man thinke that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to knowe.
                  
                  ¶ THE DEFENSE of the Aunswere to the Admonition, against the Replie of T. C. BY IOHN VVHITGIFT Doctor of Diuinitie.
                  In the beginning are added these. 4. Tables.

                        1 Of dangerous doctrines in the Replie.
                        2 Of Falsifications and Untruthes.
                        3 Of matters handled at large.
                        4 A table generall.
                     
                  
                  If any man be contentious, we haue no such custome, neyther the Churches of God. 1. Cor. 11. 16.
                  
                  ❀ Printed at London by Henry Binneman, for Humfrey Toye. Anno. 1574.
                  
                     GAL. 5. 26.
                     Let vs not be desirous of vaineglorie, prouoking one another, enuying one another.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the godlie Reader.
            
               IT VVERE BVT A NEEDLESSE labour to make any particular recitall of those pointes of doctrine vvhich this Church of Englande at this day doth holde and maintayne, for they be at large set out in sundrie english bookes, and especially in the Apologie of the Church of Englande, and the Defense of the same: summarily also collected together in the boke of Articles agreed vpon in the Conuocation at London Anno. 1562. &c. this I dare boldely affirme, that all pointes of Religion necessarie to saluation, and touching eyther the mysterie of our redemption in Chryst, or the right vse of the Sacramentes, and true manner of vvorshipping God, are as purely and perfectely taught, and by publike authoritie established in this Church of England at this day, as euer they vvere in any church sithence the Apostles time, or novv be in any reformed Church in the vvorld: the vvhich to be true, those that be learned (euen among the myslikers of this present state) can not, nor vvill not denie.
            Likevvise: that all Heresies, all corrupt doctrines, all superstitious and papisticall opinions, haue bene, and be by the Prince and the Realme banished, by the learned Byshops and Preachers in vvorde and in vvriting confuted, vvho is so blinded vvith malice, that he cannot see, or so frovvard and vvilfull that he vvil not confesse?
            VVhat shall vvethen think of those men, that are so farre from acknovvledging this singular and vnspeakeable benefite proceeding from the mere mercie of God, so farre from being thankfull for the same, from desiring the continuance of it vvith heartie prayers, that by all meanes possible they seek rather to obscure it, and to deface it, bicause in certaine accidentall poynts they haue not their fantasies and proper deuises. If this be not to set themselues agaynst God, and to trouble the peace of the Church for externall things (vvhich is schismaticall) let the quiet and godlie Christian, iudge. Hovve much better had it bene for them to haue proceeded in teaching necessarie pointes of doctrine, and exhorting to obedience, to concorde, to godlie lyfe and conuersation, than thus vvith no small reioycing of the vvicked, great offence of the vveak Gospellers, maruellous grief of the Queenes maiestie, and other that haue the care of gouernment, frovvardly to dysquiet and dysturb the Church, trouble the happie peace of the cōmon vveale, and hazard the vvhole state of Religion, they shall one day (if not to late) vvell vnderstand.
            Furthermore it behoueth all godlie mindes, that vvill not be caried avvay vvith rash and ouerhastie iudgemēt in this cōtrouersie, to cōsider not only that that I haue before spoken of the truth of doctrine publikely receyued and cō
               firmed: but also circumspectly to vveigh the circumstances of time, place, person, and the vvhole state of things, novve in this Church and Realme of Englande: The regarde vvherof in mine opinion, must needes cause in all discrete heades a staye of iudgement, in comparison that the things themselues barely considered, vvoulde do. The state of this Church of Englande at this day God be thanked, is not Heathenish, Turkish, or Papisticall, in vvhich conditiō many things might be done, that othervvise are not to be attempted: but it is the

state of a church reformed and by authoritie and consent settled, not only in truth of doctrine, as before is noted, but also in order of thinges externall touching the gouernment of the Church and administration of the Sacramentes. VVherefore the controuersie is not vvhether many of the thinges mentioned by the platformers, vvere fitlie vsed in the Apostles time, or may novv be vvell vsed in some places, yea or be cōueniently vsed in sundrye reformed Churches at this day. For none of these braunches are denyed, neither do vve take vpon vs (as vve are sclaundered) either to blame or to condemne other Churches for such orders as they haue receiued most fit for their estats. But this is the vvhole state of our controuersie, vvhen vve of this Church, in these perillous dayes, do see that vve haue a greate number of hollovve hartes vvithin this Realme that daylie gape for alteratiō of Religiō, and many mightie & great enimies abroade busilie deuising and vvorking to bring the same to passe, and to ouerthrovve the state both of religion and of the Realme: vvhether seing vve haue a setled order in doctrine and gouernment receiued and confirmed by lavve, it may stand vvith godlie and Christian vvisdome, (vvith disobedience to the Prince and lavve, and vvith the vnquietnes of the Church and offence of many consciences) to attempt so greate alteratiō as this platforme must needes bring, and that for matters externall onlye, and vvith such egernesse and bitternesse, that they deface and discredite the vvhole state of this Church vvith al the Preachers and Ecclesiasticall gouernours of the same, as remayning in horrible corruptions and Antichristian deformities, and thereby fill the mouthes of the aduersaries vvith greater matter of obloquie to deface the gospell, than euer of them selues they had bene able to deuise.
            Surely I could neuer reade, but that they that should so do, vvere rather to be estemed troublesome and schismaticall defacers, than zealous and godly reformers.
            I knovve that no Church can be so perfect in all points of externall gouerment and ceremonies, but that such as be disposed, maye picke some occasion of quarrelling thereat, thoughe vniustlie: therefore the true members of the Church must not be to light of credit, nor to redie to follovve contentious captaines. For S. Paule sayeth: Si quis sit contenfiosus inter vos &c. If any be contentious among you, we haue no such custome, neyther the Churches of God. &c.
            Againe, vvhen any thing is amisse it must be considered vvhether the faultes be in the thinges themselues, or in the persons: for vve may not vvith partiall and corrupt iudgement impute the faultes of the persons to the things, vvhether they be offices or ceremonies, for then should vve continuallie bee altering the state, and neuer stand stedfast in any kynde of gouernment: therefore in such cases vve must seke to reforme the abuses in men, vve must not pull avvaye the states and offices, or the thinges themselues bicause they be abused by some men.
            But to let this passe and come to the purpose: this Replie of T. C. (vvhich is of some counted so notable a peece of vvork) consisteth of tvvo false principles and rotten pillers: vvhereof the one is, that vvee must of necessitie haue the same kynde of gouernment that vvas in the Apostles tyme, and is expressed in the scriptures, and no other: the other is, that vve may not in any vvise, or in any consideratiō, reteyne in the Church any thing that hath bin abused vnder the Pope: if these tvvo postes be vveake, yea rotten (as I haue proued them to be, in this my Defense) then must the building of necessitie fall. Touching the

first, it is to be vnderstanded, that there is a double gouernment of the Church, the one spirituall, the other externall: Christ onlie and none other by the operation of his spirite and directiō of his vvord spiritually gouerneth his Church, and reignyng in the conscienees of the faithfull, guydeth their myndes in all matters of deuotion, faith and holynesse: and this is the spirituall kingdome of Christ, so much spoken of in the scriptures, and speciallie in the Prophets: of this kynde of gouernment I meane not. The externall gouernment hath both a substance and a matter about vvhich it is occupied, and also a forme to atteyne the same, consisting in certaine offices and functions, and in the names and titles of them: the substance and matter of gouernment, must in deede be takē out of the vvord of God, and cōsisteth in these pointes, that the vvorde be trulie taught, the sacramentes rightlie administred, vertue furthered, vice repressed, and the Church kept in quietnes and order. The offices in the Church vvhereby this gouernment is vvrought, be not namely and particularelie expressed in the scriptures, but in some pointes left to the discretion and libertie of the Church, to be disposed according to the state of tymes, places & persons, as I haue further declared in my Ansvvere and Defense follovving. Of the secōd principle I haue also spoken at large there, so that I shall not neede to trouble the Reader any further in these matters.
            The proofes that T. C. vseth in this his Replie are grounded onlie vpō vntrue allegations and interpretations of the scriptures, vaine and childishe reasons, falsifying the authorities of Doctors & other vvriters, vntrulie ascribing that vnto them, vvhich they vvrote not, as shall be euidētlie declared in this Defense, by the grace of God: and surelie I haue not redde many bookes vvherein so many grosse vntruthes are to be found, or vvherein there is so manye manifest argumentes vttered, to proue the ignoraunce of the author, and lacke of reading auncient and learned vvryters.
            Touching his manner of vvriting I shal not neede to say much, for any mā of iudgemēt, that readeth his book may easilie perceiue, vvith vvhat hautines of mynde, vvhat contempt & disdayne of others, in vvhat sclaundrous and opprobrious manner it is vvritten: hovve oft doth he repeate M. Doctor, in contēpt either of the degree, or of the person? 370. times is the leaste: vvhat other speaches of disdaine and reproche doth he vtter? but I do nothing at all maruayle at it, for I consider it hath bene the vsuall practise of sectaries and disquieters ofAug. lib. 1. contra Donatist. the Church. It is true that S. Augustine sayeth, lib. 1. contra Donatist. cap. 11. Nulli schismata facerent si fraterno odio non excaecarentur. None would make schismes, if they were not blinded with hatred of their brethren. And againe: An non est in schismate odium fraternum? quis hoc dixerit, cum & origo & pertinacia schismatis nulla sit alia, nisi odium fraternum. Is there not hatred of brethren in schismes? who would saye so? seeing that the beginning and continuaunce of schisme proceedeth from no other cause, than from hatred of our brethren. I must therefore saye vvith M. Zuinglius: Scio quibus conuitijs & quantis furoribus illorum
               Lib. de Baptis. 
               hic me exponam. I knowe to what reproches and to howe greate rages of theirs I make my self subiect. And I vvill conclude vvith him. Quamuis miris conuitijs nos perstringere, &
               Eodem. 
               nouis quotidie clamoribus morderenō des
                     〈1 line〉
                  āt &c. Although they maruelouselie slaūder vs, and daylye with newe clamors, reuile and backbite vs, yet will I neuer leaue of the defense of the truth before their contumacie be made knowne to all men. VVho so peruseth such learned authors as had greate experience of the lyke kynde of men, he shall finde that their especiall grace both in speaking and vvriting, hath bene in bitter inuectiues against other vvhom they haue enuyed and hated for some speciall causes. M. Zuinglius in an Epistle that he vvriteth before his book de Baptismo, speaking

of the Anabaptistes sayeth thus: Hyp
                     〈1 line〉
                  critica illorum humilitas illis fatis nota & perspecta est: qui cum his aliquando sermones contulerunt, quàm scilicet sit illorum oratio omni felle amarulentior. Their hypocriticall humilitie is verie well knowne to those which haue had cōference with them: how that their talk is more bitter than gaule. And in his booke de Baptismo, he earnestlie protesteth that he neuer found any thing in them, quàm saturninam quandam & melan
                     〈1 line〉
                  holicam ingeniorum contumaciam. &c. and in his book against Baltasar he sayth that by dispraysing and reuyling others, they seeke to wynne credite vnto them selues. How this qualitie agreeth vvith some of our men, and especiallie vvith the author of this Replie, I am content that other men iudge. If I my selfe haue in vvryting, and in this Defense spoken something more sharpelie, it must be imputed to myne infirmitie, and yet am I therevnto greatelie prouoked: but herein as in manye other matters, I submit my selfe to the iudgement of those that haue authoritie to iudge, and of those that be learned: for I am content still to make this the foote of my song: Errare possum, haereticus esse nolo.
            
            To those that be in authoritie I onlie speake as M. Zuinglius did to the magistrates in his time, vpon the like occasion: Quòd si hoc cuiuis hominū impunè facere licebit,
               In Ecclesiast. 
               vt quae priuato suae rationis consilio adinuenit, in vulgus spergat, inconsulta, imò resistente etiam vniuersa totius ecclesiae authoritate, breui plus errorum, quàm fidelium & Christianorum in ecclesia erit cernere. If it be lawful for euery man to publish abroade among the people those thinges which he hath deuised of his owne heade, before he hath consulted with the church, nay against the authoritie of the whole church, in short time we shall see moe errors in the church, than there be faithfull men and Christians. And againe, Si enim boc permittamus vt capitosus quisque &
               Lib. de Baptis. 
               malè feriatus bomo, mox vt nouum aliquid & insolens animo suo concepit. &c. If we suffer euery hedie and braynelesse fellowe, so sone as he hath cōceyued any new thing in his mynd, to publish it abroade, gather disciples, and make a new secte, in shorte time we shal haue so many sectes and factions, that Christe which scarce with greate payne and labor, is brought to vnitie in euery church, should be deuided againe into many partes. VVherefore as you haue singularelie and vvith greate vvisdome and labour, alreadie restored the true religion of Christe, and banished all superstition and erroneous doctrine: So likewise (as the same Zuinglius sayeth) in those perillous times, wherein Satan seketh so busilie toIn his epistle before his book de Baptismo. entrap vs (so that with newe cōtentions about external thinges, he goeth about to trouble those whome the sworde of persecution eyther moued not, or terrified not) look well about you, note the craftes and subtilties of them: take hede of the pestilent windes of diuers doctrine, let none trouble the gospell amongst you, or set you at strife and variaunce. And remember that as the streame that commeth dovvne from the highe mountaines being caused by much rayne and snovve, taking eueriething that it meteth vvith, before it, the further it goeth the greater strengthe, and the more aboundance of vvater it gathereth, and first remoueth out of their places small stones, after vvith greater violence, casteth dovvne strong bridges, yea huge and mightie rockes, and encreaseth to that strength, that nothing, be it of neuer so greate force, can resist or vvithstand it: and in the end leueth nothing else behinde it, quàm inutilem luctum, quaerelas inanes, & miseram vastatorum agrorum & segetum formam: but vnprofitable mourning, vaine complaintes, and a miserable forme of the spoiled fieldes: euen so, contentionum pestis, & impia haeresis, eodem modo progrediens, non quicquam aliud quàm turpem & calamito sam rerum faciem: in florentissimo antè ecclesiae, agro post se relinquit. The plague of contention, and wicked heresie proceding in like manner, leaueth nothing after it but a miserable and pitifull face and shew of thinges in that place, which was before the flourishing fielde of the church. Consider vvhat the vviseman sayeth Prouerb. 17. the beginning of stryfe is as one that openeth the waters. It had bene vvell if the beginning had bene vvithstanded: but seing that vvas neglected, and rather by some furthered than stopped: Yet novv

it is time to make vp the breache. This is sufficiēt to you, vvhose vvisdome and carefulnesse is vvell knovvne to all those that be not vvith sinister affection blinded.
            Those that be in the Ecclesiasticall state (and desirous to kepe the peace of the Churche) I haue onlie to admonishe, that they be not discouraged from doing their duties, bicause of the slaunderous reportes, and vnchristian tauntes and contumelies, that our vnquiet brethren lade them vvith, knovving that it hath bene the vsuall practise of all sectaries and especiallie of Anabaptistes, vvho counte them all as vvicked, and vngodlie, as vvorldlinges, and men pleasers, as idle and slouthfull, that conspire not vvith them in their confused platforme. I maye vse the same exhortation to you that M. Zuinglius, vsed in the like time. Nec quicquam vos moueant, atroces illaecalumniae. &c. Let not those bitter reprochesZuinglius 
                     〈◊〉
                   Ecclesiast. and cauilling speaches, (wherewith the Anabaptistes and others, studious of contention, and discorde oppresse you) moue you any thing at all, bicause you rather followe Christ, than them: for although they call you wicked, and infidels, yet your selues best know what your cōfidence in God is, and what is your meaning and purpose, so that so often as they accuse you of impietie, or of infidelitie, so ofte do they minister manifest proofes vnto you, that their spirite procedeth from the father of lyes. And marueile not at those bitter contentions: you knovve it to be true, that the same Zuinglius also sayeth: Nec enim aliud est communis illius hostis nostri ingenium. &c. This is the subtil
                  〈1 line〉
               e of our common enimie, this is his manner, herevnto doth he bend him selfe whollie, and sleepeth not: that as sone as the lord hath reuealed the light of his worde, he also by and by soweth darnell: this do almost all the epistles of S. Paule teach vs, wherein it is manifestlie declared that there hath bene alwayes some men Pietatis simulatores potiùs quàm cultores, rather feyners of holynes than embracers of it, who for certaine externall and vnprofitable thinges, doubt not to laye (as it were) greuous stumbling blockes, to the doctrine of the gospell. Onlie let vs be diligent in our vocation: earnest against all kinde of enimies: feruent in prayers for the preseruation of the Queenes maiestie, and for the peace of the Church, vvith the good successe of the Gospell: and vigilant that errors be not published vvithout controlement: and, God vvill ere it be long, (if our sinnes deserue not the contrarie) giue peace to this Church, as he hath done to other disturbed in like manner. To conclude, I do charge all men before God and his Angells, as they vvil ansvvere at the daye of iudgement, that vnder the pretence of zeale, they seeke not the spoyle of the Church: vnder the colour of perfection they vvorke not confusion: vnder the cloake of simplicitie they couer not pride, ambition, vayneglorie, arrogancie: vnder the outvvarde shevve of godlinesse, they nourish not contempt of magistrates, popularitie, Anabaptistrie and sundrie others pernicious and pestilent errors. The Lord make vs thankful for his infinite mercies and singular goodnesse bestovved vpon vs in thus long continuing his gospell: preseruing our most gracious and louing Queene: and ouerthrovving all the conspiracies and deuises that the diuell hath hetherto inuented to molest this state and Church.
         
         
            
            ¶ A note of such dangerous pointes of doctrine as are auouched by T. C. in his Replie: and quoted as they are to be founde in this Booke.
            
               HE sayth that Certeine of the things which we stande vpon are suche as if euery heare of out heade were a life, we ought to aforde them for the defense of them: whereby he woulde insinuate that this Church of England doth mainteine some dānable doctrine. pag. 44.
               2 He sayth, that if the Church be considered in the whole and generall gouernment and outwarde pollicie of it, it may be pure and vnspotted: whiche smelleth of an Anabaptisticall fansie. pag. 50.
               3 He affirmeth, that many things are both commaunded and forbidden, of which there is no expresse mention in the word, which are as necessarily to be followed or auoyded, as those whereof expresse mention is made: which soundeth to the confirmation of the very foundation of all Papistrie. pag. 77.
               4 He holdeth, that the doctrine of free will is not repugnant to saluation: and yet is it a doctrine cleane contrarie to frée iustification by Christe. pag. 82.
               5 He saythe, that all the commaundements of God and of the Apostles, are needefull for our saluation: which is a notorious error. pag. 103.
               6 He vtterly denyeth, that any magistrate can faue the life of blasphemers, contemptuous and stubborne I dolaters, murtherers, abulterers, incestuous persons, and such like, whiche God by his indiciall lawe hath commaunded to be put to death: whereby he byndeth the ciuill Magistrate to the obseruing of the Judicial lawes of Moses, and condemneth this state & gouernment (now vsed in this realme of England) of manyfest impietie. pag. 120.
               7 He affirmeth, that in the Churches of Christe, there be no drunkardes, nor whoremongers, at the least, which are knowne: which assertion tendeth to Anabaptisme. pag. 176.
               8 He saith, that what socuer apparell the magistrate commaundeth the minister to weare, the commaundement can not be without some iniurie done to the minister: which is to debarre the Magistrates from appointing any kynde of apparell to Ministers. pag. 265.
               9 He saith, that those ministeries without the which the Church is fully builded & brought to periection and compleat vnitie, are not to be reteined in the Church: which is a very daungerous assertion, and may giue occasion of diuers errors. pag. 307.
               10 He holdeth that it were more safe for vs, to conforinc our indifferent ceremonses to the Turks which are farre of, than to the Papistes which are so neare: whiche can not be so, for the Turkes vtterly deny Chryst, and be voide of all Christian ceremonies. pag. 475.
               11 He affirmeth, that not only the dignitie, but also the being of the Sacrament of baptisme dependeth vpon this, whether he be a minister or no, that do the minister it
                     〈1 line〉
                   whiche if it be true, then be there nūbers not baptized, that are supposed to be baptized, & it must of necessitie follow, that they ought to be rebaptized, which is plaine Anabaptisme. pa. 5
                     〈1 line〉
                  8.
               12 He sayth, that with what lawfulnesse men may offer themselues to the prayers and hearing of the worde of God, they may also offer themselues to the Lordes Supper: which is a palpable error, pag. 532. And pag. 604. he affirmeth directly to the contrarie.
               13 He denyeth, that the church or any man, may restraine the people from bodily labor, in any of the sixe dayes: which is to drawe from the Magistrate his lawfull authoritie, and to giue carnall libertie to the people. pag. 541.
               14 He sayth, that the life of the Sacramentes dependeth of the preaching of the worde: which if it be true, then is the Sacrament of baptisme not to be ministred to Insants, bycause they can not heare the worde preached, and indéede this is the ground of Anabaptisme. pag. 566.
               15 He doubteth, whither he may call him minister or no, that can not preach, whiche being ioyned with his former assertion, that the minister is of the being of the Sacrament▪ it wyll fall out, that he counteth all those not baptised which haue bene baptised by any other, than by preachers. pag. 568 and. 583.
               16 He séemeth to be of this iudgement, that only those which be of the familie of God ought to be baptised: which is a daungerous error, for not all that be baptised are of the familie of God. pag. 621.
               
                  17 He secludeth the Children of excommunicate persons, and of prosessed Papistes from the Sacrament of baptisme, vntill they be able to make a confession of their fayth: which smelleth very strongly of Anabaptisme, and it is a manyfest error. pag. 622.
               18 He sayth, that Princes must remember to subiecte themselues vnto the Churche, to submit their Scepters, to throwe downe their crownes before the Church, and to licke the duste of the fecte of the Churche: and by the Churche he meaneth the presbyterie and Eldership: so that he woulde haue Princes in as great bondage to his Seniors, as euer they were to the Pope. pag. 645.
               19 He sayth, pag. 646. that the gouernment of the common wealth, must be framed according to the gouernment of the Church, euen as the hangings to the house: and he affirmeth that the gouernment of the Church is Aristocraticall or populare, and therefore his opinion must néedes be, that no gouernment of any common wealth ought to be Monarchical, but either Aristocraticall or populare: which is a daungerous error, and springeth of this, that he doth not distinguish betwixt the essential points of the gouernment of the Churche, and the accidentall pointes of the same: for the essentiall pointes of ecclesiasticall gouernment, maye well agree with any lawfull state of common wealth, and ciuill kinde of gouernment: as the Gospell maye be truely preached in them all, the Sacraments rightly ministred, discipline duely erecuted, and such like: but the accidentall points of gouernment (as the manner of electing ministers, the kinde of discipline, accidentall ceremonies, and other suche like rites and circumstances) may be varied according to time, place, and persons, and are so to be framed, as they may best agrée with the state and gouernmente of euery common wealth. The ignorance of this distinction hath cast. T. C. into a great and perilous error.
               20 He both ioyneth with the Papistes, in taking from the ciuil Magistrate authoritie in ecclesiasticall matters, and also in confirming that error by their arguments, and none other. pag. 694. &c.
               
               21 He affirmeth, that the reading of the scriptures without the preaching, cannot deliuer so much as one poore sheepe from destruction. &c. wherein he is also contrarie to himselfe. pag. 784.
            
         
         
            ¶ A note of certaine vntruthes, and falfied authorities conteyned in the Replie of T. C. and are to be founde out in this Booke, according to the quotation.
            
               HE saythe, that it appeareth in the eight chapter of the booke of Nehemias, that the teast of Tabernacles, which was commaunded of the Lord to be celebrated euery yeare, was not celebrated from the dayes of Iosua the sonne of Nun, vntill the returne of the people from their captiuitie: whiche is a manyfest vntruth, as it is euident. 1. Esdr. 3. and it is also against the opinion of all the interpreters. pag. 8.
               2 Iosias, is alledged for Ezechias. pag.
                   10.
               3 This worde (especially) is added to the texte. 1. Cor. 10 pag. 86.
               4 He opposeth Ignatius and Tertullian, to Ambrose and Augustine, as though Ambrose & Augustine should thinke it to be lawfull to fast on the Lords daye, & the other two thould write the contrarie: whereas Ambrose and Augustine fully agrée with Ignatius and Tertullian in that matter. pag. 99.
               5 He mangleth S. Augustines wordes, both before, behinde, and in the mydest. pag. 107.
               6 Pag. 144. he falsifieth the wordes of S. Paule. 1. Tim. 3. and vntruely translateth them.
               7 He saith that the Israelites when they worshipped the Calfe saide, That they would kepe holy day to the Lorde Iehoua: which is not true. pag. 151.
               
                  8 He citeth a place out of Iustinians code, which cannot as yet be found there, neither doth he faythfully report, but subtilly suppresse the wordes whiche explane the matter, as they be set downe by Illyricus of whom he borowed them. Pag. 184.
               9 He sayth, that Platina wryteth, that Lodowik the second commaunded the Romaines to choose their owne Bishop: which is not true, for he only commended them for so doing, he did not commaunde them. Pag. 186.
               10 He sayth, that those which write the Centuries suspect the Cannon of the Councell of Laodicea, which forbiddeth the electiō of ministers to be committed to the people, and doubt whether it bea Bastarde or no: whiche is vntrue, for the Authours of the Centuryes make no such doubt. Pag. 188.
               11 He sayth, that Hierome willeth that the people should haue power and authoritie to choose their clearks & their ministers: which is not so, for Hierom willeth no such thing. Pag. 203.
               12 He alledgeth Musculus his wordes in stead of Ieromes: and that which onely Muscu. sayth in his cōmon places, he ascribeth to Ierom in his epist. to Nepotian. ead.
               
               13 He sayth that Nazian. (in an oration that he wryteth at the death of his father) confuteth those reasons, that seeme to hinder the election of Ministers by the Church, and yet is there no such thing to be founde in that oration. Pag. 205.
               14 He referreth the Reader to the. 6. and. 7. booke of Eusebius, for examples of elections of the people & Clergie confirmed by the Christian magistrate, namely in the Bishop of Constantinople: and yet is there no such examples, in those bookes, neyther any mention of any Bishop of Constantinople. Pag. 207.
               15 He fathereth a manifest vntruth vpon Eusebius. lib. 6. touching Origens admission into the ministerie. Pag. 209.
               16 He leaueth out the wordes of the Councell of Chalcedon, that open the meaning of the Councell. Pag. 222.
               17 He againe ascribeth Musculus his wordes to Ierome. Pag. ead.
               
               18 He denyeth that Chrysostome maketh a distinction betwixt Bishops and Elders, when as his wordes be plaine. Pag. 226.
               19 He doth vntruely and corruptly alledge Theodorete. Pag. 268.
               20 He sayth, Pag. 280. that the two treatises called the Admonition, were written by diuerse persons, the one not knowing the others doings: the contrarie whereof is manifestly declared.
               21 He citeth Nicephorus corruptly. Pag. 326.
               22 He falsifyeth a place in the first of Iohn, by a false interpretation, to make it serue his turne. Pag. 302.
               23 He sayth that the Centuries alledge a place of Ambrose, out of his booke de dignitate sacerdotali, to proue that the office of an Archbishop was not then come into the Church. Which is vntrue, for the Centuries alledge no suche place out of Ambrose for any such purpose. Pag. 337.
               24 He sayth that Hierome and Augustine speake of Archdeacons, in those places where they onely speake of Deacons. Pag. 346.
               25 The wordes of Socrates are falsified. Pag. 350.
               26 He vntruly reporteth the wordes of Cyprian. Pag. 257.
               27 He falsifieth the meaning of Tertullian, alluding that to Ceremonies, that Tertullian meaneth of matters of fayth and of saluation. Pag. 370.
               28 He kéepeth back the wordes of Theodoret that explane his meaning. Pag. 412.
               29 An vntruth concerning Iereneus, auouched out of the fifth booke of Eusebius. Cap. 3. &. 4. Pag. eadem.
               
               30 He peruerteth the wordes of the Gréeke scholiast. Pag. 413.
               31 He auoucheth an vntruth of Theodoret. Pag. 415.
               32 He vttereth a verie vncharitable vntruth of the worthie man M. Iewel, Bishop of Sarisburie. Pag 422.
               33 He sayth, that in the Councell of Antioch it appeareth that the Bishop of the Metropolitane seate called Synodes and propounded the matters, which were to be handled, and that it was his office to see, that the Bishops kept themselues within their owne Diocesse: and he quoteth the. 9. Canon where no such thing is to be founde. Pag. 435.
               
                  34 He both addeth and detracteth from the. 34. Canon attributed to the Apostles. Page. 439.
               35 The. 17. Canon of the Councell of Antioche is vntruely alleadged. Page. 440.
               36 He should saye an Epistle of Pope Zachary to Boniface, and he sayth an Epistle of Zachary to Pope Boniface, In the whiche Epistle he saythe that this cause scil. Least they shoulde wax vile through the multitude, is alleaged why there should not be a Bishop in euery village or little citie which is vntrue: for there is no such cause alleaged there. 443.
               37 He alleadgeth the fift Canō 
                  Concilij Tyronnes. for that, that cannot be found in it. Pag 446.
               38 He saythe, that another councell (quoting the Councell of Afrike) decreed that the Christians, shoulde not celebrate feastes on the birth dayes of Martyrs, because it was the manner of the heathen: which is a manifest vntruth, for there is no such decrée in that councell. 479.
               39 He sayth. That Tertuliian would not haue the Christians to syt after they had prayed, because the Idolaters did so: and he quoteth his booke de anima, where there is no such thing written. Page ead
                        〈1 line〉
                     .
               
               40 He fathereth an vntruth of Augustine touching Baptizing by women or in priuate houses. Page. 522.
               41 He alleageth M. Beza in his annotations for that which cannot be founde in thē. Pag. 584.
               42 He saith, that if we will take the nature of the sacrament so straightly as Augustine doth, & that there be no sacramentes but when as to the element there commeth the worde, the circumcision can be no Sacramen
                     〈1 line〉
                  , which is a grosse vntruth, for in circumcision there is both the word and the element. Page. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               43 He saith that the eldership was most flourishing in Constantines time, but he noteth 
                     〈◊〉
                   place, where we may finde his saying to be true. Page. 651.
               44 He is greatly deceiued about the excommunicating of Apollinaris, and sheweth manifest tokens, that either he hath not himselfe read the story, or that he hath read it very negligently, as it is plainely declared in the Defense. Page. 669.
               45 He falsifieth Ambrose. Page. 670.
               46 He alleageth a place of Tertullian very deceitfully. Page. 673.
               47 He saith that Augustine in his bookes de Bap. contra Donatistas, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   that if the most of the people be in 
                     〈1 line〉
                  ected with the fault which is to be punished, that then no excommunication ought to be attempted, for because 
                     〈◊〉
                   sufficient number of voyces will not be obteined for the excōmunication, whereas these wordes, for because a sufficient number of voyces. &c. are not to be founde in these bookes of Augustine. Page. 675.
               48 He maketh an vntrue report of the. 10. Canon of the Councell of Anti
                     〈1 line〉
                  h. Page. 682.
               49 He alleageth that for making Ecclesiastical lawes and ceremonies, which is ment of building and repayring of Churches, out of Euseb. lib. 2. de vita Constant. Epist. ad Eusebium. Page. 698.
               50 He affirmeth that this practise continued still in the Churches of God, scil. that nothing was broughte into the Church to be read, besides the word of God, whereas the contrarie is manifestly proued of the same time whereof he meaneth. Page. 718.
               51 He saith that S. Iohn in the Apocalips reprehending the ministers of diuers Churches, dyd not put to his name vnto his booke, whiche is a manifest vntruth, for he addeth his name both in the beginning, and in the end: thrise in the first chapter, and once in the last.
            
            I here omit his manifest wresting of the Scriptures: his wrong collections: bolde assertions contrarie to the practise of the Church and truth: and notorious vntruthes affirmed by him of the Answere to the Admonition, with sundrie other grosse ouersights, because I haue noted them in the margent, and plainly detected them in my Defense to this Replier, and are (for the most part) noted also in the Generall Table vnder these 3. titles. Falsifications of the Replier: T. C. charged with vntruth. T. C. chargeth the Answere falsely. Men may erre and be deceiued: but either to speake nothing truly, or often to fault in vntrue dealing, cannot be a token of the spirite of truth: the which spirite of truth, God for his Christes sake, graunt vnto all those that haue a heartie desire to know the truth.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPALL titles, and matters, handeled at large in this Booke.
            
               
                  AN answere to the Epistle Dedicated by T. C. too the Church of Englād &c. pag. 1
               An Epistle of the Author too the Church of England. 17
               An exhortation to the Ciuil & ecclesiasticall Magistrates. 31
               An aunswere to the Preface of the Admonition. 57
            
            
               Tractatus. 1.
               VVhether Christ forbiddeth rule and superioritie vnto mi nisters. 61
               The true interpretation of the 20 of Mathew &c. Reges gentium. &c. Cap. 1. 61
               The exposition of the place Math. 23. Cap. 2. 71
            
            
               Tract. 2.
               Of the authoritie of the church in things indifferent. 76
               Som things may be tollerated in the Church touching order, ceremonies, discipline, & kind of gouern ment, not expressed in the woord of God. Chap. 1. 76
               The opinion of the auncient fathers and councelles of thinges indifferent. Chap. 2 95
               The opinion of Saint Augustine of things indifferent. Chap. 3 99
               The opinion of M. Caluine of things indifferent. Chap. 4. 109
               The opinion of Bucer of things indifferent. Chap. 5 113
               The expositiō of the places of Deut. 4. & 12. quoted by the Admonition. Chap. 6. 116
               The opinion of other late writers of thinges indifferent. Chap. 7. 126
            
            
               Tract. 3.
               Of the election of Ministers. 132
               Of the triall of Ministers both in lear ning and conuersation. Chap. 1. pag. 132
               VVhether Idolatrous sacrificers and Massemongers maye afterwardes be Ministers of the Gospell. Chap. 2. 143
               Of Ministers learning Catechismes Chap▪ 3. 152
               Of the election of Ministers by the voices and consent of the people. Chap. 4. 154
               An examinatiō of the reasons which T. C. vseth to proue the perpetuall equitie &c. of elections by the people. Chap. 5. 170
               The diuersitie betwixt the Apostles times & oures, requireth a diuers kind of gouernement, and of ordering of Ministers. Chap. 6. 174
               That Bishops haue authoritie to admit and ordeine Ministers. Chap. 7. 194
               It is not necessary that the people should haue interest in the election of Ministers, but the contrary is conuenient. Chap. 8. 211
            
            
               Tract. 4.
               Of Ministers hauing no pastorall charge, of ceremonies vsed in ordering Ministers, of Apostles, Euangelistes, and Prophets. 216
               Of Ministers admitted, a place being not voyd. Chap. 1 216
               Of ceremonies vsed in ordeining Mi nisters. Chap. 2. 225
               Of Apostles, Euangelists, and Prophets. Chap. 3. 228
            
            
               Tract. 5.
               Of Residence of the pastor. Chap. 1. 235
               Of pluralities or hauing moe benefices than one. Chap. 2. 246
            
            
               Tract. 6.
               Of Ministers that cānot preach and of licences to preach. 251
               Some may be Ministers that cannot preach. Chap. 1. 251
               Of licences to preach. Chap. 2 254
            
            
               Tract. 7.
               Of apparell of Ministers. 256
               The causes vvhy they refuse the Apparell examined. Chap. 1. 256
               That Ministers vvere knovvne in times past by distinct apparell. Chap. 2. 261
               That the Magistrate may appoynt a distinct apparell for Ministers. Chap. 3. 264
               The distinction of apparell vvas appointed before the Popes tiranny Chap. 4. 268
               That the apparel now vsed is not Po pishe or Antichristian. And that things inuented by euil men may be vsed of Christians. Chap. 5. 271
               Diuers thinges concerning apparell in other places, of the Aunsvvere. chap. 6. 282
               The faultes vvherevvith the Admonitors charge the apparell, aunswered, Chap. 7 283
            
            
               Tract. 8.
               Of Archbishops, Metropolitās, Bishops, Archdeacons, &c. pag. 297
               The reasons of T. C. ansvvered, wher by he goeth about to take awaye the superfluous loppe (as hee termeth it) of the offices. chap. 1. 297
               That the names of Metropolitane, Archbishop, &c. be not Antichristian. chap. 2. 318
               The offices of Archbishops, &c. are not straung or vnheard of in Chri stes church: and of superioritie among the Clergie. chap. 3. 353
               The defense of the ansvvere of maister Iewell concerninge Archbishops, &c. against the vnreuerend Reply of T. C. chap. 4 422
               The causes of Archbishops and of their prerogatiue, and the estate of the old Bishops (assigned by T. C.) examined. Chap. 5. 435
               Other things concerning the offices and authoritie of our clergie, of inequalitie of degrees amongst ministers, &c. dispersed in other places of the Answer. chap. 6. 453
               A briefe collection of such authorities as are vsed in this defense of the authoritie of Archbishops & Bishops. Chap 7. 470
               A briefe comparison of the Bishops of our time, and the Bishoppes of the primitiue Church. Chap. 8. pag. 47
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
            
               Tract. 9.
               Of the communiō booke. 474.
               The generall faultes examined wher vvith the publike seruice is charged by T. C. Chap. 1. 474
               An examination of the particular faultes either in matter or forme, whervvith the Booke of commō praier is charged. Chap. 2. 487
               Of Baptisme by women vvherwith the communion Booke is falsly charged. Chap. 3. 503
               Of ministring the sacraments in priuate places. Chap. 4. 511
               The sacraments ministred by other than Ministers. Chap. 5. 515
               Of priuate communion, wherwith the Admonition chargeth the Booke of common prayer. Chap. 6. 525.
               
                  Of Churching of women. 534
            
            
               Tract. 10.
               Of holydayes. 538
               Of holidayes in generall, and that they maye bee appointed by the Church, and of the vse of them. Chap. 1. 538
               Of Saints dayes. Chap. 2. 543
            
            
               Tract. 11.
               VVhat kind of preachinge is most effectuall. 555
            
            
               Tract. 12.
               Of preaching before the administration of the Sacraments 562.
            
            
               Tract. 13.
               Of reading of the Scriptures. 568.
               A comparison betvveene reading of Scriptures and preaching. Chap. 1. page. 568
               That reading is preaching. chap. 2. pag. 574
               The profite of reading Scriptures in the Church. chap. 3. 578
            
            
               Tract. 14.
               Of ministring and preachinge by Deacons. 582
            
            
               Tract. 15.
               Of matters touching the communion. 588
               Of orders and ceremonies vsed in the celebration of the Communion. chap. 1. 588
               Of shutting men from the communion, and compelling to communicate. chap. 2. 603
               Of playn and simple ministring and receyuing of the communion. Chap. 3. 605
            
            
               Tract. 16.
               Of matters touching baptisme pag. 607
               Of interrogatories ministred to infantes. Chap. 1. 607
               Of Godfathers and their promise. Chap. 2 612
               Of fontes and crossing in baptisme. Chap. 3. pag. 614
               Of the parties that are to bee baptised. Chap. 4 619
            
            
               Tract. 17.
               Of the Seigniorie or gouernement by Seniors. 626
               VVhether there were such as the Ad monition calleth Seniors, in euery Congregation, chap. 1. 626
               VVhether the gouernement by Seniors ought to be perpetual, cha. 2 pag. 623
               The inconuenience of the Seigniory in the time of Christian Princes, especiallye in the state of this church. Chap. 3. 656
               That there is no one certain kind of gouernment in the church, which must of necessitie bee perpetually obserued. chap. 4. 678
            
            
               Tract. 18.
               Of certain matters concerning discipline in the church. 660
               Of Excommunication, and in vvhō the execution thereof dothe consist. chap. 1. 660
               Of Bishops courtes and their Officers. chap. 2. 679
            
            
               Tract. 19.
               Of Deacons and widowes. 686
               Of the Office of Deaōcs. chap. 1. 686.
               Of the office of widowes and their continuance. chap 2. 693
            
            
               Tract. 20.
               Of the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate in Ecclesiasticall matters. 694
            
            
               Tract. 21.
               Of subscribing to the communion Booke. 709
               Certaine generall faultes whervvith the Booke is charged by the Admonitors. chap. 1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Of reading Homilies & A 
                     〈◊〉
                   chap 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Of the name (priest) giuen to the mi nisters of the Gospel. chap. 3 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Matters concerning the solemniration of Mariage. chap. 4. 72
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Of the Confirmation of Children. Chap. 5. 
                     〈1 line〉
                  5
               Of burials and matters therunto belonging. Chap. 6 727
               Other particular faultes for vvhiche they refuse too subscribe too the Booke. Chap. 7 7
                     〈1 line〉
                  7
            
            
               Tract. 22.
               Of Cathedrall Churches. 743
            
            
               Tract. 23.
               Of ciuill offices in ecclesiastical persons. 749
               A triall of the places alleaged by the Admonition, against suche ciuill officers, as are exercised by ecclesiasticall persons in this realme. chap 1. 749
               The reasons vvhich T. C. vseth against ciuil offices in ecclesiastical persons examined. chap. 2. 75
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               The reasons vsed in the aunswer iustified. 763
               Of additions, detractions, & alterations in both the partes of the Admonition. 780
               Articles collected out of the for mer Admonition, & vntruly sayd (of the fautors of that Admonition) to be falsifiedpag. 795
               A view of the second Admonition. 799
               Answere to certayne pāphlets spread abroad of late. 806
               An examination of the places cited in the end of the Replye, touchinge matters in controuersie. In the end.
            
            The end of the principall Titles.
         
         
            
            
               A GENERALL TABLE OF THOSE things which are most worthie the noting in this booke: wherein this marke (&c) signifieth that that which is noted, is handled more largely, and continueth in moe pages together than are quoted.
            
               A
               
                  ABsurdities. 138. 195. 566. 684.
               An absurde collection. 383.
               Deliuerance from aduersitie, of two sortes. 493.
               ¶ Aerius heresie in denying the difference betwixte a Bishop and a Priest. 403.
               ¶ Adde to the word, what it is. 123.
               ¶ Admonition contrary to T. C. 38.
               Admonitiō would haue none compelled to communicate. 605.
               Contrariety in the Admonitors. 802
               Admonitors fly to allegories. 599.
               Admonitors agree not in their gouernment. 3.
               Admonitors iustly accused of contention. 34.
               Admonition disorderly published pag. 34.
               Admonitors disorderly preachyng pag. 34.
               Admonitors deny the Gospell to be truly preached in England. 38.
               Both the Admonitions slaūder this Church. 40. 485. 801.
               Admonitors compared to Donatistes. 5
                     〈1 line〉
                  .
               Admonitorsioyne with papists in de facing this Churche of Englande pag. 51. &c.
               Admonitors gratifie the Papistes pag. 55. 603. 712
               The ground of the Admonition. 76
               ¶ Aduersaries to the Churche of. 4. sortes. 7
                     〈1 line〉
                  5.
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   not one with 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 71.
               ¶ Alteration in this tyme daungerous. 678.
               ¶ Alexander a good Byshop. 594.
               ¶ Ambition. 481.
               Ambitious frowardnesse. 481.
               Ambition in the Admonitors. 560.
               ¶ Ambrose alloweth the Arch byshop. 335.
               Ambrose a Metropolitane. 336. 471.
               Ambrose his house of salutations. pag. 449
               Ambrose excōmunicated alone. 670
               Ambrose refused to come at the Em perours commaundemente, and why. 700.
               ¶ Amphilochius a Metropolitane. pag. 341. 471
               ¶ Anabaptisme a crafty heresie. 620.
               A note of Anabaptisme practised by the Replier. 696.
               An vsuall obiection of Anabaptistes pag. 239.
               Anabaptistes pretende a calling by by the people. 191 192.
               Anabaptistes inueigh more bitterly against Ministers than against papistes. 16.
               Properties of Anabaptistes. 33. &c.
               A braunch of Anabaptisme. 177.
               A dore opened to Anabaptisme. 313
               VVhy the Anabaptists alwayes pretend scripture. 98.
               The doctrine of the Replier tendeth to plaine Anabaptisme. 566. 567. 622. 626.
               ¶ Anacletus. 327.
               ¶ Anicetus. 328.
               ¶ Andronicꝰ and Iunia Apostles. 276
               ¶ An answere vnaduised. 347.
               ¶ Antichrist began in the Apostles time. 349.
               Antichrist worketh now by contention. 349.
               The tayle of Antichriste what it is. pag. 793.
               VVhat is a note of Antichrist. 276.
               ¶ Antiquitie maye be proued by the writings of Infidels. 324.
               ¶ Apparell for Ministers 256. &c.
               Apparell not refused bicause the Papistes vse it. 257.
               Apparel of ministers distinct. 261 &c
               The magistrate may appoint apparell for ministers. 264. &c.
               Distinction of apparell before the Popes tyranny. 268. &c.
               Iohns apparell. 270.
               Apparell now vsed not Antichristian. 271. &c.
               VVhite apparell vsed in the Ministration. 281. 282.
               Howe apparell serueth to edification. 286. &c.
               The forme of apparell maye put a man in mynde of his dutie. 291.
               Mourning apparell. 730. &c.
               ¶ Appeale graūted from the Magistrate to Bishops. 773.
               ¶ Apostolical function extraordinarie. 217.
               VVhat part of the Apostolicall function doth remaine. 218. 229. 424
               One Apostle dyd appoint ministers pag. 327.
               The Apostles began the lordes Supper with the lords prayer. 588. 602
               ¶ Apollinaris. 669.
               ¶ Apocryphà. 715. &c.
               Apocrypha read in times past, 721.
               Apocrypha. 793.
               ¶ Archbishops, Primate, Metropolitanes. 297. &c. 470. &c
               Christ called Archbishop. 300.
               The name of Archbishop maye be transferred to other than Christ pag. 300.
               Archbishop no new ministery. 303. 375.
               The office of Archbishop without the name. 340. &c.
               Great difference betwixt an Archebishop and the Pope. 308. 382.
               The Archbishops office conteyned in the Scripture. 313. 427
               The Archbishops office in the Apostels. 372
               Archbishop and Metropolitane, not antichristian names 318. &c.
               Antiquitie of Archbishops & their office. 318. 354
               Archbishops in England Anno. Domini. 180. 324. 470
               Differēce betwixt Archbishop and Byshop. 325.
               The Archbishops office in S. Iohn pag. 329.
               Archbishops and Metropolitanes before the Nicene Councell. 331. 354.
               Authoritie of the Metropoltane. pag. 333.
               The name and office of Archbishop and Metropolitane. 338.
               Primate allowed in the Councell of Carthage. 343.
               The authoritie of Archbishops in our Church. 374.
               The principal office of Archbishops pag. 355.
               How far our Archbishops deale in controuersies. 362.
               The reasons serue not for the Pope that serue for the Archbyshoppe. pag. 380. 381. &c.
               Metropolitanes in Ieromes time. 386
               The office of Metropolitane fixed to a place. 393.
               The vse of a Patriarch rare, in what sense. 419.
               The office of Patriarches in the Primitiue Church. 420.
               The authorite of our Archbishopps and Bishops lesse than in tymes past. 440
               Authoritie of Archbyshop and Byshop came not frō the Pope. 360
               The circuite of the Archbishop of Alexandria. 471
               
                  An Archbishop may gouerne one prouince, but not the Pope the whole world. 464. &c.
               Reasons for the Archbishop are solutions against the Pope. 467
               Authorities vsed in the Defense, for Archbishops, and the superiority of Bishops. 470. &c.
               ¶ Archdeacons. 344. &c.
               ¶ Archiflamines. 320. &c. 323
               ¶ Argumentum à secundùm quid ad simpliciter. 23
               Argumentum ab authoritate negatiuè. 24. 26. 77. 328. 543
               Argument of Negatiues by comparison. 26 27
               Argumentum à petitione principij. 26. 62. 95. 249. 302. 304. 314. 322. 440. 451.
               Argumentum à non causa pro causa 27. 293. 482.
               Argumentum ab aequivocatione. 62
               Argumentum à facto ad 
                     〈1 line〉
                  us. 142. 161. 505.
               Argumentum ab authoritate affirmatiuè. 78
               Argumentum ex solis particularibus pag. 79
               Argumentum ab ignorantia Elenchi 109. 181. 187. 206. 426.
               A deformed argument. 316. &c.
               Arguments borowed of the Papists. 466. 696. 697. 698. &c.
               Argumentum à toto ad partes affirmatiuè 265
               ¶ Aristotle not rightly alleaged. 243
               ¶ Arrogancie cloked with zeale. 42
               Arrogancie disprayseth good things pag. 725
               Arrogancie of the libellers. 57
               ¶ Assertion vnaduised. 475
               ¶ Athanasius Archbishop. 471. 339
               Athanasius Creede. 496
               Athanasius being a child, baptized. pag. 519.
               ¶ Atheists in the Church. 178
               ¶ Auncient Fathers contemned of the vnlearned 811
               ¶ Augustine of thinges indifferent. pag. 99. &c
               Augustine deliuered from vntrue surmises. 100
               Augustine heareth ciuill causes. 771. 772.
               Augustine retorted vpon the aduersarie. 811
               ¶ Aurelius Bishop of Carthage had the ouersight of many Churches. pag. 471
               ¶ Authoritie the best proofe in Diuine matters. 200
            
            
               B
               ¶ Babling in prayer, what it is. 805
               ¶ Baptisme the sacrament of fayth. pag. 608. 609
               Matters touching baptisme. 607. &c
               Of the parties to be baptised. 619. &c
               Baptisme once ministred remaineth perpetuall. 622
               The essentiall poynte of Baptisme. pag. 519.
               Baptisme called priuate in respect of the place. 93. 504
               Baptisme ministred but once a yere. pag. 238
               Baptisme true though not ordinarily ministred. 517. 521
               Differring of Baptisme not cōuenient. 521
               Baptisme by lay men. 518. 519. 523.
               Baptisme by women not collected out of the booke. 504. 793.
               Baptisme by women not defended. pag. 509. 516. 29.
               Baptisme ministred in priuate places. 511. &c. 513.
               Necessitie in Baptisme. 523.
               Baptisme ministred withoute preaching. 563
               The name of Baptisme transferred to the giftes of the spirit. 564
               ¶ Basilius, a Metropolitane. 341. 471
               ¶ Battus a babling Poet. 805
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   804
               ¶ Beggers and ignorant persons are thoughte onely to bee saued of some. 10
               ¶ To beleue and to be elected not al one. 611
               ¶ Benedictus. 494. &c. 496. 497
               ¶ Beza calleth the names of Archbishops. &c. holy names. 472
               Beza his iudgemēt of baptising the children of excommunicate person. &c. 623. 624.
               ¶ Bishops moste mete to haue the examination of ministers. 131
               Bishope haue authoritie to admitte ministers. 196. &c
               Bishops appointe their successours. pag. 205
               Bishops authoritie. 297. &c 408.
               Bishops called heades of the Churches. 301
               One ministerie of Bishops, but diuerse degrees 320
               A Byshop aboue a priest in Cyprians time. 358
               One Byshoppe in one Cittie. 366. 444.
               Difference betwixte Byshoppe and Priest. 383
               Byshoppes in the Apostles tymes. pag. 384. 470
               Ieromes Byshoppe aboue an Elder in rule. 385
               Byshops gouernours simply, not of one action onely. 3
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Byshoppes authoritie consisteth in offences. 75
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Byshop high priest. 411. 470. 471.
               VVhat kinde of authoritie Byshops exercise. 420
               Byshoppes succede Apostles in gouernment. 
                     〈1 line〉
                  32
               Comparison betwixte our Byshope and the olde Bishops. 472 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Byshops alone excommunicate. 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  6 &c.
               Byshops may haue assistance in excommunication. 673
               Authoritie ascribed to Bishops in 
                     〈1 line〉
                  x communication, not infinite but limited. 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  8
               Byshops gaue sentence in ciuill causes. 773
               ¶ A Bloudy assertion. 150
               ¶ Booke of common prayer. Looke Communion Booke.
               
               Booke of ordering Ministers iustifyed concerning examination. pag. 134. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     〈1 line〉
                  42
               The reasons of T. C. agaynste the Booke of ordering Ministers. pag. 134. &c
               ¶ Bodye, what it signifieth in Caluine. 46
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Of these wordes. The Body of ou
                     〈1 line〉
                  e Lord Iesus Christ. &c. 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               ¶ Bragges. 58. 297
               ¶ Bread in the Communion. Looke Communion Bread.
               
               ¶ Brethren may be punished. 809
               ¶ Bucer of things indifferēt. 113. &c.
               Bucers censure of the first Communion Booke. 595 615
               Bucer defaced by the Replyer. 522
               ¶ Burialls. 727. &c
               The place of Buriall. 737
               The dutie of the minister not hindred by burying the dead. 730
               A prayer at Buryall expounded. pag. 729
               The dead buryed by the minister & with prayer. 728
               Buriall Sermons. Looke funerall sermons.
               
            
            
               C
               ¶ Caius Fimbria. 7
                     〈1 line〉
                  8
               ¶ Caluine acknowledgeth the names of Archbishop, &c. 417. &c
               Caluine of thinges indifferente. 109 &c.
               Caluine alloweth Superioritie. 390. 398.
               Diuerse editions of Caluines institutions. 391. 50
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Caluines opinion of Communion bread. 592. &c
               ¶ Canon law not altogether condemned. 463 &c
               ¶ (Can) is not taken for (ought). 778
               ¶ Catechist, and pastor differ. 425
               Catechi
                     〈1 line〉
                  mes. 152. &c
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 69
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 69
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 280
               
                  ¶ Cathedrall Churches. 742. &c
               Cathedrall Churches before Antichristian Popes. 747
               A Colledge of Ministers in euery citie. 747.
               Our Cathedrall Churches not much differing from those of old time. pag. 747
               The vse of Cathedrall Churches necessary. 747
               ¶ Cauilles. 130. 352. 401. 506. 574. 585 628.
               ¶ A Caueat. 448
               A necessary caueat. 481
               ¶ Ceremonies of 2. sortes. 80
               How we haue but 2. ceremonies. 119
               Substantiall ceremonies. 80
               Accidentall ceremonies. 80
               Rules of ceremonies. 86. 87
               The controuersie about ceremonies confessed by T. C. 85. 86. 126
               Euery church hath an order of ceremonies. 707
               How Ceremonies serue to edifying. pag. 286. &c.
               VVhy God appointed so many ceremonies to the Iewes. 305
               Disterence betwixt Popish ceremonies and oures. 616
               The ground of the Assertion about ceremonies, vnanswered by T. C. pag. 94
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 158. &c. 163
               ¶ Children of Papists and excommu nicate persons may bee baptisedpag. 621. &c
               How children are said to beleue. 608
               ¶ Christ called Archbishop. 300
               Christ vsed vnleauened biead. 593. &c.
               ¶ Christian men sheepe, but reasonable. 172
               The number of Christiās more now than in the Apostles times. 175
               ¶ Chrisostome an Archbishop. 412. &c. 472.
               Chris
                     〈1 line〉
                  stome exerciseth Archiepiscopall iurisdiction in Asia. 414
               Chrisostome of distinctiō of degrees pag. 387
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 682
               ¶ Church cannot be shut vp in one prouince now. 465
               The Church is reformed not transformed. 474
               To frame all churches after one is daungerous. 481. 482
               Church for the gouernours of the church. 636. 66
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               No church maye challenge to bee a patterne necessarily to be followed. 704
               The church full of hypocrites. 176
               Some in the church, and not of the church. 179
               No church established in the Apostles time & how. 180. 18
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               The church in persecution in Constantines time. 188. 189
               The Authoritie of the church in things indifferent. 76. &c.
               VVhat thinges are left to the order of the church. 83. 88. &c. 713.
               The determination of the church ought not lightly to be altered. 89
               ¶ Churching of women. 534. &c.
               The cause of the womans absence from the church after hir dehuerance. 535
               ¶ Circumstances necessarie are commaunded. 512
               ¶ Circumcision a sacrament. 618
               Circumcision in priuate houses. 515
               ¶ Cypriā chooseth without consent of the people. 205
               Cyprian of the office of an Archbishop. 354. &c. 367. &c.
               Cyprian a Metropolitane. 356. 438. 470.
               ¶ Ciuil offices in Ministers. 749. &c.
               Ciuill offices in our Ministers tend to the gouernment of the church pag. 75
                     〈1 line〉
                  .
               Ciuill authoritie not claimed but committed to our Bishops. 752
               Some Ciuill offices rather helpes than hinderances to Bishops. 753
               Augustine iudgeth ciuill causes. pag. 772.
               Ciuil iurisdiction that the Pope claimeth not like to that in vse in this church. 759. 778
               A greater ciuill iurisdiction sought for in disprouing the lesse. 760
               Ciuil iurisdictiō in vse in this church is in some respect ecclesiasticall. pag. 766. 771
               Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall offices met in one. 767. 771.
               Ciuil offices in ministers not against the word of God. 773.
               The practise of the Church for ciuil offices in ministers. 773.
               Ciuill businesse incident to Byshops by the iudgemente of the holye Ghost. 772. 774.
               ¶ Clement. 319. &c.
               Clements Epistle read in the church pag. 719.
               ¶ Collect vpon Trinitie Sunday 491
               Collect of the 12. Sunday after Trinitie Sunday. 491.
               ¶ Coemiteria. 250.
               ¶ Commaundementes of diuerse kindes. 103.
               All the commaundementes of God and of the Apostles are not nedefull for our saluation. 103.
               ¶ Cōmunitie in the Apostles times. pag. 162.
               ¶ Comelinesse externall, is alterable. 98.
               The iudgement of comelinesse resteth not in priuate men. 87.
               ¶ Communion Booke. 474. &c.
               Communion in priuate places. 5
                     〈1 line〉
                  4. 525.
               Communion ministred to the sicke pag. 527. &c
               Of the number of Communicantes pag. 528. &c.
               Basill would haue. 12. at the least to communicate. 530.
               Of compelling men to communicate. 531. 532. 605.
               Men not meete to cōmunicate may be admitted to the hearing of the word, and prayer. 533.
               The Apostles began the communion wyth the Lordes prayer. 588. 602.
               Matters touching the Communion. pag. 588. &c.
               Examination of Communicantes. pag. 591. &c.
               Two things worthie to be noted of Communicantes. 592.
               Examination of communicants not disallowed. 593.
               Communion bread. 593. &c.
               Alexander appoynted vnleauened breed. 594.
               Bucers opinion of Communion bread. 594.
               Caluines opinion of Communion bread. 594.
               Christ vsed vnleauened bread. 595.
               The kinde of bread indifferent. 595.
               Communion at mariages. 724.
               Of shutting mē from the Communion. 603.
               Men persisting in wickednesse are not to be compelled to the communion. 605.
               Halfe communion. 737.
               The makers of the Communion booke praised. 711.
               ¶ Companions of Paule chosen by consent, and why. 163.
               ¶ Comparisons vnequall. 710.
               ¶ Conferēce a cause of better know ledge. 176.
               Conference offered to the Replyer, hath bene by him refused. 354. 7.
               ¶ Confirmation. 725. &c 785. 786.
               Abuse of confirmation in the Popishe Church. 786.
               Confirmation of old time like ours. pag. 786.
               Confirmation at the length allowed. 794.
               The ende of confirmation. 794.
               ¶ Confusion follovveth the doctrin of the Admonitors. 3. 559. 746.
               ¶ Conscientia mille testes. 503.
               ¶ Consuls and their authoritie 396.
               ¶ Constantine made Ecclesiasticall lawes. 698
               ¶ Contention defended. 34. 377.
               Contentiō a hinderance to the profession of diuinitie. 141.
               
                  VVho be contentious. 13. 14.
               ¶ Contraries may be defined wyth one difference. 124
               Some delighte to be contrarie to tymes. 283.
               Men of contrarie iudgement ioy ne against the truth. 51.
               Howe contraries muste be cured by contraries. 476.
               ¶ Conuenticles. 41.
               ¶ Corruption. 485
               Corruption in the Churche in the Apostles time. 349.
               ¶ Councels summoned by princes. page. 436
               Varietie about the time of the coū
                  cell of Nice. 330.
               The meaning of the. 6. Can. of the councell of Nice.
               Controuersie about the number of Canons of the councell of Nyce. page. 334.
               The seconde councell of Nyce alleaged by the Replyer. 247.
               A corrupt councell of Vrbane alleaged by the Replyer. 23.
               A corrupt councell of Hispall alleaged by the Replyer. 442.
               ¶ Courtes of Byshops. 679. &c.
               Court of faculties. 561.
               Ecclesiasticall courtes executed in the Princes name. 680.
               ¶ Crossing in Baptisme. 614. &c.
               Difference betwixt the papists crossing and ours. 616.
               Crossing no Sacrament. 617.
               ¶ Curates allowed. 245.
               ¶ Cursed things consecrated to god page. 284.
            
            
               D.
               ¶ Damasus alleaged to a wrong pur pose. 248.
               Damasus added Gloria patri. 489.
               ¶ Dayes, obseruing of dayes, 546. 547. 549.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   kindes of obseruing of Dayes. 546
               ¶ Deacons chosen by consent, and vvhy. 164
               Of ministring & preaching by Deacons. 582. &c
               Philip a Deacon baptised. 582. 515
               Deacons helpe in the ministration. pag. 585
               The Deaconship a step vnto the ministery. 587
               Deacons baptised. 588. &c.
               More pertayneth too the office of a Deacon, than prouision for the poore. 687. &c.
               Some parte of the Deacons office not necessary vnder a Christian Prince. 689. 690
               VVhether Deacons were in euerye congregation. 689
               VVhy the Apostles left the Deaconship. 758
               ¶ Deanes. 347. 746
               ¶ Decrees pertayning too order, not onely humane. 107
               ¶ Degrees of honour in the ministerie. 458
               Degrees in Diuinitie condemned. 780. 781.
               Degrees in the Vniuersitie condemned. 782
               To take away Degrees, is barbarousnesse. 420
               To be deliuered from euill, what it signifieth. 498
               ¶ Demetrius bishop of Alexandria and Egypt. 470
               ¶ Defyling the nature of thinges is not in mans power. 285
               How farre the precepte in Deuteromie is extended. 117
               ¶ Digressions frō the matter to the persons. 24. 235. 351. 370. 512.
               ¶ Dic Ecclesiae, interpreted. 636. 663
               ¶ Dionisius Areopagita, Archbishop of Athens. 470. 324
               Dionysius Ariopagite vsed of maister Ievvell agaynst Harding. 608
               Dionysius Alexandr. Bishop of Alexandria and Pentapolis. 470
               Dionysius Corinthius. b 719
               Dionysius Corinth. his epistles read in the Church. 719
               Dionysius deuided parishes. 249. 250.
               ¶ Dioscorus Archbishop. 338. 471.
               ¶ Discipline necessarie. 559
               Matters concerning Discipline. 660
               VVherein Discipline consisteth. 661
               The execution of Discipline not gyuen equally to all. 313
               ¶ Distinction (quoad ministerium, & quoad ordinem) iustified. 390
               Disobedience in ciuill matters is disobedience to God. 282
               Dissention domesticall, the fo
                     〈1 line〉
                  erunner of Destruction. 705
               ¶ Doctors of law left out of the Admonition, and way. 783
               ¶ Doctrine framed to mens persons. pag. 148
               All pointes of Doctrine pure in this Church. 129
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   interpreted. 461
               ¶ Dominion hath diuerse significations. 63
               Some kind of temporall Dominion denied to ministers. 64
               A minister maye exercise temporall Dominion. 64. 65
               ¶ Donatists and their properties. 50. 622.
               ¶ A doubtfull saying. 255
               ¶ Drun
                     〈1 line〉
                  kardes in the visible church pag. 177
            
            
               E
               ¶ Easter obserued of the Apostles. pag. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               ¶ King Edwardes priestes left 
                     〈◊〉
                   pag. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               ¶ Elections act. 1. & act. 6. agree 
                     〈◊〉
                   pag. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Elections by the people not 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the Apostles time. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Elections by the people not generall in Cyprians time. 1
                     〈1 line〉
                  .
               No certaine forme of electing commaunded in Scripture. 166. 
                     〈1 line〉
                  1
               Diuersitie of Elections in the Apostles times. 167. 197 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Varietie vsed in Elections. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Reasons for the election by the people ansvvered. 17
                     〈1 line〉
                   
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  c.
               Elections by the multitude for the most part tumultuous. 1
                     〈1 line〉
                  1
               Electiō forbidden to the people. 1
                     〈1 line〉
                  8
               Three kindes of election in the Apostles time. 1
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Election and ordination may concurr. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Contention in popular electiōs. 2
                     〈1 line〉
                  5 206. 213. 214.
               Reasons against popular electio
                     〈1 line〉
                  . 211 &c.
               Popular elections an impedimen
                     〈1 line〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the ciuill Magistrate 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               ¶ Emperours haue had the deci
                     〈1 line〉
                   of ecclesiastical 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Councels sommoned by 
                     〈◊〉
                  . pag. 4
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               ¶ England not bound to the 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
                  ples of other churches. 7
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               ¶ Epaphroditus an Apostlt. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               ¶ Ephes. 4. no perfit pat
                     〈1 line〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 423. &c.
               Ephes. 4. dis
                     〈1 line〉
                  ssed. 
                     〈◊◊〉
                  
               
               ¶ Epiphanius busied with ciu
                     〈1 line〉
                  l 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
                  ses. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Epiphanius alloweth superioritie. pag. 4
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               The writings of Epiphanius. 402
               The whole Epistle to Timothe no commaundement. 637
               Epistie and Gospell in the church. pag. 58
                     〈1 line〉
                  . &c
               ¶ Equalitie of Ministers wil pull on the equalitie of all estates. 455
               VVhy the Admonitors seeke equalltie. 459
               Equalitie of Ministers, (quoad m
                     〈1 line〉
                  i sterium) 389. &c.
               Equalitie made a cloake for ambition 55. 459
               VVhat kinde of Equalitie is pretended. 299
               ¶ Errours and daungerous doctrine of the Replyer. 4 4. 50. 77. 82. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 120. 176. 180. 265. 307. 518. 532. 541. 566. 568. 582 621. 622. 646. 694. 784
               A grosse Errour. 151
               ¶ Euangelistes remaine. 229.
               Euangelistes haue an ordiuarie function. 217
               
                  ¶Eusebius gouernour of mo Churches than one. 698.
               ¶Eustathius deposed for apparell. page. 270. 271.
               ¶Examples, what they proue. 506. 512.
               Examples of Luther. &c. against the Admonition. 148.
               VVhat exāples of the Apostles times must be followed. 101.
               Particular examples maye sometime be followed. 516.
               A general doctrine may not be concluded of a singular exāple. 562
               A man may follow the example of him that is not continually with him. 241
               Examples of T. C. against him selfe. 68. 152. 374. 395. 396.
               ¶Exhortatiōs particular moue more than generall. 601
               ¶Excommunication. 660. &c.
               Only ministers maye excommunicate. 661
               Excommunication more than exclu ding from externall societie. 665
               Excommunication not the only punishmēt of the church. 764
               The people not ministers, but witnesses of Excommunication. 666
               Want of Excommunication no iust cause of separation frō the church pag. 81
               Excommunication by one. 665 &c.
               Excōmunicate persons not receiued before publike repentance. 671
               VVhen Excommunication shoulde be ministred. 673
               Hovv the whole Church is sayde too Excommunicate. 673
               Bishops alone did Excommunicate. pag. 678. 677. 679
               The practise in Augustines tyme of Excommunication. 678
               A kind of ciuil Excommunic. 679
            
            
               F
               ¶Falsifications of the Replier. 49. 86. 107. &c. 144. 184. 186. 203. 209 222. 268. 302. 314. 326. 350. 357. 370. 412 413. 415. 439. 467. 479. 547. 584. 669. 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  0. 673. 675. 698. 797.
               Errour and disorder mayntayned by falsifying. 485
               A False collection vppon Musculus wordes. 67
               ¶Fasting on the Saboth day. 99. 102
               Fasting on the lordes day wicked. pag. 99. 102
               ¶Fayth cometh by reading. 252
               No man knoweth who be Faythful pag. 621
               ¶Flauianus Archbishop. 338
               ¶Caius Fimbria. 708
               ¶The fourth Finger. 723
               ¶Fontes. 614
               ¶Diuersitie betwixt spiritual Food and externall. 556
               ¶Forgery seeketh corners. 338
               ¶Maister Foxe alloweth of Archbishops. &c. 421.
               ¶Freewill doctrine thought not too be repugnant to saluation. 82
               Doctrine of Freewill raseth the foū
                  dation of faith. 82 83
               ¶Funerall sermons. 732. &c.
               Funerall sermons compared to Tren tals. 732
               Funerall sermons allowed by Caluin. 732
               The order of the primitiue church in Funeralls. 734
               Funerall sermons serue to comforte those that are greeued. 735
               An absurde argument against Funerall sermons. 735
               Funeral sermōs most necessary wher there are most papistes. 736
            
            
               G
               ¶Gedeons Ephod. 711
               ¶Getils tooke their Images for gods pag. 151
               Gentils and papistes not like in all respectes. 475
               Gentils and Iewes liad somethings common. 475
               ¶Gennadius. 472
               ¶Gifts of god bestowed by meanes. pag. 645
               Howe euery function hath giftes needfull. 316
               ¶Gloria patri. 489. 496
               Gloria in excelsis. 602
               All seeke not the glory of God that pretend it. 
                     〈1 line〉
                  42
               ¶Godlynesse breaketh no lawes. 810
               Godlines required in gouernors. 684
               All Godly men are not meete to gouerne. 684
               ¶Godfathers & their promis. 612. &c
               The promise of Godfathers restrayned to their power. 612
               Godfathers allowed by T. C. 613
               Godfathers once disallowed, and after recanted. 798. 782
               ¶Good things may come from euil men. 746
               Good men defaced by those which do no good. 241
               ¶Gouernement in the Cleargie not forbiddē but the kind of Gouernment. 62
               The pretence of restoring right Gouernment, a cloak for further mis chief. 2
               Gouernement of one by lawe better thā of many without lawe. 378
               Three kinds of lawfull gouernment pag. 650
               Matters of the kind of gouernment, not necessarie to saluation. 80
               Two kinds of gouernment of the Church. 80
               In what respect gouernment is necessarie. 81
               The Church not tyed to one kind of Gouernment. 81. 98. 640. 678. &c.
               The kind of Gouernment alterable by M. Beza his iudgement. 660.
               Gouernours in the Church. 630
               Diuers circumstances alter Gouernment. 639. 659. 660.
               Gouernment of the Church Monarchicall. 641
               The Gouernment of the Common wealth ought not to be framed to the Gouernment of the Church. 646. &c.
               Spirituall Gouernment taketh not a way ciuill Magistracie. 756
               The Gouernment of the Church not only spirituall. 756. 789
               Gouernour in the Church not of the Church. 789
               ¶Gregorie Bishop of Pontus. 471
               Gregorie made the Letanie. 489
               Gregorie for George. 447
            
            
               H
               ¶Heretiks loose not their baptisme. pag. 622
               ¶Hemingius alloweth superio
                     〈1 line〉
                  itie. pag. 419. &c
               ¶Hierome of the degree of Bishops aboue other Ministers. 369. &c.
               Hieromes Presbyterie and the Repli ers agree not. 652
               ¶Holidayes. 538. &c
               The vse of Holydayes a stoppe to superstition. 539
               The Iewes appointed Holydayes. 543
               The Ievves had moe Holydayes than we. 545
               Holydayes obserued in reformed Churches. 548
               Difference betwixt Popishe Holydayes and ours. 554
               ¶Homilies. 715. &c.
               Our Homiles free from errour. 715
               Some Homilies better than some ser mons. 716
               Homilies of Fathers red in the church. 719. 720.
               Homilies read, commendable. 296
               Bucers opinion of Homilies. 719
               Rvdleis iudgement of Homilies. 720
               ¶The title of most honorable Lord giuen to Bishops. 448
            
            
               I
               ¶Iames Bishop of Ierusalem. 470. 384.
               ¶Idolatrous sacrificers may bee Ministers. 143. &c.
               Three kindes of Idolatrie. 152
               Idolatrous thinges turned to common vse. 273
               Idolatrous things conuerted too the honor and seruice of God. 284
               
                  ¶Kneling at the name of Iesus. 741
               VVhy christians bowed at the name of Iesus. 742
               ¶Maister Iewell concerninge Archbishops. 422. &c.
               Maister Iewell slaundered by T. C. pag. 422
               ¶The Iewes had their ceremonies particularly described. 118
               VVherein the Iewes had a more particular direction than we. 117
               Iewes had somthing common with the Gentils. 321
               ¶Ignorātia Elenchi, looke Argumentum.
               
               ¶Infirmities in all men. 612
               ¶Imposition of handes diuersly taken. 198
               Imposition of handes 226
               Imposition of handes in confirmation allowed by maister Caluin. pag. 785
               ¶Inconstancie of T. C. and his com panions. 431
               ¶Indifferent things loose the nature of indiffereneie being commaunded. 92. 258
               In what kind of indifferent thinges we ought to haue respecte to the weake. 258
               Auncient Fathers of things Indifferent. 95. &c.
               Councelles of thinges Indifferent. pag. 97. 98
               Scriptures of things Indifferent. 98
               Augustin of things Indiffer. 99. &c.
               Caluin of things Indifferēt. 109. &c.
               Late writers of things Indifferent. pag. 126. &c.
               The doctrine of things Indifferent. pag. 278
               ¶Interrogatories to Infāts. 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  7. &c.
               Augustine of Interrogatories. 608
               ¶The Introite. 588
               Celestinus his Introite. 589
               ¶Iohn his apparell. 270
               Iohn setteth his name to the Apocalips. 807
               ¶Ionathan the Calday paraphraste. pag. 718
               ¶The Iudiciall law abrogated. 121
               The Iudicialles perteyned to the gouernement of the church. 119
               The Magistrate not bound to the Iu diciall law of Moses. 121. &c.
               Iustinian made Ecclesiasticall lawes. pag. 699
            
            
               K
               ¶Difference betwixt a king and a Tyrant. 377
               Christ and his Gospel no enemies to Kingdomes. 647
               ¶Kneeling at the cōmuniō. 596. &c
               Kneeling the meetest gesture. 597
               Kneeling at the name of Iesus. 741
            
            
               L
               ¶Lawes made must not bee ouerthrowne without strong reasons. pag. 686
               Lawfull is ordinary in a Church esta blished. 38
               Difference betwixt the seueritie of the lavve and the lenitie of the Gospell. 149
               ¶Lay men teachers in the Church. pag. 209. 521
               Lay men baptised. 518. 519
               ¶Letters commendatorie. 141
               ¶The Letany. 489. 495. 496.
               ¶Leo Archbishop. 338 471
               ¶Leuites had to do in ciuill matters pag. 697
               ¶The true libertie of the Church. pag. 195.
               Christian libertie. 791
               VVhat libertie cannot bee taken away. 541
               No mans libertie restrayned. 542
               ¶Libell what it is. 807
               Libellers be vnderminers. 559
               Libelling no true way of reforming pag. 806
               The Libellers compared to pharisies pag. 807
               ¶Licence to preach necessarie. 255
               ¶Passing Logicke. 383
            
            
               M
               ¶Macheuiles. 8
                     〈1 line〉
                  0
               ¶Magistrates cuill spoken of by Anabaptists, and why. 37
               Ciuill Magistrates may not take vppon them ecclesiasticall functions pag. 5
               Ciuill Magistrate doth not simply differ from the ecclesiasticall by bearing rule. 63
               No Christian Magistrate in the Apostles time. 180
               The Magistrate head of the commō wealth, but not of the church by T. C. 180
               How the Church may be established without a Magistrate. 182
               The Magistrates authoritie abridged pag. 265. 266
               The Magistrate may abridge externall libertie. 541
               The Papistes opinion of Christian Magistrates. 631
               No more graunted to the Christian Magistrate than to the Turke. 635
               The Ciuill Magistrate a better helpe than Seniors. 640. 641
               The Prince made subiect to Seniors. pag. 646
               The Magistrate may better reforme offenders than Seniors. 643.
               The ouerthrowe of the Princes authoritie conteyned in the Reply. page. 646.
               The authoritie of the Ciuill Magistrate in Ecclesiasticall matters. page. 694. &c.
               The Prince spoyled of his authoritie. 694.
               The opinion of the Replyer concerning the Princes authoritie. 695
               VVhat authoritie Papistes gyue to the Magistrate in Ecclesiasticall matters. 695.
               Princes haue exercised supreme authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matter
                     〈1 line〉
                  . page. 698 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  9.
               A wise Prince will take the aduise of the learned in waighty affa
                     〈1 line〉
                  es page. 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  9.
               The ciuill Magistrate shut from the gouernment of the Church. 78
                     〈1 line〉
                  .
               ¶Magnificat & nunc dimittis. 494. &c. 496.
               ¶Manichees appoynt the Lords day to be fasted. 1
                     〈1 line〉
                  2.
               ¶Matters cōcerning the solemnization of mariage. 723 &c.
               Toyes about mariage. 794.
               ¶M. Martyrs words peruerted. 2
                     〈1 line〉
                  0.
               ¶Massemongers may bee ministers page. 143. &c.
               ¶Masters of Colledges & their authoritie. 397.
               ¶Matthias elected extraordinarily. page. 154.
               ¶Meletius Archbyshop of Egipte. page. 471.
               ¶Mercie of God infinite. 83. 624.
               ¶Messalian heretikes. 536.
               ¶Metaphores of watchmē & shepheardes. 22
                     〈1 line〉
                  . 2
                     〈1 line〉
                  7.
               ¶Metropolitane. 297. &c
               Metropolitan: loke Archbishop,
               ¶Ministers that cannot preach. 251. &c.
               Causes of lacke of able Ministers. page. 252.
               Ministers knowne in time paste by apparell. 261. &c.
               Ministers hauing no pastorall charg page. 216. &c.
               Ministers diffamed not reformed by the Admonitors. 36.
               Ministers reuyled by Anabaptistes and why. 37.
               A man maye offer himselfe to the Ministerie. 48.
               Ministers maye exercise some ciuill iurisdiction. 64. 354. 749. &c.
               Election of Ministers. 132. &c
               The tryall of Ministers in learning and conuersation. 132.
               VVorthie Ministers in England 1
                     〈1 line〉
                  0
               The Minister may be assured of his calling thoughe he be not chosen by the people. 194.
               All Ministers gouerne but not alike page. 314.
               Ministers subiect to Bishops. 420
               One Minister may not meddle in an

other mans charge. 803
               A Minister may vse corporall punish ment. 764
               The Minister hindered, & by whom pag. 484
               The Minister not the only mouth of the people. 501. &c.
               ¶ More sinceritie in the ministration of the Sacraments nowe, than in the auncient Church. 526
               ¶ Misteries, vvhat they be. 515
               ¶ The gouernment of this Realme Monarchicall. 182. 650
               A Monarchie and Tiranny confoun ded by T. C. 377
               ¶ Modestie of the Replier. 351
               ¶ The moderators office. 395
               ¶ Moses wife did circumcise. 515
               ¶ Monuments of Idolatrie may bee vsed if they be profitable. 256
               ¶ Mourning apparell. 730. 731
               A lawfull, & vnlavvfull vse of mourning apparell. 732
               ¶ Musculus alleaged for Ierome. 203 222.
               Musculus his reasons vppon the 20. of Mathew. 69. &c.
               Musculus his meaning peruerted. 193
            
            
               N
               ¶ Names, of diuers kindes. 64
               Names common to ciuill and ecclesiasticall persons. 64
               Names proper to God may in some respect be attributed to other. 300
               A lawful name may remaine though it hath bene abused. 302
               How these wordes [vos autem non sic] may be referred to names. 63
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   not all one. 71
               ¶ Diuers significations of this word (Necessarie.) 80
               ¶ N
                     〈1 line〉
                  ene Creede. 589
               ¶ Only 2. essentiall notes of the Church. 81
               ¶ Nouatus and his qualities, and the cause of his heresie 74
               Nouatus the first that forsooke his ministerie. 74
               The Nouatian heresie. 360
            
            
               O
               ¶ Offences giuen to the papistes thorough contention. 143
               ¶ The opponent should proue. 712
               ¶ Ordeining of Ministers pertaineth to Bishops. 225 &c.
               ¶ Orders of the Church depend not vpon euery mans misliking. 86
               Generall Orders not lightly to be altered. 101
               Decrees pertayninge to Order, not only humane. 107
               Decent Orders, Gods traditions. 606
               How the Lordes Order is kept. 684
               The Order which T. C. prescribeth, is full of Inconueniences. 173
               ¶ The Ordinarie meanes too drawe men from vice. 477
               ¶ Origen a lay man when hee preached. 209
               ¶ A grosse Ouersight of T. C. 698
               Ouersight of T. C. 203. 208. 248. 530
            
            
               P.
               ¶ Papistes in the Church, and how. Pag. 179
               Papistes like too the Israelites vnder Ieroboam. 625
               Papistes and Gentils agree not in all respectes. 475. 624
               VVe conforme not our selues to Papistes in ceremonies. 475
               The Order of Popish seruice, cleane altered. 476
               Of hauing things commō with Papistes. 477. 478. 479. &c.
               Papisme an erring of the Christian Church. 624. 625
               The Churche couered in Papistry. pag. 624
               The Papistes opinion of Christian Magistrates. 631
               The Papistes cōfesse that the Prince may punish priestes. 701
               A Papisticall assertion of T. C. 77
               ¶ Diuision of parishes. 249. 250
               Parishes deuided by man. 250
               ¶ The faith & behauior of Parents. pag. 620
               ¶ Pastours absence allowed. 245
               A Pastour ought too care for the whole church. 243
               A Pastor may be absent vpon occasion. 236.
               A Pastor maye preache in moe places. 237.
               Carelesse and slouthfull Pastors not defended. 241.
               ¶ Patrirach: Looke Archbishop.
               
               ¶ Co
                     〈1 line〉
                  etous Patrones. 774
               ¶ Paul alone had ius excommunicandi. 665. 667.
               Paulus Samosatenus. 447.
               ¶ Peters forswearing. 144. 146
               Peter chiefe in Apostolicall assemblies. 393. &c
               Peter chief among the Apostles. 468 &c.
               Peter Archbishop of Alexādria 338. 339. 471.
               ¶ Peritio principii. Looke Argumentum.
               
               ¶ Persecution pretended. 58. 706. 777.
               Persecution doth both increase, and diminishe the number of professors. 
                     〈1 line〉
                  75
               Persecution of the tongue. 706
               ¶ A pestident mischief. 481.
               ¶ The people not alvvayes admitted to elections. 212. 213
               VVhy the people haue bene and ought to be debarred from elections. 213. &c
               The consent of the people in elections to Cyprians time. 164
               Elections of ministers by the people not generall. 164. 165
               The people ignorant and not able to iudge. 177. 215
               The people easily led by affection. page. 215.
               VVhat interest the people had in elections. 205
               The commō people speciall authors of tumults in elections. 206
               The people hardly brought to leaue accustomed termes. 534
               The people witnesses not Ministers of excommunication. 666
               The people vnapt to gouerne. 683
               ¶ Description of a Pharisie. 807
               ¶ Phrases of Poets vsed of Diuines. page. 274
               ¶ Philip a deacon baptised. 515. 582.
               ¶ A new platforme. 803
               ¶ Pluralities. 246. &c
               ¶ The ende of the Apostles in pollicie ecclesiasticall muste be respected and not their deedes. 212
               ¶ Potestas facti, not (iuris) ascribed to Princes. 696. 702
               ¶ Popularitie. 14
               The Replyers argumentes tende to Popularitie. 684
               ¶ Poyson hid in the Repliers doctrine. 626
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 497
               ¶ Prayers grounded vpon promises. pag. 492
               Prayer to be deliuered from al aduer sitie good. 491. &c.
               Conditions annexed too Prayer for externall things. 482
               Humilitie in Prayer required. 493
               Prayer to be deliuered from thunder pag. 494 &c.
               All things to be prayed for, tend to the glory of God. 495
               Prayer before daungers. 495
               Interpretation of the last petition in the Lordes Prayer. 497. 498
               Short Prayers called shredds by T. C. 499
               The Scripture prescribeth no forme of publike Prayer. 501
               Prayer for the dead not mayntained pag. 728. &c.
               Prayer that all men may bee saued. pag. 739
               Prayer by hart only, effectuall. 740
               Repetition of Prayer not forbidden. pag. 803. &c.
               Christe vseth repetition of the same Prayer. 805
               
                  ¶ Preaching before the ministration of the Sacraments. 562. &c.
               VVhat kinde of Preaching is moste effectuall. 554. &c.
               Verball Preachers. 558
               One learned sermon better thā many vnlearned. 555
               Friuolous and contentious Sermons pag. 555. 791
               The fansie of T. C. concerninge the forme of Preaching and Praying. pag. 499
               VVhen Preaching before baptisme is necessary. 563. &c. 567
               Preaching before the ministratiō of the Sacramentes not disallovved. pag. 565. 568
               Preachig the most ordinary meanes to saluation. 570
               Preaching profiteth moe than reading, and vvhy. 572
               A written sermon is Preaching. 575
               The number of Preachers bred in Cambridge since the Queenes reigne. 141
               The number of Preachers in Cambridge. 141
               Difference betwixt the complaintes of godly Preachers and Anabaptistes. 40
               A temporal Lord may be a Preacher pag. 64
               The word may be Preached priuatly both in respect of place & persons. 93. 94
               A Preacher may profite them whom he knovveth not. 239
               A Preacher is called thither, wher he may do most good. 244
               ¶ Pres byter vsually taken for a Minister. 626. &c
               Two kindes of Pres byterie. 627
               Pres byterie: Looke Seniors.
               
               ¶ Pride clooked with zeale. 34. 42.
               The beginning of the Pride of the Church of Rome. 607
               ¶ The name of (Priest) 721. &c.
               Priest concerning the office neuer in euill part. 723
               King Edwardes Priests left out. 781
               ¶ Primate: Looke Archbishop.
               
               ¶ Quod primum verum. 370. 371.
               ¶ The Princes authority diminished and her troubles increased. 173
               The Prince head of the Church. 181. 301. 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  0.
               Prince: Looke Magistrate.
               
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   410
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   68
               ¶ Promises conditionall. 613
               ¶ Prophets in some respect ordinary pag. 218
               Prophets remaine. 229. 230
               Prophets knowne by distinct apparell. 262
               ¶ Psalmes song side by side. 740. &c.
               ¶ Pulpets and chayers. 91
               ¶ Punishment corporal, a meanes to saluation. 765.
               ¶ Puritane. 73
               Purely, and truely. 131
               The puritie that can abyde no imperfection is diuellishe. 260
            
            
               Q
               ¶ Quintus Sceuola. 708
               ¶ Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus approbari debet, how it holdeth. pag. 170. 171
               ¶ Quotations the ground of the Ad monition. 59
               Vaine Quotations necessarily confu
                     〈1 line〉
                  ed. 60. 61
               Subtiltie in Quoting places. 73
               Vaine quotation. 234. 261
               Scriptures quoted for the phrase. 22.
            
            
               R
               ¶ Reading of Scriptures. 568. &c
               Reading is preaching 569. &c 574. &c.
               Commoditie of Reading Scriptures in the Church. 570. 578. &c.
               Reading engendreth faith. 570
               Reading of Scriptures a meanes too iudge of Sermons. 717
               Many conuerted by reading. 573. 581
               God vseth Reading as a meanes aswell as preaching. 574.
               Reading sometimes preuaileth more than preaching. 574
               Hardings opinion of Reading Scriptures. 578
               Christ Read the Scripture. 580
               Reading is feeding. 580
               Reading of Scriptures at the Communion. 589
               ¶ Reasoning frō allegories vncertain pag. 305
               ¶ Our reformation wholly misliked pag. 703
               A croked rule of reformation. 476
               ¶ Repentance stretcheth to Idolatrie pag. 145
               ¶ The Replie consisteth of other mens collections. 207
               The Replier: Looke T. C.
               ¶ The word (Repugnant) what it signifieth. 714
               ¶ Residence. 235. &c
               Howe a Pastor ought to be resident. pag. 235
               Lawful causes of the non residence of the pastor. 236
               ¶ Reuenues of Idolaters turned too good vse. 274
               ¶ Rewardes for learning already attayned necessarie. 743
               ¶ Riches no impediment to good men. 446
               ¶ Ridleyes testimonie of the communion Booke. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Ridleyes iudgemēt of Homilies. 72
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               ¶ Ring in Mariage. 723
               Bucrs iudgement of the mariage Ring. 7
                     〈1 line〉
                  3
               ¶ Rules of T. C. retourned again
                     〈1 line〉
                  t himselfe. 6
               VVhat it is to Rule vvell. 3
                     〈1 line〉
                  4
               They vvhich Rule godly, do s
                     〈1 line〉
                  rue. 
                     〈1 line〉
                  5
            
            
               S
               ¶ Sacramentes ministred by other than ministers. 515. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Some may minister the Sacramentes that cannot preache. 4
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Sacraments ministred in priuate pla ces. 511. &c.
               Doctrine tending to the derogation of Sacraments. 524
               Necessitie of saluation not tyed too Sacraments. 52
                     〈1 line〉
                  . 5
                     〈1 line〉
                  4
               The lyfe of Sacramentes dependeth not of preaching. 566
               Euery one muste applye the Sacrament to himself. 601
               The Sacramentes purely ministred. pag. 606
               Sacramentes receyue the name of things signified. 608
               VVhat is required to the making of a Sacrament. 618
               The proper signification of Sacraments. 618
               Outvvard Sacraments giue not grace pag. 73
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Sacramentall signes. 738
               Euery thing signifying is not a Sacrament 291. 617. 618
               ¶ Saintes dayes. 543. &c.
               VVhy the names of Saintes are gyuen to our 
                     〈1 line〉
                  lydayes. 543
               ¶ Saunders & the Replier agree. 695
               ¶ Sceuola. 708
               Scarse the face of a church, vvhat it implyeth. 795
               ¶ Scripture abused to coloure slate
                     〈1 line〉
                  y pag. 10
               Scripture alledged for the proofe of the phrase. 22
               The abusing of Scripture is too bee maintayned in none. 22
               Shiftes to coloure the vnapt allegation of Scripture. 22
               Scripturs vvrested and abused by the Admonition. 58. 59. 61. 73. 128. 251. 261. 454. 460. 463. 655. 687. 752.
               Scripture wrested by T. C. 83. 84. 85.
               Scripture vnskilfully and fondly alleadged by T. C. 89. 90. 92. 172. 2
                     〈1 line〉
                   297. 374. 592.
               Canonicall Scripture onely perfect. pag. 74
               VVhat is said to be expressed in Scripture. 77
               VVherein the Scripture is sufficient. pag. 7
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  VVhat things the scripture hath not expressed. 83
               Howe the Scripture conteyneth all things incident to the life of man pag. 84
               ¶ Schismatikes. 41
               Schismarikes deserue to be sharpely reproued. 778
               Schismaticall meetings aptly called conuenticies. 41
               Schismaticall meetings not sufferable. 41
               ¶ Seniors and Seigniorie. 626. &c.
               The gouernment of Seniors ought to be perpetuall. 633. &c
               The office ascribed to Seniors depriueth the Magistrate of his authoritie. 635. 643
               The office of Seniors not commaun ded. 637. 644
               Difference betwixt necessitie of Pastors and of Seniors. 644
               Ieromes Seigniorie or Presbyterie. pag. 652
               Inconueniēces of the Seigniorie. 657 &c.
               VVhether Seniors were in euery con gregation. 626. &c.
               ¶ Sermons of the same nature with Hou
                     〈1 line〉
                  ies. 718
               Seniors▪ 
                  Looke Preachers.
               
               ¶ A prescript forme of seruice. 488. &c.
               ¶ Shiftes of the Replier. 293. 399. 418. 429. 462. 547.
               ¶ Sheapheard. 220. 221. 237. 238.
               ¶ Things meere ciuil may haue signi fication. 291
               ¶ God vseth not the simple only 10 set sorth the truth. 10
               ¶ Similitudes, weake arguments. 220
               ¶ A Sillogisme without al forme. 316
               ¶ Symcon Archbishop. 341. 471
               ¶ Singing used in all reformed churches. 606
               Singing of Psalmes by course. 740.
               ¶ Singularitie, and prope
                     〈1 line〉
                  s therof pag. 14
               ¶ Sitting at the cōmunion. 597. &c.
               ¶ If the Skie fal we may catch Larks pag. 465
               ¶ Slaunderers are not the generation of Christ. 17
               Slaunders 449. 558. 704. 739. 744.
               ¶ Socrates a fauorer of the Nouatians. 350
               Socrates doings agreable to our time pag. 350
               ¶ Stephens oration a Sermon. 584
               Stephanus a good Bishop inuented the apparell. 272
               ¶ Subiects animated against authoritie. 267
               ¶ Of subscribing to the communion Booke. 709. &c.
               ¶ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 304. 663
               ¶ The office of the speaker or mode rator. 393
               ¶ A sparing restraint. 490
               ¶ Superioritie among the Apostles. pag. 37
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Superioritie conuenient among Ministers. 388
               Caluine alloweth Superioritie. 390. 467.
               ¶ Superstition in garments condemned. 277
               ¶ The Sword that Christ sendeth is not betweene the faithfull. 34
               The sword of Discipline necessary. pag. 56
               ¶ Supremacie of the Queene secretly denied. 801
            
            
               T
               ¶ The feast of tabernacles obserued since losua. 9
               ¶ Tēples of Idols cōuerted to churches. 274
               ¶ T. C. ascribeth his own deuise to the Apostles. 674
               T. C. maketh greater accompt of the gonernment, than of the Gospel pag. 7. 82
               T. C. ioyneth with the papistes concerning the Princes authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matters. 7. 377. 694. &c.
               T. C. alleageth Iosias for Ezechias. 10
               T. C. alleageth Gregorie for George. pag. 447
               T. C. charged with vntruth. 8. 69. 70 74. 77. 99. 103. 15
                     〈1 line〉
                  . 158. 163. 166. 186 188. 205 207. 209. 226. 262. 280 332 337. 342 344. 345. 346. 347. 356. 366. 377. 383. 385. 412. 413. 415. 422. 435. 441. 443. 446. 451. 459. 462. 487. 501. 522. 545. 611. 618. 637. 651. 669. 673. 680. 682. 718. 731 8
                     〈1 line〉
                  6.
               T. C. peruerteth the wordes & meaning of the Aunswere 17. 117. 130.
               T. C. chargeth the Aunswer falsely. 24. 25. 28. 29. 30. 31. 35. 36. 89.. 92 93. 111. 112. 130. 153. 164. 188. 196. 197 198. 200. 253. 321. 352. 366. 418. 461. 466. 487. 516. 585. 586. 593. 630. 631 651. 704.
               T. C. contrary to the Admonition. 3
                     〈1 line〉
                   88. 530. 605.
               T. C. bringeth places against himselfe. 160. 179. 184. 185. 186. 187. 378. 430 442. 542 697. 698. 759.
               T. C. reasoneth against himselfe. 130
               T. C. contrary to himselfe. 46. 88. 138. 151. 173. 329. 372. 400. 430. 439. 458 502. 517. 533. 566. 604. 718. 740. 784
               T. C. inconstant. 614
               T. C. desireth that which hee hath sought to hinder. 16
               The vaine excuses of T. C. why hee hath not set down the Answer, & the true causes thereof. 16
               The presumption of the Replier. 622
               T. C. altereth the state of the coutrouersie. 44. 100. 768
               T. C. setteth the Fathers by the eares without cause. 102
               T. C. iustifieth the Answere. 120
               T. C. accuseth learned men of contra rietie. 114
               T. C. tendeth to Iudaisme. 120. 169.
               T. C. fetcheth cōmaundements out of the ceremoniall lawe. 167. 592.
               T. C. depraueth learned men when he cannot answere them. 146. 191. 369. 377. 402. 410. 415 526. 785.
               T. C. suppresseth the words against him. 184
               T. C. pusheth at the Ciuil Magistrate couertly. 157. 650
               T. C. bendeth his force against a Mo narchie. 641 647
               T. C. vseth only papistes reasons against the Princes supremacie. 694 &c.
               The Repliers arguments, strike aswel at the Ciuill Magistrate as at the Ecclesiasticall. 765
               T. C. speaketh suspiciously of Gouernement. 389
               T. C. Tripped in that he chargeth others. 193
               T. C. pretending Scripture, bringeth that whiche hath no warrant in scriprure. 173. 425
               T. C. vseth popish & corrupt authorities. 223. 247. 442
               T. C. seeketh immunitie from lawes pag. 266
               VVhy T. C. bēdeth his force against those in authoritie in the church. pag. 299
               T. C. addeth to the text. 520
               The Replyer had rather conforme himself to the Iewes than to this Church. 730
               T. C. forgetteth himself. 733
               T. C. must eyther dissent from Beza, or graunt the controuersie. 759
               T. C. consesseth the grounde of the controuersies. 768
               T. C maketh Caluine contrary too himself, but vntruly. 785
               T. C. requireth that of others that he persormeth not himselfe. 799
               The cause why T. C. ioineth against degrees in Diuinitie. 78
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               T. C. preferreth his iudgemente too Councels. 365
               T. C. answered by his owne wordes. 263. 306. 307. 309. 371.
               T. C. appealeth from auncient authoritie. 547
               The Doctrine of the Replier tendeth to Anabaptisme. 566. 567. 622. 626.
               The Replyer neere to Donatisme. pag. 622
               
                  The Replyer put to the proofe of his ceremonies. 614
               The Replier tripped in his own net. pag. 693
               T. C. teacheth S. Augustine to speak. pag. 609
               The marke that the Replyer shoteth at. 56
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               The drift of the Replier. 315
               T. C. forsaketh the Apostolical form in Election. 193. 195
               ¶ Telesphorus a good Bishop. 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  2
               ¶ Theodoret had gouernement of 800. churches. 415. 472
               Theodoret of Chrysostome. 412
               ¶ Thracia annexed to the Archbisshoprike of Constantinople. 413
               ¶ Of these wordes (Take thou, eate thou) 600
               ¶ Diuersitie of Tymes require a diuerse gouernement. &c. 174. &c.
               ¶ Timothies authoritie. 401
               Timothie Bishop of Ephesus. 404 &c. 470.
               Timothie oft absent from Ephesus. pag. 236
               The iurisdiction that Timothie vsed in some respect ciuill. 769
               ¶ Titus Archbishop of Creta. 325. 400. 431. 470.
               ¶ Titles of dignitie in ministers not Antichristian. 353
               Honorable Titles of Bishops. 448
               Men called by vndeserued Titles. 70 71.
               Titles in the church vnder the lawe whereof God is not the expresse author. 304
               ¶ The othe of the fellowes of Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge. 1. 235.
               Trinitie Colledge and the fellowes deliuered frō the slaunderous Replye. 745
               ¶ The maintenance of Truth as necessarie as the suppression of errours. 496
               ¶ It is not better to frame our ceremonies to Turkes than to papists. pag. 471
            
            
               V.
               ¶ Vanitie. 351
               ¶ Omne verum à spiritu Sancto est. pag. 551. 552
               ¶ Vicars or substitutes. 681
               ¶ Victor a good Bishop. 510
               ¶ Vix what it importeth. 796
               ¶ Vniuersitie landes stand on the same pinne with Bishops. 452.
               ¶ Vse of things wickedly inuented. pag. 273. &c.
               Priuate vse of Idolatrous things forbidden. 272
               Common vse of Idolatrous things. page. 273
               The vse and abuse of things indifferent. 276
               ¶ Vsurpe
                     〈1 line〉
                   both in Ministring and preaching offend God. 520
            
            
               W
               ¶ VVa
                     〈1 line〉
                  er cakes. 596
               ¶ VVatchmen and Sheapheards. 220 237.
               ¶ The weake not offended with apparell. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               In what sort of indifferent thinges we ought to respect the weake. 258.
               ¶ VVhoremongers in the visible Church. 1
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               ¶ VVickednesse of men causeth not lawes to be euill. 1
                     〈1 line〉
                  4
               ¶ VVidowes. 6
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               ¶ VVine and Bread consecrated too Idols. 275. 276
               ¶ Froward wittes. 481
               ¶ VVhen a woman maye preach Christ. 50
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               The cause of the VVomans absence from the Church after her deliuerance. 53
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               The VVomans vayle. 53
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               ¶ Strife about wordes proper to q
                     〈1 line〉
                   rell
                     〈1 line〉
                  rs. 5
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               ¶ VVhat it is to adde, and to take away from the VVord. 1
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Difference betwixt the worshipping of the true God falsly, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   Gods. 27
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               ¶ Mens writings read in the chur
                     〈1 line〉
                   pag. 7
                     〈1 line〉
                  .
               The occasion and circumstances of mens writings must bee considered. 114. 292
            
            
               Z
               ¶ Zuinfildians condemne reading. pag. 252. 569. 71
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               ¶ The Zeale of the Replier. 36
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Preposterous Zeale. 48
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            The Printer to the Readers.
            I could not be, but that in so great a volume, some things should escape euen those that are diligent and carefull, I especially considering the speedie dispatch, and other circumstances: notwithstanding, if before you enter to reade this booke, you will take the paynes to mende these faulces with your pen, the rest being lighter, will not greately stay your course in reading, or otherwise alter the sense and meaning. Fare you well.
            
               Pag. 2. line. 8. reade plainly.
               Pag. 21. line. 22. for priuately reade priu
                     〈1 line〉
                  ly.
               Pag. 50. line. vlti. for I speake not of their opinions, reade, I speake not of all their opinions.
               Pag. 62. line. 38, reade, in these.
               Pag. 67. line. 37. for or, reade for.
               Pag. 78. line. 34. reade, and seeking helpe of the Egyptians.
               Pag. 104. lin. 22. for abiunde, reade, aliunde.
               Pag. 124. line. 45. reade, Is homo.
               Pag. 191. line. 45. for worde, reade, wordes.
               Pag. 244. line. 13. reade, in the euill day.
               Pag. 252. lin. 46. for any confession, reade, my confession.
               pag. 253, lin. 7. reade. Chap. 1.
               pag. 254. line. 13. reade, chap. 1. and line. 48. reade, Chap. 2.
               pag. 304. in y• margēt, reade, wherof God.
               pag. 349. line. 29. for and, reade, as.
               pag. 448. line. 32. reade, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               pag. 468. lin. 46. for, his own, reade, this one.
               pa. 481. lin. 32. for more, reade, moue
               pag. 508. lin. 1. reade, encomber the Answerer.
               pag. 523. lin. 25. reade, conuentur.
               pag. 536. line. 20. for, yll, read, it.
               pag. 537. lin. 42. for those, read this.
               pag. 541. line. 21. for constraine, read restreyne.
               pag. 661. line. 20. read thus, election of ministers is no correctiō of vice neither yet is the deciding. &c.
               pag. 663. line. 53. for there, reade, therefore.
               pag. 665. in the margent, for eternal, reade, externall.
               pag, 685. lin. 6. reade, the. 11. diuision
               pag. 708. line. vit. for rather, reade, either.
               pag. 722. line. vlt. adde this, heaping vp of scriptures? shewe me one place in this epistle, yea in.
               pag. 731. line. 41. for seruice, reade, sorow.
               pag. 803. lin. 7. reade, Gods worde.
               pag. 806. line. 4. reade, of defiance salued.
               pag. 810. line. 41. reade, fi
                     〈1 line〉
                  ,
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ To the Churche of Englande, and all those that loue the truth in it, T. C. vvisheth mercie and peace, from God our Father, and from our Lorde Iesus Christe.
            
               
                  AS our men doe more willingly go to warfare, and fighte with greater courage agaynst straungers, than agaynst their Countreymen: so it is with me in this spirituall warfare. For I woulde haue wished that this controuersie had beene with the Papistes, or with ether (if any can be) more pestilent and professed e
                     〈1 line〉
                  mes of the Churche: for that should haue beene lesse griefe to write, and more conuenient to perswade that which I desire. For as the very name of an enimie dothe kindle the desire of fighting, and styrreth vp the care of prepa
                     〈1 line〉
                  ng the furniture for the warre: So I can not tell howe it commeth to passe, that the name of a brother 
                     〈1 line〉
                  aketh that courage, and abateth that carefulnesse whiche sheuld be bestowed in defence of the truthe. But seeing the truthe ought not to be forsaken for any mans cause▪ I enforced my selfe, considering that if the Lorde mighte lay to my charge, that I was not for certayne considerations, so readie as I ought to haue beene, to publishe the truthe, he mighte more iustly condemne me, if beeing oppugned and slaundered by others. I shoulde not according to that measure which he hath dealte vnto me, and for my small habilitie defende it, and delyuer it from the euill reporte that some endeuour to bring vpon it.
               
                  An Answere to the Epistle dedicated by T. C. to the Churche of Englande. &c.
                  
                     IT doth not appeare by the style and maner of writing vsed in this your booke, that there remayneth any portion of suche naturall affection or brotherly loue in you, as you would beare the world in hand, and séeme to haue by these your wordes: For if you should haue written against the veriest Papist in the world, the vilest person, the ignorantest dolt, you could not haue vsed a more spitefull and malicious, more slaunderous and reprochfull, more contemptuous and disdaynfull kinde of writing, than you vse throughout your whole booke: and truly if you had not these two letters T. C. for your name, yet coulde I haue easily coniectured by the haughtinesse of the stile, and contemptuous speaches, who had bene the authour of the booke, so well am I acquainted with your modestie, and suche experience haue I of your myldnesse. But it is well, for nowe such as before haue thought that you had bene 
                        sine felle, without gall, and that butter would not melt in your mouth, may perceyue that all is not vntrue that hath ben reported of you. But what woulde they farther thinke if they shoulde compare (you béeing that T. C. that I take you to be) your othe which you once tooke when you were admitted fellowe into T. C. (Item me buic Collegio fidelem & beneuolum
                        The othe which the fellowes of Tri. Col. in Cambridge do take at their 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                        futurum, ei & omnibus socijs ac discipulis, atque etiam magistro eiusdem, non solum dum in eo vixero, sed etiam postea pro virili cum opus sit beneuolentiam & opem praestiturū. &c.) with this your good will vttered throughout your whole booke? verily you might haue answered as well as you haue doon, and had better regard both to your othe and to your brethren. But to let that passe, I doubte whether you meane good faith or no, when you would make vs beléeue that you take vs for brethren: for surely that doth not appeare either by the firste or. 
                        〈1 line〉
                     . Admonition, or by this your booke, if a man consider the fiercenesse and firie heat, almost in euery lyne of them, vttered against vs. In the second Admonition fol. 35. speaking of the Bishops which be nowe, & their confederates (as you cal them) these words in most spiteful maner be vttered. And take them for better2. Admo▪ fo. 35 who shall, they are no other but a remnant of Antichristes broode, and God amend and forgiue them, for else they bid battell to Christ and his Church, and it must bid defiance to them, till they yeeld. And I protest before the eternall God I take them so, and thereafter will vse my selfe in my vocation, and many moe too no doubt, which be carefull of God his glory, and the Churches liberty, will vse them selues against them, as the professed enimies of the Church of Christ, if they proceede in this course, and thus persecute as they do. And therefore these be but wordes of dalyance, when you saye, that you cannot tell howe it commeth to passe, that the name of a brother s
                        〈1 line〉
                     aketh that courage and abateth that carefulnesse, whiche should be bestowed in the defence

of the truth. In déede it ought to haue abated your outrageous and disdayneful speaches, if olde rancour and desire of reuengement, had not gotten in you the vpper hande. For whether you deale with me lyke a brother, or like an vtter enimie, lette the indifferent Reader iudge.
                  What truth you haue on your side, and how it is oppugned and slandered by such as you meane, shall I trust appeare, when your Replie is diligently compared with my Answere. If you had ment the truth in good earnest, you woulde haue delt more paynly in replying than you haue doone: you would haue set downe my booke, as I haue done the Admonition, that the Reader mighte haue compared bothe together: and not haue mangled it, depraued it, falsified it, and vntruly collected of it as you haue done, and almost nothing else, as (God willing) shall appeare. God graunt that it be not layde to your charge that you haue hindred Truth, slaundered it, and giuen the common aduersaries occasion to speake euill of it.
               
            
            
               T. C.
               And as vnto other partes of the Gospell, so soone as the Lorde openeth a doore for them to enter in, there is for the most parte great resistance: So in this part concerning the gouernment and discipline of the Church, which is the order which God hath left, as well to make the doctrine most effectual, and to giue as it were a sharper edge vnto the preaching of the word, as also to be a wall to keepe it, and make it continue amongst vs, I see there bee sundrie lettes, which doe as it were with weapons, stande vp to stoppe the passage, and to hinder that it shoulde not be settled amongste vs.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  It is true that there is greate resistance so soone as the Lorde openeth any dore to his Gospell, and that by sundrie meanes, and diuers kindes of men, as the stories of the Churche from tyme to tyme declare, and dayly experience teacheth: it is also true, that many vnder this pretence of right gonernment, and restoring of discipline, haue and doe disturbe the Churches wherin the Gospel is sincerely preached, and the Sacraments rightly ministred, for further proufe wherof, and auoyding of tediousnesse, I referre you to maister Bullinger Lib. 6. cap. 10. aduersus Anabaptist.
                      To Maister Caluine aduersus Anabaptist.
                      To Maister Gualter in his Epistle dedicatorie before hisThe pretence of restoring the right gouernment, but a cloake for farther mischiefe. commentarie vpon the first to the Corinthes. Therfore this pretence of restoring the right gouernment of the Churche, with so great disquietnesse of the same, is but a couer to hyde the further purposes of Satan the enimie of the peace and quietnesse of the Churche.
               
            
            
               T. C.
               With the whiche albeeit I wrestle hand to hande in this booke, yet forasmuche as we haue all drunke so deepe of the cup of vntruth, that we do not only stumble at blockes, which other men laye in our way, but oftentimes we gather lettes vnto our selues in framing a preiudice against the truth: I thought good to note shortly what those stumbling blockes are, and although I cannot remoue them, yet to giue warning of them, and to lende my hande to the weaker and simpler sorte to helpe to ouerstride them.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte
                  What these stumbling blockes are, and howe you will helpe the weaker and simpler sorte to ouerstride them, we shall sée in the discourse that foloweth.
               
            
            
               The Epist. of T. C. Sect. 2.
               The offences which are taken herein, be either in respecte of the cause, or in respect of those whiche seeke to defende, and promote the cause. The cause is charged fyrste with newnesse and strangenesse, then as author of confusion, and of disorder, and laste of all as enimie to Princes, magistrates, and common wealthes. For the fyrst, besydes that it is no sufficient chalenge, to say it is new and strange, there is no cause why it should be counted newe, which is confessed of those whiche myslyke it, to haue bin for the most part vsed in the Apostles tymes, nor why it should be esteemed strange, which is vsed now farre and neere, of this & that syde the sea, and of ne straungers, but of those which are of the houshold of fayth. And it shal more largely appeare in this boke, that this is no innouation, but a renouation, and the doctrine not new, but renued, no stranger, but borne in Sion, wherevnto (it being before vniustly banished) ought now of right to be restored.
               
                  
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  Snrely the offences are taken bothe in respecte of the persons, and of the cause: Neither is eyther the persons, or the cause charged with any thing by mée, but I am readie eyther to proue it, or to retract it. The antiquitie of it, and the straungenesse wée must referre to be iudged of the Reader, when we haue both written what we can. In the meane tyme I suppose that youre deuises with the circumstances, will appeare not only not to be auncient, but verie straunge and lately deuised: although in suche matters antiquitie is not sufficient to proue a thing conuenient, excepte it agrée with the circumstances of tyme, place, and persons, much lesse necessarie, vnlesse it be in matters pertayning to saluation, as shall hereafter (God willing) more largely be declared: where also it will appeare, that many of your assertions tende not to renouation, but innouation, and that they were neuer eyther borne in Sion, or méete for Sion.
                  
               
            
            
               The Epist. of T. C. Sect. 3.
               And of confusion and disorder it is yet more vntruly accused. For iustice may be as well accused for dooing wrong, as this doctrine, for bringing in disorder, whose whole woorke is to prouide, that nothing be done out of place, out of tyme, or otherwyse than the condition of euery mans calling will beare: which putteth the people in subiectiō vnder their gouernours, the gouernours in degree and order one vnder an other, as the Elder vnderneath the Pastor, and the Deacon vnderneath the Elder, which teacheth that a particular Churche shall giue place vnto a prouinciall Synode, where many Churches are, and the prouinciall to a nationall, and lykewyse that, vnto the generall, if any, bee, and all vnto Christe and his worde. When on the contrarie parte, those whiche stande against this doctrine, are therby compelled to bring into the Churche great confusion, and maruellous disorder, whylest the Pastors office is confounded with the deacons, whilest women doo minister the Sacraments which is lawful only for men, whylest priuate men doo that which belongeth vnto publike persons, whilest publike actions are done in priuate places, whilest the Churche is shuffled with the common wealth: whylest ciuill matters are handeled by Ecclesiasticall persons: and Ecclesiasticall by those whiche be Ciuill: and to be short, whylest no officer of the Church kepeth his standing, and one member doth take vpon it the office of an other. Which things as they hazarde the armie, and destroy the bodie, so they doe presently hinder, and wil shortly (if remedie be not prouided) vtterly ouerthrowe the Churche. And therefore vnlesse good order bee in that whiche was broughte into the Churche by Poperye: and confusion in that whyche was lefte vnto the Churche by the Apostles, and that it be order, that publike actions shoulde be doone in priuate places by priuate persons, and by women that is appoynted to be doone by men, and confusion when the contrarie is obserued: and finally, vnlesse order haue an other definition or nature, than hitherto hath ben read or hearde of, there is no cause why this doctrine which contemeth the discipline and gouernment of the Churche, should be thus shamefully slaundered, with confusion and disorder.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  It will fall out I thinke, that your opinions now in question, tende in déede toWhere vnto their opinions tend. confusion: respect neither tyme, place, nor persons: confounde degrées, bring such in contempt as be in authoritie: make the ignorant subiect loftie, & arrogant, take from Princes their due authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matters: when as present experience and the peace and quietnesse of this Church, since the beginning of the Quéenes Maiesties reigne (vntill you and your companie began to broache these youre fantasies) declareth, that the doctrine mainteyned by those whome you counte as your aduersaries, is most agréeable to order, preserueth peace, kéepeth euery man in his degrée and calling. And truly if the gouernment of the Churche nowe allowed by publike authoritie, be compared with your new deuised policie, the differēce of them both wil easily appere. For I pray you tel me, how many of you which haue bin permitted asThe admonitors agree not in their go uernment. preachers in seuerall places, haue consented in one kinde of gouernment, nay, which of you haue not troubled, not onely the Towne where you haue remained, but the whole Countrey reunde about also? so that vndoubtedly though you be not Anabaptists (as I hope you be not) yet doth this propertie of theirs most aptly agrée vnto you that whersoeuer you come, you make contention, and kindle the fire of discorde, take it as you list, experience doth teache it to be so,
                  Whether we confounde the Pastors office with the Deacons or no, otherwyse than it hath bene in the Apostles time, and primatiue Church: whether priuate men

women, ciuill or Ecclesiasticall persons, doe more than they ought to doe or no, to be short, whether order according to the true nature and definition thereof be obserued or no, I shall haue better occasion hereafter to discusse. Now my meaning is to answer words with wordes, although in no such deriding and opprobrious maner.
               
            
            
               The Epist. of T. C. Sect. 4.
               For the thirde poynt which is, that it is an enimie to Magistrates, and the common welth: if it be inough to accuse without proofe, saye, and to shewe no reason, innocencie it selfe shall not be guiltlesse. This doctrine was in tymes past, euen by their confession, which write agaynst it, a friend vnto Princes and Magistrates, when Princes and magistrates were enimies vnto it: And can it now be an enimie vnto Princes and magistrates, which are friends vnto it? It helped and vpholded the common wealths, which were gouerned by tyrantes, and can it hynder those, which are gouerned by godly Princes? And in what is it an enimie to Princes and magistrates? Note the variance, set downe the enimitie. If the question be, whether Princes and Magistrates bee necessarie in the Churche, it holdeth, that the vse of them is more than of the Sunne, without the whyche the worlde can not stande. If it bee of theyr honoure, it holdeth, that with humble submission of mynde, the outwarde also of the bodie, yea the bodie it selfe, and all that it hathe, if neede so require, are to be yelded, for the defence of the Prince, and for that seruice, for the whyche the Prince will vse them vnto, for the glorie of God, and mayntenance of the Common wealth.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  These be but glorious wordes, the truth wherof shall appeare, when we come to the more particular declaration of the seuerall poyntes: and if wée accuse without proofe, say and shewe no reason, take youre remedie agaynste vs as slaunderers, and bring vs to our triall. In deede the doctrine of the Gospell, which is the doctrine of saluation, hath ben, is, and will be a friend to Princes and Magistrates, yea though they persecute the same: But you haue not yet proued your doctrine now in question, to be that doctrine of the Gospell & of saluation. These woordes might wel haue ben spoken of the Gospell against Mahometisme, Iudaisme, Papisme, but you doe iniurie to that doctrine of lyfe, when you confounde with the same your erroneous contentions about ceremonies, and the kinde of gouernment, whiche all béeing externall things, I thinke not many will make them to be 
                        de necessitate salutis, of necessitie vnto saluation. you haue here sayde nothing of your doctrine, but that whiche the Arrians, the Pelagians, the Papistes, the Turkes, yea almoste the Anabaptistes will say of theirs: for many euen of the Anabaptistes confesse, that Magistrates be necessarie, but yet not to be lawfull for Christians to be Magistrates: and for proof therof they vse diuers of the self same places that the Admonition hath alleaged (and you allowed) against superioritie in the clergie. And (except I be deceyued) you come verie néere to them, for you will haue the Ecclesiasticall and ciuill gouernment so distincte, that they can by no meanes concurre in one and the selfe same persons: wherby you take from the Ciuil Magistrate authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matters, and by that meanes spoyle him of the one halfe of his iurisdiction. But of this matter more at large hereafter as occasion shall be ministred by you. In the meane tyme, I admonishe the Reader to beléeue youre wordes no farther than he shall sée iust proofe of them.
               
            
            
               T. C.
               If it be asked of the obedience due vnto the Prince, and vnto the Magistrate, it answereth that all obedience in the Lorde, is to be rendred: and if it come to passe, that any other be asked, it so refuseth that it disobeyeth not, in preferring obedience to the greate God, before that whiche is to be giuen to mortall man. It so resysteth, that it submitteth the bodie and goodes of those that professe it, to abyde that whiche God will haue them suffer in that case.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  All this is truly spoken of the doctrine of the Gospell, but not of the doctrine in controuersie amongst vs: and verily this is not plaine dealing, to make the reader beléeue that we doe withstande the doctrine of the Gospell, when we only resist your contentions about externall matters, wherby the doctrine of the Gospel is hindered, and the Churche of Christ disturbed.
               
            
            
               
               T. C.
               And if it be shewed, that this is necessarie for the Churche, it can not be but profitable for the common wealth: nay the profit of it may easyly appeare, for that by the censures and discipline of the Churche, as they are in this booke described, men are kept back from committing of great disorders, of stealing, adulterie, murder, &c. whylest the smaller faults of lying and vncomely 
                     〈◊〉
                  , of harde and cholerike speaches, which the magistrate both not commonly punishe, be corrected.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  If it be necessarie for the present state of the Churche, it is also profitable for the present state of the cōmon welth: for I perceiue no such distinction of the common wealth & the church, that they should be counted as it were two seueral bodies gouerned with diuers lawes & diuers Magistrates, except the Church be linked with an heathenish & idolatrous cōmon wealth. The ciuil Magistrate may not take vpon himWhat ecclestasticali functions the 
                           〈◊〉
                         Magistrate may not take vpon him▪
                      such Ecclesiastical functiōs as are only proper to the Minister of the Church, as preaching of the wordé, administring of the Sacramentes, excommunicating, and suche lyke, but that he hath no authoritie in the Churche, to make and execute lawes for the Churche, and in things pertaining to the Churche, as Discipline, Ceremonies, &c. (so that he doo nothing agaynst the woorde of God) though the Papistes affirme it neuer so stoutely, yet is the contrarie moste true, and sufficiently proued by men of notable learning, as Master Iewell Bishop of Salisburie, Maister Horne Bishop of Winchester, Maister Nowell Deane of Paules, in their bookes written against Papistes holding your assertion, to whose painefull and learned writings I res
                        〈1 line〉
                     rre the Reader, for the auoyding of too muche prolixitie.
                  I doe not well vnderstande what is mente by these woordes, Naye the profite of it maye easyly appeare, for that by the censures and discipliue of the Churche, as they are in this booke described, men are kepte backe from committing of greater disorders of stealyng, adulterie, murther. &c. whylest the smaller faultes, of lying, and vncomely iesting, of harde and cholerike speaches, whiche the Magistrate dothe not commonly punysh, be corrected: Doe you not thinke the punishemente for stealing, and murther, to be sharpe enough? or doe you thynke that the feare of the Discipline of the Churche will more terrifie men from these vices, than the feare of deathe? Or doe you doubte whether the Ciuill Magistrate hathe Authoritye to appoynte anye other punyshemente for these and suche lyke crimes, than is prescribed in the Iudiciall Lawe of Moyses? For thys is nowe called in controuersie, and begynneth to bée table talke: or are you perswaded, that the Ciuill Magistrate eyther maye not, or will not correcte lying, vncomely iesting, harde and cholerike speaches? Or that if these were punished by the Discipline of the Churche, men woulde rather be terrified from the greater crymes, than they will be if they be punished with ciuill correction? Truly I thinke that the ciuill Magistrate hath sufficient authoritie to prouide remedies for all suche mischieues, without altering the state, eyther of the church, or of the cōmon wealth. But let the indifferent Reader iudge, whether you goe aboute to wring the swoorde out of the Magistrates hand or no: or at the least, so to order the matter, that it be neuer drawne out to punishe vice, but with the consent and at the appoyntment of you and your seigniorie.
               
            
            
               T. C.
               And vndoubtedly, seing that the churche and common wealth, doe embrace and kisse one an other, & seing they be like vnto Hypocrates twinnes which were sick together & wel together, laughed together, and weped together, and alwayes lyke affected: it can not be, but that the breaches of the common wealth, haue proceeded from the hurts of the Church, and the wants of the one, from the lackes of the other: Neither is it to be hoped for, that the common wealth shal florish, vntill the Church be reformed.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  All this I grant (and God be thanked therfore) if we shal measure the state of the church, with the florishing estate & wise gouernment of the cōmon wealth, we shall haue no great cause to complaine, but to burste oute into moste hartie thankes vnto God for the same, and most humbly desire the continuance therof.
                  
                     I do not say that the Churche is without fault, for then should I affirme an impossibilitie, but I thinke the faultes that are, rather to be in the persons, than in the lawes, rather in the gouernours, than in the kinde of gouernment: neyther woulde I haue men (eyther Puritanes, Donatistes, or Anabaptists) to dreame of such a Church, as Plato did of a Common wealth, Aristotle of felicitie, and the Stoicks of their iuste man: muche lesie to make contention in the Church, or deuide themselues from the same, if al things go not according to their fantasie: for then shal they neuer be quiet with any Churche, no not long with that Church, which they themselues do presently best lyke of. Surely if this rule be certaine, that the Common wealth shal not flourishThe rule of T. C. returned against himselfe. vntil the Church be reformed, then this may be a good token vnto vs, that this Churche of Englande is reformed, bicause the Common wealth doth flourish. Neither doe I speake this to flatter the Magistrates, and to sewe quisshions vnder their elbows (as it pleaseth some to reporte) but I speake it before God, I speake it as I thinke: and the rather I vtter it, to deliuer both the state of the Churche, and also of the common wealth of Englande, from the vnthankfull, vnnaturall, and slanderous tongues of such as séeke to deface and depraue them both.
                  I will not defend the vice, the negligence, the securitie of any man, I shall be as bolde and as readie to tel euen the best thereof in time and place (as occasion is ministred, and my duetie shall require) as any of those shall be, which woulde séeme to be farthest from all kinde of flatterie.
               
            
            
               T. C.
               And it is also certaine, that as the Church shal euery daye more and more decay, vntill it be made euen with the grounde, onlesse the walles be buylded, & the ruines repaired: S
                     〈1 line〉
                   the weight of it (if it fal) will either quite pull downe the Common wealth, or leaue it such as none whiche feare God will take any pleasure in it. For seeing Salomon sayeth, that by wisedome (whiche is the worde of God) Kings doe gouerne, and Princes doe beare rule: it can not be, but as that wisedome is eyther contemned, or neglected, or otherwyse abridged of hir free and full course, so Princes and Magistrates, and consequently their common wealthes, eyther goe to wrack, or decay, or at the least, want so muche of the flourishing estate, as there wanteth of that word of God which he hath appoynted to be their stay. And howsoeuer (before the comming of our Sauioure Christ) amongst the Athenians, Lacedemonians, and Romanes, and since his comming in dyners places where this wisedome hath not ben heard of, there may seme to haue bin some shewes of eyther florishing, or tollerable common wealths, yet neyther haue those endured, but according to the prophecie of Daniell, haue bene broken all to peeces: so that there is not so much of them left, as a sheard to fetche fyre in: neyther yet can those kingdomes whiche haue the knowledge of the Gospell reuealed vnto them, looke for that long suffering and pacience of God towards them wherwith those ignorant kingdoms haue ben borne with. For as the benefite is greater towardes these, than towardes the other, so is the iudgement swifter against them, than against the other: if that grace which was not offered vnto them (being offered vnto these) bee refused, and made light of. And in these especially is, and shall be fulfilled that whiche the Prophet Esay saith, that it shall be in the later days that euery nation and kingdom, which shal not serue the Church, shall be destroyed. As of the other syde, the full and whole placing of our sauiour Christe in his throne, is the perpetuall stay, and stayed perpetuitie of all Princes in theyr seates.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  All this is true, for if any nation shall refuse the word of God offered vnto it, or not suffer Christ wholly to be placed in his throne, no doubt God will poure vppon that nation his plagues, as he hath done vpon al other that haue runne into the same contempt. But would you make your reader beléeue, that bycause this Churche of England doth not admit your kind of gouernment, therefore the walles of it be broken, the word of God contemned, and Christe not suffered wholly to be placed in hys throne? We admit the Gospell wholly, and in gouernments the magistrates take vpon them no office only proper to Christ, neyther yet any authoritie which is not by the word of God limited vnto them. These wordes might aptly haue bin spoken if you had written against the state of the Churche in Fraunce, or any such like kingdome as refuseth the Gospell offered vnto it, and most cruelly persecuteth the true professors of the same. I do not excuse such in the Churche of England as contemne the word of God, neither do I iustify the whole Church for not receiuing the Gospell offred, by bringing foorth the frutes therof as it ought to do: But I exhort euery mā, from the highest to the lowest, euen in the bowells of Iesus Christ, to haue a better

regard thervnto, least it be sayd vnto vs, as it is sayd vnto the Church of Ephesus, 
                        Apoc. 2. Sed babeo aduersum te, quod charitatem tuam pristinam. &c. I haue some thing againstApoc. 2. thee, bycause thou hast forsaken thy former loue. &c. And to the Hebrues. 6: For the earthHebr. 6 whiche drinketh in rayne that commeth ofte vpon it, and bringeth foorth herbes meete for them by whome it is dressed; receiueth blessing of God. But that whiche beareth thornes and briers, is reproued, and is neere vnto curssing, whose ende is to be burned. For surely euen these contentions stirred vp in the Churche where the Gospell is truly preached, are argumentes that we be voyde of loue and peace, the chiefe and principall tokens and frutes of the Gospell.
               
            
            
               T C.
               And therfore if this booke shall come into the handes of any, that haue accesse vnto hir Maiestie, the head of this common wealth, or vnto hir most honorable counsatle, the shoulders therof, my humble sute and heartie request, in the presence of God is, that according as their callings will suffer them, they will put them in remembrance of these things, which otherwise they know better than I, and that they would set before them the example of Moses, who was not contented to haue brought the people out of Egipt, T. C. maketh greater accopt
                        〈1 line〉
                     . of the gouernmet than of the Gospell it selfe▪ for he 
                        〈◊〉
                      the state of this Churche, to 
                        〈1 line〉
                     he wand
                        〈1 line〉
                     ing in the wildern
                        〈1 line〉
                     . but would verie fain also, haue conducted them into the lande of Canaan, that is, would gladly haue bene the instrument of the full and whole deliuerance of the people. And seing that the Lord doth offer them this honour which he denied vnto his seruant Moses, that they woulde not make themselues guiltie of so greate vnthankfulnesse, as will folowe of the forsaking of so incomparable a benefite. That hir Maiestie especially, and hir most honorable counsayle, would sette before them the example of Dauid, who although he made a great reformation of those things which were defaced by Saul, yet he was not content, that the Arke of the Lord should dwel vnder a Tabernacle, and therfore desired maruellously, that he might buyld the temple vnto the Lord. And seing that the Lord hath graunted vnto them which he denyed vnto his seruāt, that they would not be narow and straight in themselues, seeing the Lorde openeth the treasures of his goodnesse so largely vnto them. That they would set before them the zeale of Zerubbabel, who although he had (after the returne out of captiuitie) abolished idolatrie, layde the foundations of the Temple, and set vp an aultar vnto God, wherevpon the morning and euening sacrifice was dayly made: yet being admonished by the Prophete Aggey, that God would not be pleased, vnlesse the Temple also were fully buylded, did (all feare of the nations rounde about, and other busynesse layde asyde) cause it foorthwith, and with al possible speede to be made an ende of. Finally, that it would please them to consider the examples of Iosias, Ezechias, and Iehoshaphat, who are therfore, to their euerlasting commendation pr
                     〈1 line〉
                  ised of the holie Ghoste, for that they made whole, and thorough reformations, where as the honour of other some (albeit they were otherwyse good) is stayned, and caryeth the marke of their imperfection, by this and like exception, that although they did suche good things, and such, That is, they suffred manifest Idolatrie: wher
                        〈1 line〉
                      with you can by n
                        〈1 line〉
                      means 
                        〈◊〉
                      thi
                        〈1 line〉
                      Chur
                        〈1 line〉
                     he of Englande, and therefore your application 
                        〈◊〉
                      vnfie. yet they left also suche and suche vndoone.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  And why is not hir Maiestie the head of this Churche also, as wel as of this common wealth? For I must giue thée to vnderstande (good Reader) that T. C. makethT. C. ioyneth with the Papistes concerning the authoritie of the ciuil Magistrate in ecclesiastical matt
                           〈1 line〉
                        rs. the Churche, and the cōmon wealth two such distinct and seuerall bodies, as must of necessitie, haue distinct and seuerall magistrates and gonernors, and that the Ciuill magistrate hath not to medle in Ecclesiasticall matters, excepte his aide be required by the Pastor and Seigniorie, or suche lyke cases, wherin he flatly ioyneth with the Papistes, who say, that the ciuil Magistrate hath only Potestatem facti, and not Iuris, that is, authoritie to execute suche things as they decrée, but not authoritie to make any lawes in Ecclesiasticall matters. And least you should thinke that I faine this, consider the whole scope of his booke, and particularly his wordes before mencioned in this leafe, where as he accuseth the gouernment of this Church nowe in practise of confusion, bycause ciuill matters are handled by Ecclesiasticall persons, and EcclesiasticallSect. 3. matters by those which be ciuill, also that whiche he speaketh of this matter f
                        〈1 line〉
                     . 144. andFo. 144. sect. 2. 154. and especially that which the second Admonition hath, fo. 8. 9. 57. 60. I know notFol. 154. sect. 1. 2. 3. howe he coulde haue made a greater difference, betwixt the Churche and the cōmon wealth in those places where the Princes be enimies vnto the Church. In déed true it is, that in the Apostles tyme, Princes did not medle in causes Ecclesiastical, except it were by persecuting. &c. For they were then infidels, not Christians, persecutors, not professors: And therfore if all ought of necessitie to be reduced to the forme of gouernment vsed in the Apostles time, Christian Princes must be deliuered from that care, and be content to forgoe that portion of their authoritie. But hereof more in the

due place, this I only here note, that you may the better consider the same in the pervsing of his booke.
                  The rest of that whiche is conteyned in this parte, may haue some vse, if it bée rightly applyed: for godly princes haue to follow such godly examples, and to be diligent in reforming such things as are to be reformed, either in substaunce, circumstances or persons.
               
            
            
               T. C.
               Whiche I do not speake, as though we had not already, by hir Maiestie especially, and afterward by their honours hands receiued a singular benefyte, but that we hauing the whole, myghte haue our hearts and mouthes filled with the praise of God, and continue the possessiō of that which we haue, which otherwise for our vnthankfull refusall, shall be taken away. Wherein as we haue especial regard, that the name of God should be magnified, not by vs alone, but by our posteritie vnto the worlds end: So it is not the smallest part of our care, that hir Maiestie and your honours, to whome we are so deepely bound, and of whome we haue receiued so singular benefytes of peace, and preaching of the Gospell, mighte with your successions continue nnd flourish amongst vs for euer: But the desire of reformation, and feare of Gods heauie wrath to come vpon vs, hath carried me further herein than I purposed. I will therefore make an end of these points, considering that the vntruth of these accusations, of newnesse and straungenesse, of disorder and confusion, of beyng enimie to princes and common wealthes, shall better appeare in the discourse of this Booke.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  These be smooth words to win credite by: but they agrée not with the rest of your booke, wherefore I doubt not but that they will be considered of accordingly. I would to God that you did in déede acknowledge that singular benefyte that you haue receiued by hir Maiestie and their honours, then truly would you haue shewed yourselfe more thankfull than you haue done, neither woulde you haue mainteined libells whiche séeke vtterly to deface all that is done, as will manifestly hereafter by further examination appeare. Whatsoeuer accusations haue bin made of your doctrine, if they be not iustifyed, then let the authours of them suffer the shame. Surely you haue as slenderly answered these accusations hitherto, as may be.
               
            
            
               The Epistle of T. C. Sect. 5. 6. 7.
               Amongst the offences taken by occasiō of those, which preferre the doctrine, this is the cheefest, that comparison being made betwixt those excellent mē, both in vertue and learning, which suffered for the testimonie of the truth, and betwene vs, of the one side: Also betwene the Archbyshops, Byshops, Deanes, and Archdeacons, which now are, and vs on the other side: it seemeth vnto many that it is not like to be good, which was not found out by those excellent personages, and which being now propounded, by men of no great shew, is eyther misliked, or at the least, by no open approbation allowed, of those which carrie greater countenaunces, and be in greater dignities.
               Unto the first, although answer is made more at large, in this booke, yet I will adde thus much, that as for my part, I coufesse my selfe, to be a great deale inferioure vnto the least of them: so the omitting of these necessarie things, ought to be no more preiudice against them, or against those that pret̄erre them, than the omitting of the celebration of the feast of Tabernacles, so many hundreth yeares, by so many good high priests, in the raignes of so many good kings, was preiudiciall vnto the ministers, which caused it to bee celebrated, when the people returned out of their captiuitie: for it appeareth in the booke of Nehemias, that the feast of Tabernacles, which was commaunded of8. Chap. the Lorde to be celebrated euery yeare, wasThis is a manifest vntruth, as shall appeare. not celebrated from the days of Iosua, the sonne of Nun, vntill the returne of the people from their captiuitie. And yet were there in this space, dysiers both iudges and kings, both priests and Prophets singularly zealous and learned.
               If therefore the omitting of so necessary a thing, so many hundreth yeares, by such godly, zelous, learned persons, could not bring any prescription, against the truth: the lacke of this necessary discipline, by the space of. 30. yeares, through the ouersight of a fewe (if they be compared with that multitude) ought not to be alleadged, to keepe it out of the Church.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  Surely the inequalitie of the persons, and great difference betwixt them, both in godlynesse, zeale, learning, experience, and age, (though it séeme a small matter too some) yet it ought to be well considered: for it is well knowne, that the firste sorte of men here mentioned, did excell in all those forenamed qualities, and haue continued in the same euen to the death: and the latter sort many of them singular in learning, zeale, wisedome, & experience, hauing also knowledge of other Churches refourmed

more than you (howsoeuer it pleaseth you and some of your companions vndutifully to contemne them) wherefore as I saide, this comparison is something, and not so lightly to be estéemed, as you would make the reader beléeue. For my part I thinke the worse of you, bycause you thinke so well of your selues, that you dare be so bolde, as not onely to compare your selues with them, but to preferre your selues before them. As for this Humilitie, and abasing your selfe in saying, that you cōfesse your selfe to be a great deale inferioure to the least of them: He that will take paynes but to peruse your booke, shall easly vnderstand that you thinke nothing lesse. For truly your stile is so bigge and loftie, and your tauntes such towards them and others, that a man would thinke you not only to haue cast off all modestie, but vtterly to haue forgotten all good manners, ciuilitie, and duetie. But it is Rhetoricke common to you with other of your companions, as appeareth in diuers places of the first Admonition, and in the second throughout the whole, which I would wish the reader to consider, that he may thereby partly know, and discerne your spirit.
                  But say you, the omitting of these necessarie things, ought to be no more preiudice agaynste them. &c. Surely if you can proue that they haue omitted any thing expressely against the commaundement of God, then is it true that you say, but if you cannot do so, then do you vniustly charge these learned and godly martyrs. But what if you haue abused the place in the. 8. Chapter of Nehemias? What if you vnderstand it not truely?The feast of Tabernacles was not so lōg omitted. What if there can be no suche thing gathered of it, as you woulde make the reader beléeue? Shall I triumph ouer you and say that eyther you haue not read it, or you do not vnderstand it, or that you willingly and wittingly abuse it, or that you receiued it in some notes from others, as it pleaseth you to deale with me, when no such occasion is offered vnto you? I will not so requite you: But this only I say, that you haue not set downe the true sense of that place: For the meaning is not that the feasts of Tabernacles wasThe true interpretation of the place alleadged out of the 8. of Nehemias. not celebrated from the time of Iosua the sonne of Nun, vnto that day which was almost a thousand yeares, but that it was not celebrated in that manner, that is with such solemnitie, so great reioycing and gladnesse, as the very wordes them selues declare, both in the Hebrue, text and in the best translations. And so dothe Pellicane expounde that place, who saith, that these words since the time of Iosua the sonne of Nun. &c. be spokenPellican in 8. Nebe. in the respect of the greatnesse of the ioy whiche then happened to the people. Lyra also expoundeth the same place much after the same sort, and presupposeth nothyng lesse, than that the feasts were omitted all this time: for he affirmeth that they were much more solemnly and with greater cost celebrated in the times of Dauid and Salomon:
                     Lyra in 8. Nebe. therefore, saith he, the comparison is secundum quid, &. proportionaliter (for I vse hys words) bycause in all this time sithence Iosua, it is not read, that the people were so generallie gathered togither in Hierusalem, as we reade in the beginning of this Chapter that they were at this time: and againe he saith that it was more for the people newly returned frō captiuitie, to celebrate suche a feast with that solemnitie, than it was to mightie kings and people being in prosperitie, and setled in a kingdome, to celebrate the same day with much more cost and solemnitie. I might alledge other expositiors to the same effect: neyther haue I read any that doth expound that place otherwise.
                  The like kind of speach we haue. 2. Reg. 23. where it is said. That there was no passouer2. Reg. 23. holden like that (which Iosias helde) from the dayes of the Iudges, that iudged Israell, nor in all the days of the kings of Israell, and the kings of Iuda: whiche is only spoken in respect of the multitude, and zeale of the people, with the great preparation: and not bycause the passouer was not all this time celebrated. The like is also vsed. 2. Chro.2. Chro. 30. 26. 30. vers. 26. euen so it is in this place: for there is no doubt, but that the feast of Tabernacles was celebrated both in Dauid and Salomons time: and it is manifest that it was celebrated not long before this time, as it is in plaine words expressed. 1. Esdras1. Esra. cap. 3. vers. 4. Ca. 3. vers. 4. wherefore I might make much ado at this ouersight of yours, or rather wilfull deprauing of the scriptures, if I were delighted with that kind of confuting. But though my learning be small, and that I am ignoraunt both of Logicke and Philosophie, and haue read so little in Diuinitie, and you so mightie a man in the Scriptures, and so profound in all kind of knowledge, as you perswade your selfe to be, yet

you must be content here to be admonished of me, that you haue abused this place, and that it serueth not for your turne, to proue those godly men, which suffered martyrdome in Duéene Maries time, to haue permitted any thing in this Churche of Englande (after it was reformed) expressely contrary to the commaundemente and word of God, as you vntruly report, So many good high priestes in the reygnes of so many good kings, so many hundreth yeares to haue omitted the feastes of Tabernacles, expressely by God commaunded. Although I do not denie, but suche men also may sometimes be ouerséene in some points, but neither can you proue that they were deceiued in any substantiall point of doctrine, neither yet if they were, is this place aptly or truly alleadged.
               
            
            
               The Epistle of T. C. Sect. 8.
               The dignitie also, and high estate of those, which are not so earnest in this cause, can not hinder it, if we consider, the wisedome of God, almost from time to time, to consist, and to shew it selfe most in setting foorth his truth, by the simpler, and weaker sort, by cōtemptible, and weake instruments,1. Cor. I. by things of no valew, to the end, that whē al men see the basenesse, and rudenesse of the instrument, they might the more wonder at the wisedome, and power of the artificer, which with so weake, and foolish instruments, bringeth to passe so wise and mightie things. And if mē will with such an eye of fiesh, looke vpon matters, they shal condemne that excellent reformation, made vnder the Godly kingIosias is here alleadged for Ezechias Iosias, which the holy Ghost doth so highly cōmēd: In which it is witnessed, that the This place is not right interpreted. Leuites,2. Chro. which were a degree vnder the priests, were more forward, and more zelous, than the priests29. Chap. themselues. Yea wherein it is witnessed, that the people were yet more earnest, and more willing,2. Chro. than either the Leuites, or the priests, which thing, if euer, is verefyed in our time.
               For whē 
                  A manifest flatterie, and the scripture abused to coloure it. I cōsider the zeale for religion which sheweth it selfe in many, as well of the nobilitie,30. Chap. and gentrie of this realme, as of the people, their care to continue it, and aduaunce it, their voluntary charges to mainteine it, their liberalitie towards them, which bend themselues that way, as I do thereby conceiue some hope, of the fauorable countenaunce, and cōtinuaunce of Gods goodnesse towards vs: So I cannot be but ashamed of mine owne slackensse, and afraid of the displeasure of the Lorde, for that those whose proper worke this is especially, and which shoulde beare the standard, and carrie the torch vnto the rest, are so cold, and so carelesse in these matters of the Lord.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  I knowe none among vs, which in the respect of his dignitie, and high estate, séeketh or desireth to be preferred or beleued before you, but in the respect of the cause, which is the peace of the Church, suppression of schismes, and the truth it selfe. No man denieth but God of his wisedome in the beginning of the Church of Christ, pouredGod vseth not the simple only, or alwayes to set foorthe his truth. out his gifts more plenteously vpon the simpler, contemptible and weaker sorte, and that he choosed for his Apostles fishermen, tollegatherers, and ignorant persons, lest that shoulde be ascribed to the wit, eloquence, and learning of man, which commeth only of the goodnesse, might, and power of God, as the Apostle plainly declareth. 1. Cor. 1. &. 2. But will you therefore conclude, that truth, zeale, and godlinesse remayneth either only or especially in the simple, rude, and ignorant sort? and make thys your conclusion, the learned, the honorable, men of great countenance or knowledge be of this or that opinion, Ergo it is not true? Or the simple, rude, and ignorant people ar thus and thus perswaded, Ergo they must be followed, or to the like effect? Uerely this were to reason as the Franciscan friers do to excuse their ignorance: Apostoli nesciebant literas, ergo Franciscanis non est opus literis. And like some other phantastical persons also, which thinke that no learned, rich, or honorable man shall be saued, but only beggers, and such as be ignorant, as master Gualter testifyeth in his commentaries vpon. 1. Cor. 1.Gual. in. 1. Cor. I. hom. 7.
                  
                  You know (as I suppose) that this place of the. 1. Cor. 1. quoted in your margent, doth not gather any suche conclusion, that therefore the doctrine is not true, bycause Princes, nobles, wise and learned men &c. do allow of it: or therefore it is true, bycause it pleaseth the simple, rude, and ignorant people. For Nicodemus, Ioseph, Lazarus Betha: Sergius Paulus, Dionisius Areopagita, Crispus, Gaius, Erastus, with diuers others, were politique, wise, welthy, learned, and honorable men: and the Prophete Esay saithe. That kings and Queenes shall be the nursing fathers and mothers, the defenders and mainteiners of the Churche. And Bullinger in his cōmentaries vpō
                     Esay. 49.
                     
this place doth thus expounde it: He speaketh of the first calling especially, wherein fishermenBull. in. 1. Co. I. and Idiots were especially called to the preaching of the Gospell. For no man can denie, but that after the Gospell was confirmed in the world, the best learned imbraced the truth. For first shepherds declared that Christ was borne: then the Magi, that is, the wise men of the East, came to salute him with gifts. Wherefore I pray you let not the wealthe, calling, or dignitie which you thinke we haue, preiudice our cause. The simple and plaine meaning of the place is, that God in his electing to eternall life, hath neyther respect to nobilitie, learning, riches, or any such thing.
                  I might héere againe trippe you for alleadging Iosias in stead of Ezechias, and say that you had not read the Scriptures, or that you vsed other mens notes, and so dallie with you, as you vse to do with others: But I will leaue such kind of gibes to brabling Sophisters in the schooles, & thinke that it was some light ouersight, which in such a case may sometimes happen to him that is most circumspect.
                  Your collection vpon that place. 2. Chro. 29. and. 30. I can not as yet allowe, vntill I be better instructed therein: for wheras you saye that it is there witnessed that the Leuites which were a degree vnder the Priestes were more forward and more zelous than the Priests themselues, and the people more earnest and more willing than eyther the Leuites or the Priests: I sée not how you can gather any suche thing out of either of these two Chapters: for if there be any sentence to gather it of in the. 29. Chap. it is the. 34. verse: which although in some translation, it séeme to insinuate some such thing, yet if credite may be giuen to those that be notable learned men, and very wel séene in the Hebrue song, the meaning of that place is nothing lesse. Pellicane translateth the words thus: 
                        Leuitae quippe faciliori ritu sanctificantur quam sacerdotes: For the Leuites were sooner or easyer sanctifyed than the priests which he expoundeth more plainly in hysPel. in. 2. Chr. 29. commentaries, saying: 
                        Intelligitur sacerdotum numerum imminutum fuisse. &c. It is to bee vnderstanded that the number of the priests was diminished whiche should haue sufficed for to prepare the sacrifices, and therefore they desired the help of the Leuites, that al things might be done more diligently: there was also another cause of the Leuites helpe, for the sanctifying of the temple, and the preparation of the sacrifice was so suddainly commaunded, that many of the priestes had not time to sanctifye themselues according to the lawe, which required a certaine space for the same, and the Leuites might be sanctified with lesse adoo, and in shorter time. And surely euen the very circumstances of the place dothe proue this to be the true vnderstanding of it: For these be the words that immediatly go before. But the priests were too few and were not able to fleay all the burnt offrings, therfore their brethren the Leuites did help them, vntil they had ended the worke, and vntill other priests were sanctifyed.
                     2. Chro. 29. 34▪
                     
                  
                  Your second assertion that is, that the people were yet more earnest, and more willing than eyther the Leuites or the priests, I thinke is grounded vpon the. 15. verse of the. 30. Chapter, which is this: Afterward they slew the passouer the foureteene day of the second moneth: and the priests and Leuites were ashamed, and sanctifyed them selues, and broughte the burnt offerings into the house of the Lord. Truly I sée not how you can collect any2. Chro. 30. 15. such thing out of these words: I know that some do gather such a note of that place, But I do not vnderstand the reason of it. Howsoeuer it be, and howsoeuer you abuse the scriptures to iustify your selues, I doubt not but that a greate number of those, whome you contemme and séeke to deface, do presently, and will to their liues ende, shewe that zeale of religion, that diligence in their calling, that vprightnesse in conuersation which becommeth them, and whiche they are well assured pleaseth God: neyther do I in so saying condemne the godly zeale of any, but I admonish all to take héede of a preposterous and affectionated zeale, such as is spoken of in the. 30. Page of the second edition of my answer to the Admonition.
               
            
            
               The Epistle of T. C. Sect. 9.
               And I humbly craue, and most ernestly desire of those whiche bare the cheefe titles in the ecclesiasticall functions, that as we do in part correct our negligence by the example of the forwardnesse, and redinesse of the people, so they would suffer themselues to be put in remembrance of their

ducties by vs which are vnderneath them, and that they would not neglect this golden gift of gods grace, in admonishing them, by cause the Lorde doth offer it in a treane or earthen vessell, but that they would first consider, that as Naaman the Syrian prince, receiued great commoditie, by following the aduice of his mayd, and after, of his man: And Abigael being a wise woman, singular profite, by obeying the counsell of hir seruant: so they may receiue of tentimes profitable aduertisement, by those which are in lower places than they themselues be. Then let them thinke, that as Naaman was neuerthelesse noble, for obeying the voice of his seruaunts, nor Abigaell neuerthelesse wise, bycause she listned vnto the words of hir man, so it cannot deminish their true honoure, nor empaire the credite of their godly and vncounterfaite wisedome, if they giue care vnto that, which is spoken by their inferiours.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  This humilitie appeareth to be counterfaite by the opprobrious speaches, and great contempt that you shew towards them in the rest of this booke.
                  What diligence you are prouoked vnto, by the forwardnesse and redinesse of the people, I know not, but euery man may sée you are ready to shake off your calling vpon euery light occasion: Neither will you preach in those places where the Gospell hath not bin so well planted, but there only you loyter, where there is lesse nede, and where you easily may make sturres, and moue contention, as experience sufficiently teacheth.
                  I know none, no not of the best, that refuseth to heare either you or any other modestly admonishing, neither haue you any cause hereof to complaine, but your stomackes are such, and your arrogancie so great, that you passingly abuse your selues toward those, whome indéede you ought to reuerence, and with all duty obey.
                  I maruell that you will confesse yourselfe to be vnderneath them, seing you so cry out against superioritie in the clergie, and claime such interest in equalitie: but I may not stand in answering words.
               
            
            
               The Epistle of T. C. Sect. 10.
               And last of all, that as, if they had not listned vnto those simple persons, the one had perished in his leprosie, the other had bin slayne, with hir familie:This is glorious talke builded vpon a false ground. euen so, if they shall for any worldly respect of honoure, riches, or feare of being accounted, either vnaduised in taking this course, or light, or inconstant, in forsaking it, stop their cares against this louing admonition of the Lord, they prouoke his anger, not against their health, or against their life, but against their owne soules, by exercising of vnlawfull authoritie, and by taking vnto them partly such things, as belong by no meanes vnto the Church, and partly which are common vnto them, with the whole Churche, or else with other the ministers, and gouernours of the same: whereof I beseeche them humbly to take the better heede, for that the iudgement of the Lord will be vpon a great part of them, by so much the heauier, by how much, they haue not only beleeued the Gospell, but also haue receiued this grace of god, that they should suffer for it. So that if they will neither take example of diuers their superiours the nobles of this realme, nor be admonished by vs, of the lower sorte (wherein we hope better of them) yet they woulde remember their former tunes, and correct themselues, by themselues, and seing they haue bin content, for the Gospels sake to quit the necessarie things of this life, they wold not thinke much, for the discipline, which is no small part of the Gospell (hauing both things necessary and commodious) to part from that, which is not only in them superfluous, and hath nothing but a vaine ostentation (which wil vanish as the shadow) but also is hurtfull vnto them, and pernicious vnto the Church, which thing I do more largely, and plainly lay foorth in this Booke.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  Surely if they do for any suche respects refuse any admonition giuen vnto them, for the auoyding of such things as be vnlawfull, and as they vniustly retaine, then no doubt they are worthy of great reprehension: but if your Admonition be not louing, but spitefull, not brotherly, but vnchristian, nay no Admonition in déede, but a very scolding and vncharitable rayling, if the thinges you would haue them forsake, bée bothe lawfull and conueniente for them to vse, and contrariwise the things that you moue them vnto, tend to confusion, and ouerthrow of the Gospell, and of the state (as they do) then truly haue they to consider of such disturbers of the peace of the Church, and according to their office and duty prouide a conueniente remedy for them: knowing that it is the extreame refuge of Satan, when by other meanes he cannot, then to séeke the ouerthrow of the Gospell, thorow contention about externall things.
               
            
            
               
               The Epist. of T. C. Sect. II.
               An other exception against the fauorers of this cause, is taken for that they propounde it out of time, which is that the Jewes said, that the time was not yet come to builde the Lords house: but it is knowne what the Prophet answered. And if no time wer vnseasonable, in that kind of material building, wherin there be some times (as of sommer) more opportune and fit than others: how can there be any vntimely building, in this spiritual house, where, as long as it is called to day, men are commanded to further this worke. And as for those which say, we come to late, & that this shoulde haue bin done in the beginning, and can not now be done without the ouerthrow of all, for mending of a peece: they do little consider, that S. Paule compareth that which is good in the buylding vnto golde, and siluer, and precious stones, and that whiche is euill, layde vpon the foundation, vnto stubble and hey, and woode. Likewise therfore as the stubble, & the hey, & the wood be easily by the fyre consumed, without any losse vnto the gold, or siluer, or precious stones: so the corrupt thynges in this buylding, may be easily taken away, without any hurt or hinderaunce vnto that whiche is pure, and sounde. And if they put such confidence in this similitude, as that they will therby without any testimonie of the worde of God, stay the further buylding, or correcting the faultes of the house of the Lorde (which by his manifest commaundement ought to be done with all spede) then besides that they be verie vncunning buylders, which can not mende the faults without ouerthrowe of al (especially when as the fault, is not in the foundation) they must remember, that as the mean, which is vsed to gather the children of God, is called a building, so it is called a planting. And therfore as dead twigs, riotous or superfluous branches, or what soeuer hindereth the growth of the vine tree, may be cut of, without rooting vp the vine: so the vnprofitable things of the Church may be taken away without any ouerthrow of those things which are wel established. And seeing that Christ and Beliall can not agree, it is strange, that the pure doctrine of the one, and the corruptions of the other, should cleaue so fast together, that pure doctrine can not be with hir safetie, seuered from the corruptions, when as they are rather lyke vnto that parte of Daniels image, which was compounded of claye and iron, and therfore coulde not cleaue or sticke one with an other.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  They did not only propound it out of time, (after the Parliament was ended) but out of order also, that is in the maner of a libell, with false allegations and applications of the Scriptures, opprobrious speaches, and slaunders: not to reforme, but to deforme the Church, and to confound al. The rest in this part is Petitio principij, the petition of the principle, for you take that as confessed & true, which will not be graunted vnto you, as shall more at large hereafter appeare.
               
            
            
               The Epistle of T. C. Sect. 12.
               It is further sayd, that the setters forward of this cause are contentious, and in mouing questions giue occasion to the Papistes of staundering the religion, and to the weake, of offence. But if it be founde to be both true which is propounded, and a thing necessarie about whiche we contende, then hath this accusation no ground to stand en. For peace is commended to vs, with these conditions, if it be possible, if it lye in vs. Now it is not possible; it lyeth not in vs to conceale theRom. 1
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     . Cor. 10. truth, we can doe nothing against it, but for it. It is a prophane saying, of a prophane man, that an vniust peace, is better than a iust warre. It is a diuine saying of an heathen man: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : It is good to contend for good things. The Papistes haue no matter of reioycing, seyng they haue greater & sharper controuersies at home, and seing this tendeth both to the further opening of theyr shame, and thrustyng out of their remnants, whych yet remayne among vs. The weake may not be offended, consyderyng that (euen in the Church of God, and among those of the Churche) there hathe bene as greate varieties of iudgementes, as these are. For what weightier controuersies can there be, than whether wee shall ryse agayne or no,These were offences, but woe to the authors. whether circumcision were necessarye to be obserued of those whych beleeued? And yet the fyrste was amongest the Churche of the Corinthes, the other was fyrst in Hierusalem and Antioche and after in the Churches of Galatia, and yet they the Churches, and that the true religion whyche was there professed.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  It is very true, and sufficiently proued in that Answere to the Admonition, that the authours thereof bée contentidus, and giue occasion to the Papistes of staundering the religion professed, and to the weake of offence. For whosoeuer troubleth the peace of the Churche, or deuide themselues from the Churche for externall thinges, they be contentious: but these men doe so, therefore they be contentious: the maior proposition is grounded vppon the woordes of Saincte Paule. 1. Corinth. 8. 9. and. 10. but especiallye vppon these woordes of the. 11. Chapter. If anye bee
                     
                     contentious, we haue no suche custome, neyther the Churches of God. Whereas he purposely speaketh of such, as be contentious for externall matters: wherevpon that is grounded that Bullinger saith: That those be contentious, which trouble and deuide theBulling. church for externall things. And that also, whiche Zuinglius in his book de baptismo, speaking of contentious Anabaptistes, writeth: They goe about innouations of their owne priuate authoritie in those Churches where the Gospell is truly taught, and that in externallZuinglius de baptis. things. And in his Ecclesiastes he calleth them authours of contentions, and troublers of the church, which striue about externall matters. And surely this is an euident token thatZuingl in ecclesiast. the accusation is true, bicause they and their companions (for the mosre parte) make contention wheresoeuer they come, and especially in those places where the Gospell hath with most diligence bin taught, as experiēce sufficiently proueth. Furthermore the time and maner of publishing their pamphlets, argueth ye same most euidently.
                  The truth and necessitie of those things for the which they contend, rest as yet in triall. Surely if they be matters necessarie to saluation, then is there some iust cause of breking the peace of the Church for them, but if they be matters of no such weight, then can you not excuse eyther your selfe, or them.
                  In déed the Papists haue no iust matter of reioycing, for they disagrée both in me, & also in far greater matters thā these be, euen in ye chiefest points of their religion: but this is no sufficient excuse for vs, we may not disagrée in truth, bicause they disagrée in error. Neither ought the weak to be offended, bicause such cōtentions haue bin vsual in the Church, as I haue also shewed in myne Epistle dedicatorie to the Churche of England. But yet wo be vnto those by whome suche offences come.
               
            
            
               T. C.
               And it is to be remembred that these controuersies, for the most part, are not betwene many. For sundry of those things which are cōprehended in the answer to the Admonition, haue (as I am persuaded) few fauorers, of those especially, which are of any stayed, or soūder iudgement in ye scriptures, and haue sene, or red of the gouernment, and order of other Churches: so that in deed (the father of that answere excepted) we haue this controuersie, oftentimes, rather with the Papistes, than with those whiche professe the Gospell, as we doe.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  Certainly I do not willingly defend any thing against the word of God, or of mine own priuate persuasion, but I haue either sufficient warrant of the worde of God, or some godly lerned & zelous authors iudgement for the same. If I haue done otherwise I trust I shal heare of it in this booke; but I am fully persuaded that all men of stayed and sound iudgement, ioyne with me in these matters, & such especially as haue had the beste experience of the order and gouernment of other reformed Churches: for proofe whereof, I referre you to the wisest, godlyest, and best learned among the clergie in this lande.
               
            
            
               T. C.
               And where as last of all, it is sayde, that this precedeth of enuie, of singularitie, and of popularitie, although these be no sufficient reasons agaynst the truth of the cause, whiche is neither enuious, singular, nor popular, and although they be such, as might be seuerally, by greate likelyhodes, & probabilities refuted: yet bicause the knowledge of these things, pertaineth only to God, which is the searcher of the heart & raynes, and for auoyding of to much tediousnesse, we will reste in his iudgement, tary for the day wherin the secretes of hearts shal be made manifest. And yet all men doe see, how vniustly we be accused of singularitie, Notable vntruths, as wil fal out in triall. which propound nothing that the Scriptures, doe not teache, the writers both olde and newe for the moste parte affirme, the examples of the Primitiue Churches, and of those which are at these dayes confirme.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  Whether if procéede of enuie or no, lette the manner bothe of their, and your writings declare. Popularitie you can not auoyde, séeing you séeke so greate an equalitie, committe so many thyngs to the voyces of the people, and in sundrye places so greately magnifye and extoll them, than the whyche thrée what can bée more popular?Singularitie, and the properties therof. It is Singularitie to deuyde youre selfe from that Churche, whyche bothe professe the woorde of God truely, and is not to bée touched in any poynte

of doctrine necessarie to saluation. It is true that a godly learned writer sayth: CharitieMusc. in. 
                              〈◊〉
                            Mat. knittes together, and reconcileth: singularitie cutteth in peeces, and diuideth: it is the beginning and roote of all heresie, to hate & contemne the cōmunion of the church. And a little after, There be some contentious persons whom no church can please, always hauing some thing to blame in other, but nothing in themselues, which is a manifest signe of singularitie. But bicause the mindes and affections of men, are certainly knowne only to God, the determinate iudgement hereof I also referre vnto him.
                  As for this bolde assertion, that you propeund nothing that the scriptures doe not teach. &c. howe true it is, must hereafter by examination appeare.
               
            
            
               The Epist. of T. C. Sect. 13.
               All these accusations as wel against the cause, as the fauourers therof, albeit they be many and diuers: yet are they no other, thā which haue bin long sithens in the Prophets, apostles, & our sauior Christs, & now of late in our times obiected against the truth, & the professors therof. And therefore as ye sunne of the truth then appered, & brake through al those clouds, which rose against it, to stop the light of it: so no doubt this cause being of the same nature, will haue the same effect. And as all those sclanders could not bring the truth in disgrace, with those yt loued it: so the children of ye truth through these vntrue reports, wil neither leaue the loue of this cause, which they haue alredy cōceiued, nor yet ceasse to enquire diligently, & to iudge indifferētly of those surmises which are put vp aagaynst it.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  These be but words of course, which men of any sect (though not truly) wil apply vnto thēselues, if they be otherwise delt with, than they can wel beare. The truth certainly can not be kept vnder by any meanes, and yet sometime error ouershadoweth the truth euen as the cloudes do the Sunn. My hope also is, that men will not be caried away with slaunderous reportes▪ (for if they shoulde, then musre you néedes preuayle) but with sounde reasons, and the truth of the cause.
               
            
            
               The Epistle of T. C. Sect. 14.
               Moreouer, seing that we haue once ouercōmed al these lets, & climed ouer them, when they wer cast in our way, to hinder vs from cōming frō the grosse darknesse of Poperie, vnto ye glorious light of the Gospel: there is no cause why now they shuld stay our course to further perfection, cōsidering that neither the stile is higher now, thā it was before (being the very selfe same obiections) & in all this time we ought so to haue grown in knowledge of the truth, that in stead of being then able to leape ouer a hedge, we should now haue our feete so prepared by the Gospell, that they shoulde be as the feete of a hynde, able to surmount euen a wall if neede were.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  There is but one truth, & that is certain: whē we haue obteined if, we must therin remain constant, without altering: whosoeuer shal ouerleap or ouerrun this wall, must of necessitie procure vnto himself great danger. and therfore according to the olde prouerbe, Looke before thou leape.
                  
                  We must grow in faith & knowledge, & always be growing & going forward, but it doth not therfore follow, yt we must dayly inuent new opinions, or broach new dectrines, & alter in iudgement: we must grow in strength of faith, we must increace in practise and loue of vertue, we must studie to encrease our knowledge, that we may be the more confirmed in the truthe that we haue learned out of the worde of God. This is an euill collection, we must grow in the knowledge of the truth, therfore we must alwayes be altering and changing our religion.
               
            
            
               The Epistle of T. C. Sect. vlt.
               The summe of al is, that the cause may be looked vpon with a single eye, without al mist of partialitie, may be heard with an indifferent eare, without the waxe of preiudice: the argumēts of both sides may be weighed, not with the changeable weights of custome, of time, of men, which notwithstanding (Popish excepted) shal be shewed to be more for the cause than against it: but with the iust balances of the incorruptible & vnchangeable word of God. And I humbly beseech the Lord, to increase in vs the spirit of knowledge, & iudgement, that we may discern things which differ one from an other, and that we may be lyncere, and without offence, vntill the day of Christe.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  This doe I in lyke maner desyre with all my heart, and to the latter ende of it, I

say Amen. The middest if you proue not, then shall you be blamed, for making such a bragge.
               
            
            
               T. C. The Author to the Reader.
               
               I Am humbly to craue at thy hand (gentle reader) that thou wouldest vouchesafe diligently and carefully to compare Maister Doctours answere, and my replie, bothe that thou mayst the better vnderstād the truth of the cause, & that the vntempered speches of him (especially that whippeth
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      desireth 
                        〈1 line〉
                     hat 
                        〈1 line〉
                     hich ▪ as much as lieth in him) he hath sought to 
                        〈1 line〉
                     inder. other so sharply for them) which I haue in a maner altogether passed by, and his lose conclusions, which I haue (to auoyd tediousnesse) not so fully pursued, may ye better appere: which thing as I craue to be done through the whole booke, so chiefly I desire it may be done in the beginning, where the reader shall not be able so well to vnderstande what is sayd of me, vnlesse he haue M. D. booke before him. Vaine 
                        〈1 line〉
                     nd vn s
                        〈1 line〉
                     fficient ex
                        〈1 line〉
                     u se
                        〈1 line〉
                      why he ha
                        〈1 line〉
                     h not 
                        〈1 line〉
                     et down the answer to the Ad
                        〈1 line〉
                     onition. The cause of whiche diuersitie rose of that, that I fyrste purposed to set down his answer before my replie, as he did the Admonition, before his answer. But afterward considering that (his booke being alreadie in the handes of men) it woulde be double charges to buye it again: And especially weighing with my selfe that through the slownesse of the printe, for want of help, the repli
                     〈1 line〉
                   by that meanes should come forth later, than was conuement (for although he might commodiously bring in the Admonition, being short, yet the same coulde not be doone in his booke, swelling in that sorte which it dothe) I saye, these things considered, I chaunged my mynde, and haue therfore set downe the causes, whiche moued me so to doe, bicause I knowe, that thos
                     〈1 line〉
                  , if any be, whiche haue determined to continue their foreiudged opinions againste the cause, whatsoeuer be alleaged, wil herevpon take occasion to surmize, that I haue lefte out his answere, to the ende that it might the lesse appeare, wherin I haue passed ouer any weyghte of his reasons: wheras, had it not bin for these causes, which I haue before alleadged, my earneste desire was, to haue set his answere before my replie: wherof I call the Lord to witnesse, whom I knowe to be a sharpe iudge, against those which shall abuse his holie name to any vntruth.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  You haue well prouided for the comparing of Master Doctors answer with your replie: & howsoeuer you protest, ye your earnest desire was to set it down before yourThe true ca
                           〈1 line〉
                         ses why T. C. sette not downe the answere. Replie, yet the sequele wil declare the contrarie: for it shal euidently appere that therfore you haue omitted it, bicause you are loth they should be compared together, least your friuolous Replies, your childish collections, your wilful deprauing, your fraudulent dismembring of my booke, should manifestly appeare. Full wel knew you, that your fautours (in whose hands especially your bookes are kept) would not take pains to compare them both together, except they had bin ioyned together, that they might haue done it with one labor. And suerly herein you haue delt verie vnhonestly with me, done me great iniurie, and not performed that towards me, that you before required of me in one of your pamphlets, and doe nowe againe require of me in the end of this booke. But wise and indifferent men will soone espie the causes, if it will please them to pervse this booke with some diligence.
                  My vntempered speaches if they be compared with your floutes & disdaynful phrases, or with either of ye Admonitiōs, wil séeme I am sure verie modest. And no doubt you would haue set down some examples of some of them, if they had bin such as you would make the reader beleeue. But in your booke he may sée the humblenesse of your spirite, and iudge whether that one qualitie be founde in you or no, which Zuinglius inZuinglius. his booke called Elenchus contra Anabap. and in his bookes de baptismo, & Ecclesiast. and Bullinger in his booke Aduersus Anabap. do say, is cōmon to the Anabaptists, that is, to reuileBullinger. the ministers of the worde, and much more bitterly to inuey against them (if they withstand their errors) than against the Papists. Truly if you should haue written against the doggeddest Papist, or the pestilentest heretike that euer was, you could not haue inuented, howe in more spitefull maner to deface him: but how truly, it resteth in ye tryall.
                  Touching lose conclusions, it is vnlike that you haue omitted any, seing yt you haue famed those to be which are not. Wherein your false dealing plainly appereth, & shal b
                        〈1 line〉
                      made manifest. Your excuses for omitting my booke in your replie be mere excuses: for why should you run in suspition of corrupt dealing for sauing. x
                        〈1 line〉
                     . d. in an other mans purse? as for the volume of your booke it would not haue ben much bigger, if you had spared your superfluous digressions, cut off your vain words, & kept in your scornful and opprobrious speaches. What I think of your protestatiō, I haue told you before.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               To his louyng Nurse, the Christian Churche of England, Io. VVhitgifte a membre and minister of the same, vvisheth peace in Christe, and continuance of his glorious Gospel, euen to the worldes ende.
            
            
               THere bee dyuers things, and especially fiue, that when I fyrste tooke this laboure in hande, had almoste vtterly dissuaded mee from the same.
            Fyrste bycause I doe with all my hearte hate contention and stryfe, and especially in matters of Religion, among suche as professe the selfe same Gospell.
            Secondly, for that I feared greatly least some sclaunder myghte tedounde to the Gospell by this open contention, seing that God is not the author of contention or confusion, but of peace.1. Cor. 14.
            
            Thirdly, I doubted whether this kinde of dealing by writing might minister matter to the common aduersaries of the Gospel, to reioyce and glorie, and to flatter themselues the more in their damnable errours.
            Fourthly, I greately suspected the slaunderous reportes of the backbiter, and of the vnlearned tongue: the one, bicause he loueth to speake euill, and heare euill of all those that be not in all pointes inclinable to his fansie, whereof I haue greate experience, being my selfe most vniustly sclaundered by that viperous kind of men: the other, bicause they be not able to iudge of controuersies according to learning and knowledge, and therefore are ruled by affection, and carried headlong with blind zeale, into diuers sinister iudgements, and erroneous opinions.
            Lastly, bycause I know sundry (in all respects) worthy men, much more able to deale in such matters than I am.
            But when I considered my duty towards God, to his Church, and to our most gracious Lady and soueraigne Elizabeth hir Maiestie (by whose ministerie God hath giuen his Gospell free passage vnto vs) the first stop and hindrance was answered. For I thought that, that dutie ought not to be omitted for any such cause, seeing God and not man, shall be my iudge: and also that not he which defendeth the truth, and confu
                  〈1 line〉
               eth errours, but he that impugneth the truth, and spreddeth sects, is the authoure of contention.
            Likewise when I remembred that it was no newe thing to haue contentions, sects, and schismes in the Church of Christ, (especially whē it enioyeth externall peace) and that we had manifest examples there of from tyme to tyme, (fyrste in Peter, and Paule ad Gal. 2. Paule and Barnabas, Acto. 15. then in the Churche of the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 1. &. 3. Afterwardes betwixte the orientall Churche and occidentall Churche, touching Easter and suche like matters: Betwixte the Bishops of Aphrica and the Byshoppes of Italie for rebaptising of Heretikes: and sundry tymes, yea vsually in the

externall peace of the Churche, as may be more at large seene in Eusebius lib. 4. eccl. histo. cap. 6. & libr. 5. cap. 24. 25. 26. & li. 8. &c. Likewise in Ruffinus lib. 1. ca. 1. In Zozom. lib. 6. cap. 4. In Basilius Magnus ep. 61. ad fratres & episcopos in occidente, & ep. 69. & in sundry other auncient and learned histories and writers. For the second point I was satisfyed: For I thought, that, that coulde be no slaunder to thys Churche, which by the malice of Sathan hath ben practised in all Churches euen since the ascention of Christe.
            Thirdly, when I perceiued that these men against whom I now write, did agree with the aduersaries in defacing the state of Religion, the order of Common prayers, the Ministerie, the Sacramentes, the kinde of Gouernment, &c. vsed and allowed in this Realme of Englande, and that in as opprobrious and spitefull maner as the aduersaries doo: lykewise that they seeke to ouerthrowe the selfe same pillers of this Church with the aduersaries (although not by the selfe same meanes) I thoughte that the confutation and ouerthrowe of the one, should be the confutation and ouerthrow of the other, and therfore the aduersaries to haue small cause in deede of reioycing.
            Agaynst backbyters, slaunderers, and vnlearned toungs, I shall by Gods grace, arme my self with pacience, for their talke is no sufficient cause for a man to abstaine from doing his dutie.
            To conclude, I (although the vnworthyest and vnmeetest of a great number) was bold to take vpon me this enterprise, partely to shewe that the booke called the Admonition, is not such, but that it may easily be answered, and especially to satisfie myne owne conseience: for I considered that if no man had taken vpon him the enuie of the cōmon sort, in with standing the enterprises and proceedings of the Anabaptistes when they began in Germanie, Anabaptisme had ouerrunne those Churches, and vtterly destroyed them.
            These were the reasons that satisfied the former obiections, and especially moued me to take vpon me this labour, wherwith if I can also satisfie others, I haue my desire: if not, yet haue I done my duetie, and satisfied myne owne conscience. And forasmuche as the matter toucheth the state of the whole Churche of Englande, I thought it moste meete to dedicate this my booke, rather vnto the same generally, than to any one particular member thereof: protesting that if I haue affirmed any thing therein, that by learnyng & good reasons may be proued erroneous, I will reforme the same, for I wholly submitte it to the rule of Gods worde, and the iudgement of those that be learned, discrete and wyse. The Lorde blesse thee (O deare spouse of Christe) with the continuance of his Gospell, of the Queenes Maiestie, and of godlie peace and quietnesse. Amen.
            
               
               
                  An answere to the whole Epistle to the Church.
               
                  T. C.
                  WHat causes either pulled you forwarde, or thruste you backwarde, to write, or not to write, and how in this dispute with your selfe, in the end you were resolued to write in this sorte, I leaue it vnto the iudgement of the Lorde, who only knoweth the secrets of the hart, and wil in his good time vnseale them. But if there be any place of coniecture, the hatred of cōtention, which you set downe, as the first and principal cause, that beate you backe from writing, might wel haue bin put, as the last and least, or rather none at all. For if peace had bin so precious vnto you (as you pretend) you woulde not haue brought so many hard wordes, bitter reproches, e
                        〈1 line〉
                     mylike speaches (as it were sticks and coales) to double and treble the heate of contention: If the sharpnesse of the Admonition misliked you, and you thinke that they outreached in some vehemencie of words, how could you more effectually haue confuted that, than to haue in a quiet and 
                        〈1 line〉
                     ide spirit set them in the way, which (in your opinion) had left it? Now in words condemning it, and approuing it in your deedes, I will not say that you do not so muche mislike this sharpnesse, as you areA charitable figure. sory, that you are preuented, and are not the first in it. But this I may well say vnto you, whiche he said: Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? what should I heare words, whē I see the dedes? In the fourthe reason whereby you were discouraged to write, if by backbiters, and vnlearned tonges, viperous kind of men, not able to iudge of controuersies, caried away with affections and blind zeale, into diuers sinister iudgements, and erroneous▪ opinions, you meane al those that thinke not as you do in these matters, I answer for my selfe, and for as many as I knowe of them, that they are they, which first desire (so it be truly) to heare and speake all good of you. But if that bee not, through your perseuerance, in the maintenance of the corruptions of this Church (which you should help to purge) then the same are they, that desire, that both the euill whiche you haue done, and that which you haue yet in your hart to do, may be knowne, to the lesse discredite of the truthe and sinceritie, which you, with such might and maine, do striue against.
                  Touching our A manifest peruerting of the words and meaning of the Epistle. vnlearned tonges we had rather a great deale, they were vnlearned, than they should be as theirs, * which haue taught their tonges to speake falsly. And how vnlearned soeuerIerem. 9. 5 you would make the world beleeue that we, and our tongs be, I hope (through the goodnesse of God) they shall be learned ynough, to defend the truth, against all the learning that you shall be able to assault it with. If those be Slaunderous and cursed speakers, be not the generation of Christe. the generation of Christe, whiche you cal viperouse kinde of men,Esay. 53. 8. knowe you that you haue not opened your mouth against earth, but you haue set it agaynst heauen, and for all indifferent iudgement, it will easily perceiue, that you are as farre from the spirit of * John Baptist, as you are neere to his manner of speach, which you vse. whither it be affection,Math. 3. 7 or blind zeale, that we follow, and are driuen by, it will then appeare, when the reasons of both sides, being laid out, shal be wayed indifferently. Wheras you say, that your dutie towards God, & the Queene hir Maiesty, moued you to take this labour in hād, it will fall out, vpon the discourse, that as you haue not serued the Lord God in this enterprise and work of yours, so haue you done nothing lesse than any godly dutie which you owe vnto hir Maiestie, so that the best that can be thought of you herein, is, that where in an euill matter, you could yeld no dutie, yet now you haue done that, which you thoughte a duetie, which iudgement, we will so long keepe of you, vntil you shall by oppugmng of a knowne truth, declare the contrary, which we hope will not be. What truth it is, that we impugne, and you defēd, let it in the name of God appeare, by our seueral proofs and answers of both sides. And as for the slanderous surmises, wherby in your third and last consideration, you set the Papists of the one side of vs, and the Anabaptists of the other, and vs in the middest, reaching out our hands (as it were) to them both: first, it ought not to be straunge vnto vs, myserable sinners, seeing that the Lord hunselfe, without all sinne, was placed in the middest of two greeuous malefactours, as though he had bin worse than they both. Then for answer of these slanderous speaches, I will referre the Reader to those places, where these generall charges are giuen out in more particular manner.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     It is well that you are content to rest in his iudgement, vntill the time come: for so indéed ought we to do: as the Apostle admonisheth. 1. Cor. 4. 
                           Nolite ante tempus quicquam
                           1. Cor. 4▪
                            
                           iudicare: Iudge not before the time, vntill the Lord come. &c.
                     
                     Your coniecture is a méere coniecture in déede, for vndoubtedly these so many harde words of mine, bitter reproches. &c. would not haue bin kept so secret of you, if you coulde haue had them foorthcomming. But be it so, as you will néedes haue it, yet haue I not in like bitternesse of speach spoken against them, as Zuinglius, Bucer, Caluine, Bullinger, Gualter. &c. haue done against the like troublers of the Church: who had notwithstanding all these pretences and clokes, to shadow their contentions with, which either you, or the Authours of the Admonition do alleadge: for they pretende the Glory of God, the Puritie of Religion, the safetie of the Church, as Master Bucer witnesseth in his Coment▪ vpon the Ephe. Cap. 4. Master Caluine in his booke aduersus Anabap.
                        
                        Gastius in his booke 
                           de exordio & erroribus catabaptist. Zuinglius in his booke called Ecclesi. And Bullinger in his booke aduersus Anabaptist: as I haue by setting downe their very wordes more at large declared in the second edition of my answere to the Admonition. But graunt, that for the loue of peace, and hatred of contention, and earnest zeale that I beare to this Church of Christ in England, and dutifull affection to my souerayne, I haue sometimes passed the bounds of modestie (wherein I wil neyther accuse, nor excuse my selfe) yet are my speaches in bitternesse farre inferiour to those opprobries, slanders, and disdainefull words vttered either in the first or second Admonition, or in your Replie. And where haue you learned to espie a mote in another mans eye, and not to sée the beame that is in your owne? or what poynte of Rhetoricke do you call it, to charge me in the beginning of your booke with that, that you yourselfe most outrageously fall into sundry times, almost in euery leafe? or how vnwise are you to giue vnto me that councell, which you yourselfe in no respect obserue? But of both our modesties, and manners of writing, we must be contente that other men iudge which shall reade our bookes: and therefore it is but in vaine either for you to accuse, or me to excuse. God graunt vs both the spirit of modestie and humilitie.
                     In my fourth reason, by backbiters, I meane all such as are ready to heare euill, and speake euill of all men that be not of their iudgement, and such as cease not continually to depraue those especially that be of any countenance and calling, the which vice doth aboundantly reigne (I will not say in all) but in a great sort of your sect, and those learned also. I could name some which go from place to place for that purpose especially, although vnder other pretences: and in this qualitie they agrée with the Anabaptists: as may appeare more plainly in the notes of the Anabaptists qualities, conteined in the seconde edition of my answere to the Admonition, to the which for breuities sake I referre you.
                     By vnlerned tongues, I meane such of the common people as you haue deluded, who in déede are caried away by a blinde and preposterous zeale, and therefore the rather to be excused. I know there be some (both of the learned & vnlearned sorte) among you, that haue milder spirites than the rest, such I do not blante in this point, I would other would follow their modestie.
                     As for the good that you and other woulde so gladly speake of me, it euill appeareth in this booke, where you do but deuise how possibly you may deface me: in déede bothe you, and some others (if you considered your duties towardes mée, and my dealings towardes you, whilest you kepte your selues within your bondes) haue small occasion to whisper of me in corners as you do, or otherwise to deale so vnchristianly with me. The euill that you know by me, vtter it and spare not, I desire no silence, so that it be done where I may come to the answering of it. And surely he that shall reade this your booke, cannot but conceiue, that if you knew any euill thing by me, it would not be concealed. But to all reproches I will answere, as they come in order, and proclayme defyance againste you, for any thing that you can iustly charge me with.
                     I intend not to mainteine any corruptions of this Church, I will séeke for the redresse thereof as earnestly as you shall, and more orderly, and therefore I trust more effectually. But I neither can, nor may suffer that which is lawfully, and by due order established, vnlawfully and out of order by you to be defaced. This your pretence of clensing the Church from corruptions, is but the accustomed excuse of the Nouatians, Donatists, and Anabaptistes, as you know welynough: and therefore before you condemne me to be a defender of the corruptions of this Church, you must first proue them to be corruptions: and when you haue so done, you must also declare them to be such corruptions, as deserue this stirre and hurly burly for them: for there were great corruptions in the Church of the Corinthes, and yet the Apostle greatly misliked such as stirred vp contentions for the same: so hath there bin always imperfections in the Church, especially in externall things: and yet such as therfore did breake the peace of it, were always counted as contentious, and condeinned as schismatiques: looke the

writers before of me mentioned in their bookes against the Anabaptists.
                     As I saide before, so I say againe, let the euill which I haue done, and that which you say I haue yet in my hart to do (wherein you take vpon you the office of God) be proclaimed at the standard in Cheape, or elsewhere (so it be done publiquely that I may answere it, and not in corners as it hath bin) and if I faile in my purgation, let me sustaine the paine due for the same. I aske no fauoure, I feare no accuser, I refuse no indifferent iudge. And if you haue any thing to say against me, do it orderly, do it lawfully, not in corners, not in libels. This I speake not to iustify my selfe before God (for in that respect I know more imperfections in my selfe than I do in any other, bycause I know my selfe better than I know any man else) but before man, in doing my duety, in obseruing lawes, in walking in my vocation. &c.
                     I do not accuse you all, for lacke of learning, neither can you, or any man else gather any such thing of my words: God graunt you may vse your learning to better purpose, than to the disturbing of the Church, and stirring vp of contentions, where the Gospell is truly preached. This is but a slender collection to say that therefore I accuse you all of vnlearnednesse, bycause I say that I greatly suspected the slanderous reports of backbiters, and of the vnlearned tongue. Surely there be both learned and vnlearned tongues among you too muche giuen to backbiting, and slandering, as it is well knowne: and yet I accuse not all. Let them which finde this imperfection in them selues, in the name of God amende it, for it is a foule faulte.
                     In that they like vipers with slaunderous reports, sting men priuately, they be not the generation of Christ, but of Christes aduersary, howsoeuer otherwise they séeme to be godly and zelous: For Christ doth will them to loue their enimies, to prayMath. 5. for them that curse them. &c. so farre woulde he haue them from backbiting and slandering of their brethren, and of such as professe the name of Christe with them. He that speaketh against slanderous tonges, doth not open his mouth against Heauen, but against that vice which is earthly, yea hellish: neither must you thinke that your Church is so pure, but that it hath in it a number such as well deserue this reprehension. And therefore these great speaches of yours mighte well haue bin forborne, your learning and reasons which you so oft boast of, must be left to the iudgement of others.
                     What duty I haue performed towards God and hir Maiestie, lieth not in your power to iudge: I am fully perswaded, that I haue done that which my duty towardes them both requireth of me, and vrgeth me vnto in this behalfe: and I doubt not, but that therein I haue done good seruice to them both. Your iudgement of me I do not greatly regard, so long as you are affected as you are. I will die rather than impugne a knowne truth, neither will I cease from defending of that which I am fully perswaded to be a truth.
                     In my third and last consideration, all is true that I said, neither can you denie it. Most true it is that in defacing this present state of Religion, that is, the order of common prayers, the ministerie, the Sacramentes, the kynde of gouernment, you ioyne with the Papistes, although you vse in some poyntes contrarie reasons: and in disquieting the Churche for externall things, you ioyne with the Anabaptistes. And in opprobrious speaches and tauntes you are inferioure to neyther of them bothe. And yet I do not say that you be either Papistes or Anabaptistes. Proue that I herein speake vntruly of you, and I will willingly make you amends.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A briefe Examination of the reasons vsed in the Booke, called an Admonition to the Parliament.
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  
                     FIrst, in that booke the scripture is most vntollerably abused, and vnlearnedly applyed, quoted only in their margent to delude both such, as for lacke of learning cānot, and such as either for slothfulnesse or some preiudicate opinion, will not examine the same: as I haue particularly declared in my answer following.
                  
                     T. C. An ansvver to that vvhich is called a briefe examination of the reasons vsed in the Admonition to the Parliament.
                     IF the scriptures had bin applyed to the maintenance of the abhomination of the Masse, and someVaine shifts to coloure the vn apt allegati
                              〈1 line〉
                           s of scriptu
                              〈1 line〉
                           es by the 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Charitie do
                              〈1 line〉
                           he not couer open and notorious faults. other of the grosest of antichristianitie, you could haue sayd no more, nor vsed vehementer speache than this, that they are most vntollerably abused, and vnlearnedly applyed. And then where is charitie, which couereth the multitude of faultes, especially in brethren, when you do not only notPro. 10. couer them, but also take away their garmentes whereby they are couered. I will not denie, but that there be some few places quoted, which might haue bin spared, but there are a great number, whiche (M. Doctor) tosseth and throweth away so lightly, which he shall perceiue to sit nearer him than he is, or at the least seemeth to be aware of. And to bring to passe that the quotations in the margent mighte appeare to the reader more absurd, M Doctor hathe besides the There is no su
                              〈1 line〉
                           e aduantage taken. aduantage which he taketh of the faults of the Printer, vsed two vnlawfull practises especially. Wherof the one is, that whereas the Admonition doth quote the scripture, not only to proue the matters which it handleth▪ but sometimes also to note the place from whence the phrase of speach is taken, M. Doctor dothe go about to make his reader beleeue, that those places whiche bee alleadged for proofe of the Scriptures alledged for profe of the phrase. phrase, are quoted for proofe of the matter. The other practise is, that where the Admonition for the shortnesse which it promiseth, and was necessarie in that case, could not applie the places, M. Doctor presuming too muche of the ignorance of his reader, thought he mighte make him beleeue, that any thing else was meant by those places, than that whiche they meant in deede, and for which they were alleadged. And where you say the quotations are only to delude such. &c. I see you hold it no fault in your selfe, which you condemne so precisely in others, that is, to iudge before the time, to sit in the conscience, to affirme definitely of their thoughts, contrary to their owne protestation. But seeing you lift vp our imperfections so high▪ and set them as it were vpon a stage for all men to be looked of, to the discredite of the truth which we do mainteyne, you shal not thinke much if your pouertie be pointed vnto, in those things wherein you would carrie so great countenance of store.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  The abusing of the scriptures, and the vniust applying of them, is to be mainteinedThe abusing of scripture is to be mainteined in none. neither in Papist, nor other: and least of all in such as séeming to giue most authoritie vnto them, do by that meanes giue occasion to the aduersarie to contemne them. What iust occasion might the Papists haue of triumphing, if they should vnderstand that we as licenciously wring and wrest the scriptures to serue our turne, as they do to serue theirs? And truly as well may they applie the scriptures that they vse in the defense of their Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Merites, Images. &c. as the authours of the Admonition can do to proue those things, for the which they do oftentimes alleadge them. And therefore I thinke that my speach in that pointe againste them cannot be too sharp.
                  Charitie doth not so couer open and manifest sinnes, that it suffereth them to be vnreprehended, but it remitteth priuate offences, it doth not publish secret sinnes at the first: neither doth it disclose all things that it knoweth to the defamation of a brother, when he may be otherwise reformed. But this fault of theirs in abusing the scriptu
                        〈1 line〉
                     s is publike, printed in bookes, in euery mans hand: vsed to discredite and deface this Church of England: which no true member of the same ought to suffer. Wherfore in detecting this vntrue dealing, I haue not broken any rule of Charitie, but done my bounden duty.
                  
                     If there be so many of their quotatiōs tossed and throwen away by me. &c. I trust you will let me vnderstand of them as occasion is offered: which surely you haue done in very few places, and in those wherein you haue done it, you haue done it very slenderly & loosely, as will appeare. I take very litle or no aduantage at al of the Printer, but salue that as muche as I can: and where as you saye that where the Admonition quoteth the scripture, not only to proue the matter, but to note the place from whence the phrase of speach is taken. &c. that is a very féeble excuse, and far fetched: for to what purpose shoulde they so do? or why do you not by some examples declare vnto vs, that they haue so done? this is but a shifte, and argueth that you are not purposed to acknowledge any fault, be it neuer so manifest. And therefore little hope there is of any amendment. And whereas you also say that the Admonition for the shortnesse which it promiseth. &c. to that I answere as before, and I adde that it was very vncircumspectly done of them, to quote places whiche coulde not be applied to that purpose for the which they were quoted. In suche matters men ought to haue such regard vnto the time, that they abuse not the worde of God. But I haue (as you say) otherwise applyed their quotations, than they meant indeede. I thinke you will let me heare of it, when you come to those places, and then shall I shape you an answere.
                  To what purpose should the margent of their booke be pestred with such vnapte quotations, but only to delude the reader, and to make him beléeue that all things there conteined be grounded of the expresse word of God? where things be open and manifest, there a man may iudge, though he sit not in the conscience of him of whom he iudgeth. As for Protestations they be nowe so vsuall and common in euery matter, and the sequele so many times contrarie to the same, that it is hard for a man to giue credite at all times to all persons protesting: there is experience of it, & I coulde alleadge examples, if I were disposed.
                  Set out my pouertie as much as you can, and spare it not: but take héede least in so doing you shewe yourselfe poore indéede, and that in those things especially wherein you séeme most to complaine of my pouertie.
                  
                     A briefe examination. &c.
                     Secondly their proofes consist especially of these arguments. TheArgu. a sec
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           dum quid ad simpliciter. firste is ab eo quod est secundum quid, ad id quod simpliciter est, as such and such things were not in the Apostles time, Ergo, they ought not to be nowe. Which kind of argument is very deceitfull, and the mother and welspring of many both old and new schismes: of old, as of them that called themselues Apostolicos, and of the Aërians: of new, as of the Anabaptists, who cōsidering neither the diuersitie of times concerning the externall ecclesiasticall policie, nor the true libertie of the Christian religion in externe rites and ceremonies, in matters neither commaunded, nor forbidden in Gods Law, nor the authoritie of Christian magistrates in the Christian congregation, concerning the same, haue boldly enterprised to stirre vp many and heinous errours: For if these reasons should take place: the Apostles vsed it not, Ergo it is not lawfull for vs to vse it: or this either: they did it, Ergo we must needes do it: then no Christians may haue any place to abide in, they may haue no Christian Princes: no ministration of sacraments in Churches and such like: for the Apostles had no place to abide in, they had no Christiā Princes to gouerne them, no Churches to minister sacraments in. &c. Likewise we must haue al thingsActs. 2. &. 4. common: we must depart with all our possessions when we be conuertedMath. 19. to the Gospel: baptise abroade in the fields: minister the communiō
                        Acts. 8. in priuate houses only: be always vnder the crosse and vnderAct. 2. &. 20.
                        
Tyrants, and such like: For the Apostles had al things common, departed from their possessions, baptised abroade in fields, ministred the communion in priuate houses, were always vnder persecutors and Tyrants. &c.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  To this kind of argument and that which is here spoken. T. C. maketh no answer at all in this place, what he doth hereafter we shall vnderstand when we come to it.
                  
                     Abriefe examination. &c.
                     Another kind of argument is muche like vnto this, and is takenAb authoritate negatiuè. 
                        ab authoritate negatiuè, which in matters of saluation and damnation holdeth when we reason ab authoritate scripturae, from the authoritie of the scripture, but not else: For this argument (it is not commaunded in the scripture to be done, nor there expressed Ergo it ought not to be done) is so farre out of the way and so erroneous, that it is not tollerable: for it taketh away the most part of all due circumstances, without the which either after one manner or other, the very institutiōs of Christ cannot be obserued: For how is it possible to receiue the holy communion, but either sitting, standing, kneeling, walking or lying: eyther at one time or other: in the morning or at night: before meate or after meate: clothed or naked: in this place or in that place. &c. and yet none of these circumstances are in Scripture commaunded, or by necessarie collection may thereof be gathered: the same is to be saide of the obseruation of times, of common prayers, and other cōuenient and necessary orders in the Church. If this argument were good, then all good lawes and ordinances made for the aduancing of true religion, and establishing of good orders, were to be abolished, which wer the very roote, and welspring of stubbornesse, obstinacie, sedition, disobedience, and confusion.
                  
                  
                     T. C.
                     FOr the arguments themselues, they shall be seene what they be in their places, so shall also that be answered, which M. Doctor bringeth heere, for the confutation, being streight way after, and in sundry other places repeated in this booke, I will touch that which is not repeated, and that is, that M. Doctor maketh it a
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        A wrangling cauill. indifferent thing for men and women to receiue the supper of the Lord, clothed or naked. This sauoreth strongly of the secte of the Adamites.
                     
                        Superfluous proofes. S. Paule which commendeth ye preseruation of godlinesse & peace, vnto the ciuil magistrate, doth also commend vnto him the prouiding, that honesty be kept, and M. Doctor maketh it an indifferent thing, Where found you these words? to come either naked or clothed vnto the Lords table: verely there is It is lesse honestie, in charging M. Doctor falsly. small honesty in this. And if the heathen which knew not God, did account it a filthy thing for a stage plaier, to come vpon the stage without a slop, how much more filthy is it for a Christian to come naked vnto the Lords table? and the contrarie thereof, is necessarilie collected of the scripture, notwithstanding that M. Doctor saithe otherwise. A digression from the matter to the person. They whiche haue hearde M. Doctor reade in the scholes can tell, that he being there amongst learned men, neuer vsed to reduce the contrarie arguments of the aduersaries, to the places of the fallacions, and yet that was the fittest place for him t
                           〈1 line〉
                         haue shewed his knowledge in, bycause there they should haue bin best vnderstoode: now that hee professeth himselfe to be a Doctor of the people, which bycause they haue not learned these things, cannot vnderstand them, he dasheth out his Logicke: what may be probably gathered heereof, I leaue to euery mans consideration: this is certeine, that circumstances of place and persons, which he so oftē vrgeth, are not well obserued of him, when Logicke speaketh in the Church, and is mute in the scholes: when things are handled more learnedly amongst thepeople, and more popularly amongst the learned. It is truly said, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . A good thing is euill, when it commeth out of season. But to obserue what Arte here is shewed, I would gladly know what place of the Where be they called falla cions▪ you cā not deny them to be false arguments. fallacions, either an argumēt Ab authoritate negatiue is, or of negatiues by comparison. Aristotle setting foorthe places, wherevnto all fallacions may be called, maketh no mētion of these, and if these wer fallacions, & wer such as he imagineth them, they shuld be referred

vnto the former place, Ab eo quod est secundum quid, ad id quod est simpliciter, for these reasons, the Scripture hath it not, therefore it ought not to be, or the minister was knowne by doctrine, therefore by doctrine onely, and not by apparell: If I say they be fallacions, they be referred vnto that place, and whether they be, or no, and also howe corruptly, and otherwise than is ment they be gathered, it shall afterwarde appeare. In the meane season in a small matter heere is a great faulte, not onely to muent newe places, but of one place to make three, and may aswell make a thousande.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  The arguments are lefte vnanswered, bicause in déede they can not be answered. Wherfore T. C. picketh other quarels, and héere beginneth his vayne of gybing and iesting. Who would haue made this adoe about clothed or naked, but such a one as is delighted in quareling? or who can gather, that by vsing this example, I would haue men to receyue the Communion naked, or once surmise that I thinke it lawful for them so to doe, and therfore to sauour strongly of the sect of the Adamites, but he that is disposed to péece out his replie with suche imagined toyes. I pray you where doe I make it an indifferent thing, to come either clothed or naked vnto the Lordes table? Set downe my wordes: but if I say no suche thing, if I haue not so muche as once named this worde indifferent in that place: then surely haue you dealte with me, not onely not indifferently, but very dishonestly, in laying this thing to my charge. The example is apte, and proueth that thing manifestly that I alleage it for: that is, that the moste parte of the due circumstances (without the which the very institutions of Christ in his Sacraments can not be obserued, be not commaunded particularly, nor expressed in the Scriptures, but lefte to the Churche to determine. I doe not say, that it is an indifferente thyng, I knowe it dothe necessarily appertayne to comelynesse: but I denie it to be particularly expressed in the Scriptures: and therefore I say, that althoughe all thinges necessary to saluation be in the Scriptures manyfestly conteyned, yet all thinges necessary to order and comelynesse are not there expressed, muche lesse suche thinges as according to tyme, place, and persons may be altered. If this doctrine be not true, why doe you not ouerthrowe the other examples also? why can you finde no other faultes in this argument? If this example so trouble you, I will tell you playnely from whome I had it, euen from that famous Martyr, and notable learned man, D. Ridley, sometime Bishop of London, who vsed the same example to the same purpose, in his conference by writing with M. Hoper, exhibited vp to the Councell in the time of king Edwarde the sixte, the true Copie wherof I haue. Surely he was no Adamite, but a man of singular iudgement and learning.
                  Touching my reading in the Schooles (whiche you héere opprobriously obiect vnto me) thoughe I knowe that the Uniuersitie had a farre better opinion of me, than I deserued, and that there were a great many whiche were in all respectes better able to doe that office, than my selfe, yet I truste I did my duetie, and satisfied them. What logike I vttered in my Lectures, and howe I read, I referre to their iudgementes: who surely if they suffred me so long to continue in that place, augmented the stipende for my sake, and were so desirous to haue me still to remayne in that function (reading so vnlearnedly, as you woulde make the worlde beléeue I dyd) may be thoughte either to be without iudgement them selues, or else to haue bin very carelesse for that exercise. Well, I will not speake that whiche I mighte iustly speake by this prouocation of yours: For I counte this either an heathenishe, or a chyldishe kinde of confuting, to fall from the matter, to the deprauing of the person. God graunt that we bothe may so knowe our giftes, and our selues, that we may acknowledge them to be his, and employ them to the edifying of the Churche, not to the disgracing one of another. Scientia inflat. &c.
                  
                  I did knowe that this my booke should come into the handes bothe of the learned and vnlearned: and therfore (as néere as I could) I did frame my selfe to serue them

bothe. And bicause all, or the moste parte of your proofes, consiste of these or the lyke kinde of arguments, I thought it conuenient, to set downe a note of them before my booke, and that for the learned sake, wherof I do not repent me, neither do I thinke that it commeth out of place.
                  But to obserue what arte heere is shewed, you would gladly knowe (you say) what place of the fallacions either an argument ab authoritate negatiue is, or of negatiues by comparison. &c. I maruell that you will so openly dally: I intitle this treatise, A briefe examination of the reasons vsed in the booke. &c. And afterwards I call them argumentes, I doo not call them fallacions, (whiche notwithstanding I mighte haue done in some respecte) but seeing you cauill about words, tell me where I call either an argument ab authoritate negatiuè, or of negatiues by comparison, fallacions? Doo you not blushe to trifle on this sorte, and to séeke occasion of cauilling in so small matters? I am sure that you are not so ignorante in Logike, but that you knowe there be many false argumentes, whiche be not amongest the fallacions. What saye you to an argument à specie negatiuè, and suche lyke? What say you to an argument 
                        ex solis negatiuis, or ex solis particularibus?
                      or to that that otherwise dothe offende in any moode or figure? or to be shorte, to suche as be in any place of Logike negatiue or affirmatiue, when the nature of the place will not beare it? For you knowe that in some places only negatiue reasons hold, in some other places only affirmatiue.
                  Concerning an argument ab authoritate negatiuè, that it is no good argumenteArg. ab autho ritate negatiuè. all Logicians confesse, neither is he to be thoughte to haue any skill in Logike at all, that will denie it. Onely the authoritie of the Scripture is to be excepted in matters pertayning to saluation, or damnation, bicause therein it is perfecte and absolute: as I haue declared in my answere to the Admonition.
                  Touching the argument of négatiues by comparison, which you thinke toArg. of negatiues by comparison. be so straunge, it is moste vsuall in the Scriptures, and moste consonant to reason. when God sayde vnto Samuell. 1. Reg. 8. They haue not refused thee, but me: He ment not absolutely, that they had not reiected Samuell, but by that one negatiue by comparison, he vnderstandeth two affirmatiues: that is, that they had reiected Samuell, and not him alone, but chiefly they had reiected God. But of this kinde of argument, looke the. 2. booke, and 12. chapter of worthy Cranmer Archbishop of Canterburie, which he writeth of the Sacrament: where he answering the obiections of the Papistes out of Chrysostome, touching transubstantiation, handleth this argument at large, and setteth it out by many examples, to the whiche place I referre the Reader, and you too, that you may sée your lacke of discretion, in finding faulte where none is. Those be but slender answeres to these arguments, except you quit your selfe better in the rest of your Replie, it had bin mnche safer for your cause to haue still kept silence.
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  
                     A briefe examination &c.
                     The thirde kynde of argument is called petitio principij. whych isArg. à petitione principij. when a man frameth vnto him selfe principles of his owne deuise, grounded neither vpon authoritie, neither yet vpon substantial reason, and then vpon the same will conclude his purpose: whiche is 
                           vitiosissimum genus argumentandi, a very erroneous kynde of reasoning, as these men do in vsing these two false principles: the one, when they say that to be inuented by an Antichristian Pope, which was not so inuented: the other, when they say that nothing may be vsed in the Church of Christ, which was inuented by the Pope, or vsed in the Popes Churche: which can not be true, as in sundrie places of the booke I haue declared. The selfe same reasons moued the Aërians to

forsake the order of the Church, and to commaunde their disciples to do the contrarie of that that the Churche did. We borrowe good lawes of the Gentiles: and we vse the Churches, Belles, Pulpits, and many other things vsed of Papistes. &c.
                     The fourth kinde of reason is, of negatiues by comparison: as thys,Arg. à negatiuis per come parationem. Priestes and Ministers are to be knowne by their doctrine, not by their apparell: Ergo, they ought not to haue distinct apparell from other men. This argument followeth not, for negatiues by comparison are not simply to be vnderstanded, but by the way of comparison: And therfore of the former sentence thus we may conclude, that the apparell is not to be esteemed as a note of difference in comparison to learning and doctrine, and yet a note. As when Paule sayth, that Christ sent him not to baptise, but to preache the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1. And God by his Prophet, I will haue mercy, and not sacrifice. Ose. 6. and Mat. 9.
                     The fifte is 
                           ab eo quod est non causam, vt causam ponere, vvhen that is taken forArg. à non causa pre causa. the cause of any thing, vvhich is not the cause: As when they condemne the booke of Common prayer, & a prescript forme of seruice, bicause (as they say) it maynteineth an vnlearned (or as they terme it) a reading ministerie, when as the booke is not the cause of it, neither yet a prescript forme of prayer, but either the parties them selues that be vnlearned, or they that do admitte them, or else both. This kinde of argument is vsuall in the Admonition.
                     There be other vnlearned and vnskilfull reasons vsed in thys booke, which may easily be discerned, euen of children. And therfore I heere omit them.
                     Thus muche I thought good generally to write, whiche beeing duly considered, the booke it selfe needeth no other kind of cōfutation.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  To all this T. C. answereth nothing: but onely to that of negatiues by comparison, wherof I haue spoken before.
                  
                     T. C. Fol. 1. Sect. 1.
                     And to the ende the pithe and waight of M. Doctors arguments may be the better scene, I will likewise giue the reader a say of them, noting the places of the fallacions, wherevnto they be referred. Whiche I do agaynst my wil, and compelled, for that M. Doctor to discredite the truth would make his reader beleeue, that those which thinke not as he dothe in these matters, are not onely vnlearned, but contemners of good learning. In deede there is no great learning in these small things, and they are of that sorte, which although it be a great shame not to knowe, yet it is no great commendation to haue knowledge of them.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  It had bin playne dealing to haue set downe M. Doctors argumentes in the same forme that he hath written them: then might the reader better haue iudged of your collections: but you were to wise for that, for then should either your forgerie haue béene manyfest, or else your booke should haue bin lesse by all this portion. I séeke to discredite errors, and contentious doctrine, and not the truthe. Suche learning there is, euen in those small things, that who so is ignorant of them, may easily be deceyued, bothe in speaking, writing, and reasoning.
                  
                     T. C. Fol. 1. Sect. 2.
                     In the. 40. page he reasoneth thus. An vntrue collection. The ministers muste learne, therefore they muste learne Cathechismes: which is a fallacion of the consequent. For although he that must learne a Cathechisme, must learne: yet it followeth not that whosoeuer must learne, must byandby learne a Cathechisme.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  My words in that place be these: If they that finde some want of learning in them selues, or that be crepte into the ministerie vnlearned, 
                        〈1 line〉
                     ither of their owne accorde, or by commaundement of their ordinary reade and learne godly and learned Cathechismes, they are to be commended, and so is he that prouoketh them therevnto.
                  That Cathechisme which you in derision quote in the margent, is a booke fit for you to learne also: and I knowe no man so well learned, but it may become him to read and learne that necessarie booke. But some arrogant spirites there be, that thinke them selues of all men b
                        〈1 line〉
                     st learned, and disdayne to learne of any.
                  That place of the fourth Chapter of the first to Timothie dothe not forbid a man to learne. He that is a good and modest preacher will not disdayne as well to be taught, as to teache.
                  Nowe howe any man can gather of these wordes any suche argument as T. C. frameth vnto him selfe, let the Reader iudge. He mighte well haue thus concluded: Ministers that finde some want of learning in themselues. &c. ought to reade & learne such bookes, as may better instruct them, Ergo, they may reade and learne godly and learned Cathechismes. And agayne, M. Nowell his Cathechisme, is godly and learned: Ergo, godly and learned men may reade and learne it. Last of all, a godly and modest Preacher will not disdayne aswell to be taught, as to teache: Ergo, he will be aswell content to reade other mens bookes, althoughe they be Cathechismes, as he will be to haue other men to reade his. Nowe I pray you iudge of the sequele of these reasons: and compare them with T. C. his waywarde collection, and tell me truely whether he dealeth simply, or no. It is true, that although a man must learne, it followeth not that he must of necessitie learne a Cathechisme, bicause there be other bookes, besides Cathechismes to be learned, wherby a man may be instructed: but this is also true, that if a man must learne, he may learne Cathechismes. Surely T. C. is driuen to a harde shifte, when he is thus constrayned to feyne fallations where none are.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 1. Sect. 3.
                     In the. 55. page he reasoneth, that for so muche as the ciuill Magistrate may appoynt someAnother forged argument of T. C. his owne fram
                              〈1 line〉
                           ng. kynd of apparell, therfore he may appoynt any, and so the Popishe apparell: which is ab eo quod est secundum quid, ad id quod est simpliciter, of whiche sorte he hath diuers others. As women may baptize, and preache, bycause such a one, and such a one dyd: And the ministers execute ciuill gouernment, bycause Elias and Samuell dyd.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  The words in that page be these: May not therfore christian Magistrates, in Christian common weales, for order and decencie, appoynt a seuerall kinde of apparell, aswell to Ministers, as to other states of men? Iudges, Sergeants, Aldermen, and Citizens, are knowne by their apparell, and why may not the Ministers be so likewise? are they not vnder subiection? be they not subiect to ciuill lawes and ordinances? ought they not to obey their gouernours in al things not agaynst the worde of God? If it had pleased T. C. to haue set aparte dallying, he might haue séene, that frō the last section of the. 54. page, vnto the fourth section of the. 56. page my drift is to proue that Ministers may differ frō other by their apparel, and that they may haue a distinct kinde of garments from lay men, and that the ciuil Magistrate hath authoritie, for order & decencie to appoynt a seuerall kind of apparel to Ministers. Now if he wold haue gathered truly, he shuld haue framed his argumēt thus: Christiā Magistrats haue authority in Christiā cōmō weales, for order & decēcy,

to appoynt a s
                        •
                     ueral kind of apparell to Ministers. Ergo▪
                      Ministers may differ and be knowne frō other by their apparel. Whether that the ciuil Magistrate may appoint them to weare suche apparell as was vsed in the Popes time or no, that I handle at large, euen from the. 4. section of the. 56. page to the portion of the Admonition in the 62. If T. C. had marked this myne order, he woulde not so confounde him selfe, and delude his Reader, by suche vntrue collections of my arguments.
                  Touching the other examples of baptizing by women, and ciuill offices in ecclesiasticall persons, bicause he hathe not quoted the page (whiche argueth he knoweth not where to finde them, or that he is lothe the reader by searching the places, should perceyue his corrupt dealing in the gathering) I will deferre answering of them, vntill I come where they, or any similitude of them may be founde. In the meane time with the first he chargeth me vntruly: and the seconde I intende to iustifie.
                  
                     T. C. fol. 1. Sect. 4.
                     In the. 69. page he sayth, Cyprian (speaking of the office of an Archbishop) which is a manifest petition of the principle. For it beeing that which should haue bin It is proued sufficiently in the trea
                              •
                           se of Archbishops. proued, M. Doctor taketh it for graunted. And in diuers places, speaking of the Archbishop, he goeth about to deceyue hys reader with the fallation of the equiuocation, or diuers signification of the word. For whatsoeuer he findeth sayde of Archbishop & Bishop in times past, he bringeth to establishe our Archbishops and Bishops, when notwithstanding those in times past, were muche different from ours, and are not of that kinde, as shall appeare afterwarde.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  As though Cyprian may not speake of the office of an Archbishop, excepte he expresse his name, or as though the circumstance of the place may not declare, that he speaketh of suche an office. But howe iustly I am heere charged with a manyfest petition of a principle, I shall haue better occasion to declare, when I come to answere the manyfest cauill which T. C. vseth, touching that place of Cyprian.
                  
                  Howe also in diuers places, speaking of the Archbishop, I go about to deceyue my reader with the fallation of equiuocation, (which is only sayd in this place without any maner of proofe, or any one exāple) shal likewise appeare, when I come to answere the replie touching that matter, where it will euidently fall out, that T. C. is greatly deceyued, in that he supposeth the Archbishops and Bishops in times past, so muche to differ from ours, especially if he meane the difference to be in authoritie and office.
                  
                     T. C. fol. 1. Sect. 5.
                     In the. 239. page he reasoneth, that for so muche as those which weare the apparel, doo edifie,Another vntrue collection. therefore they edifie by reason of the apparell, which is to make that the cause, which is not, but onely commeth with the cause.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  You deale in this as you haue done in the rest, that is corruptly: for the seconde reason which I there vse, to proue that the apparell doth edifie, is this: That such as haue worne the apparell, and do weare it, by the ministery of the worde, haue greatly edified, and do dayly. In the whiche argument I make not the apparell the efficient or substantiall cause of edifying, but an accidentall cause. For you knowe that it is an order and lawe in the Churche of Englande, that none shoulde either administer the Sacraments, or preache, excepte he receiue the apparell appoynted: forasmuche therefore as he that refuseth to weare the apparell by order of this Church, may not preache, and therefore can not that way edifie, and he that weareth that apparell may preache, and so edifie, therfore the apparell per accidens doth edifie, euen as the Church, the Pulpit, and suche other things doo, whiche edifie not 
                        per se, of themselues, but 
                        per accidens, accidentally, as all other accidentall ceremonies do.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 1. Sect. 6.
                     In the. 240. page. he reasoneth thus, that the surplice. &c. be notes, & notes of good ministers,

therfore they be good notes of ministers, which is a fallation of composition, when a man thinketh that whatsoeuer is sayde of a thing by it selfe, may be sayde of it when it is ioyned with another.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  The Admonition sayth, that cappe, gowne, tippet. &c. haue the shewe of euill, seeing the Popishe priesthoode is euill. To the which I answering, say on this sort: When they were a signe and token of the Popishe priesthoode, then they were euill, euen as the thing was which they signified, but nowe they be signes and tokens of the ministers of the worde of God, which are good, and therefore also they be good. What can you say to this maner of speaking? is it not true to say that they were signes of euill, when the things that they signified were euill, and nowe they be signes of good, séeing the things they signifie be good? and as they were euill signes, when they signified euill things, so they be nowe good signes, bicause they signifie good things. Doo we not commonly call the signes and notes good or euill; euen as the things signified be good or euill? None is so ignorant that knoweth not this: and therefore my reason is good, but your collection is like it selfe. I haue vsed no other maner of reasoning or speaking in this place, than M. Bucer dothe in the same matter, Fol. 59. &. 60. And therefore this is rather spoken agaynst him, than agaynst me.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 1. Sect. 7.
                     In the. 149. page he reasoneth thus: Those which authorized the booke of Common prayer, were studious of peace, and buylding the Churche, therefore those which finde faulte with it, are pullers downe of the Church, and disturbers of the peace, which is a fallation of the Accident, when a man thinketh that euery thing which is verified of the subiect, may be likewise verified of that which is annexed vnto it. The further confutation of the which arguments I referre vnto their places.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  The Admonitiō sayth, that those persons, in which and by whom the booke of Common prayer was first authorised, were studious of peace, and of buylding vp of Christes Churche. Wherevpon I conclude, that if that be true, then the defacers of that booke be disturbers of the peace. Which I gather of that that they thē selues haue graūted, and as I am perswaded truely: neither doo I vnderstande howe it can be made a fallation ab accidente. For I thinke that the meaning of the authors of the Admonition is, that these men shewed them selues desirous of peace, and of buylding vp the Church, euen in collecting and authorising that booke (or else to what purpose shoulde they make any mention of them) whiche if it be true, as it is, then the argument muste of necessitie followe.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 1. Sect. 8.
                     There be diuers other which he hath, which are so farre from iuste conclusions, as they haue not so muche as any colour of likelyhoode of argument, whiche I can not tell where to lodge, vnlesse I put them in the common inne, which is that, whiche is called the ignorance of the Elench. As in the. 68. page, when he concludeth thus, An vntruthe, for there is no such aagument▪
                         that Cyprian speaketh not of the Bishop of Rome, Ergo he speaketh of an Archbishop.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  I might héere iustly quarell with you for leaping so disorderly, sometimes forward and sometimes backwarde, as from the. 240. page to the. 149. and from that to the 68. &c. But I let al such things passe, and come to the matter. In the. 68. page as you quote it, but in déede the. 69. after I haue declared the true meaning of Cyprian, I adde, that Cyprian there speaketh not of the vsurped authoritie of the Bishop of Rome ouer all Churches, but agaynst the insolencie of some, which despising their Metropolitane or Archbishop, dyd with their factiousnesse trouble the Church. Whiche words I added, to declare

how vntruely the Papistes doe abuse that place of Cyprian, to proue the Popes authoritie ouer all the Churches, when he onely speaketh of the authoritie of an Archbishop or Bishop in his owne prouince or dioces. True it is that Cyprian doth not speake of the authoritie of the Byshop of Rome ouer all Churches, but of the authoritie that Cornelius then Bishop of Rome, or Cyprian himselfe had in his owne prouince: neither wil any denie this but Papists. Now to peruert this my plaine meaning, and to father on me whether I will or no, this argumente, he speaketh not of the Bishop of Rome, and therfore of an Archbishop, argueth a mynd disposed to con
                        〈1 line〉
                     , and a stomacke desirous rather to deface the person, than to giue care to the matter.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 1. Sect. 9.
                     And in the. 71. pag. Other vntruthe▪
                         There must be superiours, Ergo, one minister must be superiour vnto an other. There must be degrees, therefore there must be one Archbishop ouer a prouince.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  There are no such reasons, those that be in that place alleaged, are onely out of Hierome and Chrisostome, and of greater force than wil be truely answered.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 1. Sect. 10.
                     And in the. 73. there was one ouer euery congregation, therefore there was one ouer all the ministersAnother vntruth in the prouince. These and a number like vnto these, M. Doctor hath scattered throughout his booke, which as Nero sayd of his maister Senecas workes, cleaue together like sand: and thus let it be seene, whose argumentes are most iustly concluded, those of the Admonition or these of M. Doctors.
                  
               
               
                  Io. Whitgifte.
                  It is a shame to lye of the deuill. Where finde you in all that page any such argument or similitude of it? but surely you haue done me a great pleasure, who searching my booke so diligently for arguments to quit the Admonition, haue not founde one, but most vainely and vntruely fained those to be which be not. Truly, I do not think my selfe in euery circumstance to be so circumspecte, but that I may minister sometime matter to a quarreller, howebeit, as yet you haue not founde any thing for your purpose. And I shall most hartily desire the reader, to iudge of the rest of your doyngs, euen according to these beginnings.
               
            
         
         
            
               An Exhortation to such as be in authoritie and haue the gouernment of the Church committed vnto them, whether they be Ciuill or Ecclesiasticall Magistrates.
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  COnsidering the strangenesse of the time, the varietie of mens mindes, and the maruellous inclinations in the common sort of persons (especially where the Gospel is most preached) to imbrace newe inuented doctrines and opiniōs, though they tende to the disturbing of the quiet state of the Church, the discrediting and defacing of such as be in authoritie, and the mainteining of licenciousnesse and lewde libertie: I thought it good to set before your eyes the practises of the Anabaptistes, their conditions and qualities, the kinde and manner of their beginnings and proceedings, before the broching of their manifolde

and horrible heresies, to the intent that you vnderstanding the same, may the rather in time take heede to such as proceede in like maner: least they being suffred too long, brust out to worke the same effect. I accuse none, onely I suspect the authors of this Admonition, and their fautours: what cause I haue so to do, I refer to your selues to iudge, after that I haue set forth vnto you the Anabaptisticall practises, euen as I haue learned in the writings of suche famous and learned men, as had themselues experience of them, when they first began in Germanie, and did both personally reason with them, and afterwardes very learnedly write against them: neither will I in this point write one word, which I haue not my author to shew for.
            
            
               
                  An answere to the Exhortation to the ciuill Magistrates.
               
                  T. C. pag. 2. Sect. 1.
                  IT is more than I thought could haue happened vnto you, once to admitte into your minde, this opinion of Anabaptisme, of your brethren, which haue alwayes had it in as great detestation as your selfe, preached against it, as much as your selfe, hated of the folowers and fauourers of it, as much as your selfe. And it is yet more strange, that you haue not doubted to giue out such slaunderous reportes of them, but dare to present such accusations to the holy and sacred seate of iustice, and therby (so much as in you lyeth) to corrupt it, & to call for the sword vpon the innocent, (whichBigge wordes. is giuen for their maintenance and safetie) that, as it is a boldnesse vntollerable, so coulde I hardly haue thought, that it could haue fallen into any, that had caried but the countenance and name of a professor of the Gospell, much lesse of a Doctor of diuinitie. Before you will ioyne with vs in this cause, you will place vs whether we will or no, in the campe of the Anabaptistes, to the ende you might therby, both withdraw al frō aiding vs, which are godly minded, as for that you fearing (as it seemeth) the insufficiencie of your pen, might haue the sworde, to supply your want other wayes. And if we be founde in their campe, or be such disturbers of the quiet estate of the Church, 
                        〈1 line〉
                     efacers of such as be in authoritie, mainteyners of licenciousnes & lewde libertie (as you do seeme to charge vs with) we refuse not to go vnder those punishments, that some of that wicked sect receiued, for iust recompence of their demerites. You say you will not accuse any, A charitable iudgement, and yet before he reproued the l
                           〈1 line〉
                        ke. I know it is for want of no good will, that you do not accuse them, of whose condemnation & extreme punishment, we might be sure, if your hand were as strong as your harte. But you suspect the authors of the Admonition, and their fautors. (*) Charitie is not suspitious. Let vs therefore see, whether there be iuste1. Cor. 13. 5. matter to beare out, and to vphold this suspition. You will beare men in hand, that if we be not alreadie full Anabaptists, yet we are in the way thither, the fotesteps wherby you trace vs, must be considered.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     There is no cause why you should so maruaile at the matter, all things well considered, neither do I thinke that the Anabaptistes do so greatly detest and hate them, as you woulde make vs beleue. I do not accuse them of the doctrine of Anabaptisme (as you your selfe in the ende of this section do acknowledge) but I declare that I greatly suspect them, bicause they come so neare vnto the qualities and practises of the Anabaptistes, and vse the same beginnings: whether this my suspition be true or no I referre it to the iudgement of others. If the reportes be slaunderous, let them take their lawfull remedie against me: but if they be most manifest, then it is conuenient that the Magistrates haue vnderstanding thereof. Your great wordes doe not answere the matter. I feare not the insufficiencie of my pen (I thanke God) neither is there any cause why I should: for the truth hath alwayes a plentifull defense, whereas error and schisme is compelled to vse arrogant, opprobrious, and contemptuous speaches to maintaine it selfe.
                     Of all other T. C. hath least cause to complaine of such extremitie, or to speake in this maner. I haue much more cause to accuse his vndutifull and vnthankefull nature. If Charitie be not suspitious, why do you then thus not suspecte, but directly giue

sentence, that it is not for want of good will, that I doe not accuse them of Anabaptisme? 
                           〈◊〉
                         it not lawfull for me to suspect, and is it lawfull for you to condemne? You tooke vpon you to reproue me before for iudging, and can you fall so sone into it your selfe, 
                           〈◊〉
                         déede charitie is not suspicious without iust and lawfull causes: but whether the causes be iust or no, let those iudge to whom it doth especially appertaine.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The first article. pag 2. Sect. 1.
                  First Anabaptisme tendeth to this ende, that (in those places where
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                      the Gospell hath bin for a time preached, and where Churches be reformed) the Gospell may be hindered, the Churches disquieted, the simple brought to doubt of the Religion that hath bene taughte them: contentious and vnquiet mindes may haue matter to worke on, the preaching of the Gospell become odious: finally that Magistrates and such as be in authoritie, may be contemned, and despised of their subiectes and inferiours.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 2. Sect. 2.
                     It is all true you heere alleadge of the Anabaptistes: God be praysed there is nothing of it true in vs. If through these questions moued, the Churche be disquieted, the disquietnesse riseth in that the truth and sinceritie which is offered, is not receyued. We seeke it in no tumultuous manner, but by humble sute vnto them, to whom the redresse of things pertayne, and by teaching as our callings will suffer. If all those are to be counted in the way to Anabaptisme, which moue controuersies when the Gospell is preached: The ca
                              〈1 line〉
                            is 
                              〈◊〉
                            thing lyke. Then those that taught that the Gentiles weare to be preached vnto, when as the most of the beleeuing Iewes (which likewise preached the Gospell) thoughte otherwise, are to be counted in the way of Anabaptisme. Likewise, those that preached that circumcision was not necessarie vnto saluation, when as a greate number of Christians at the first thought it necessarie. Then Maister Zumglius, and Decolampadius smelt of Anabaptisme, which went aboute to ouerthrowe diuers things, which Maister Luther helde. I coulde goe further with this, but I content my selfe with these examples. If any be brought in doubt, or hatred of the truth hereby, or any man take occasion to be contentious, it is not in the nature of the doctrine which is taught, but in the corruption of their mindes, nor it is not offence giuen, but taken: nor this doctrine can be no more charged, than the rest of the Gospell, which is a (*) sworde that cutteth a Citie or kingdome in sunder, and setteth a (*) fire whereMat. 10. 34. there was none, and putteth contention betwene the father and the sonne. But what is to giue anLuc. 12. 49. incurable offence vnto the simple, and matter to the enimie to reioyce in, to all good Christians of teares and weeping, if this be not, to make the worlde thinke, that numbers of those which professe the Gospell, are infected with the poyson of Anabaptisme, which can not be touched with the smalest poynt of it? As for the Magistrate, and authoritie, we acknowledge the lawfulnesse, necessitie,A good 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            vnfayne
                              〈1 line〉
                           . and singular commoditie of it, we commende it in our sermons to others, we pray for them, as for those, of whose good or euill estate, hangeth the flourishing or decay of the common wealth, and Church both. We loue them as our Fathers and Mothers, we feare them, as our Lordes and Maisters, and we obey them in the Lord, and for the Lorde. If there be any thing, wherein we do not according to that which is commaunded, it is, bycause we can not be perswaded in our consciences, that we may so doe (whereof we are readie to render a reason out of the word of God) and if that will not serue, forthwith to submitte our selues, to that punishment, that shall be awarded against vs. And herein, we first call the Lorde God to witnesse of our meaning, and then we referre our selues to the consciences of all men in the sight of God.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Nothing is here sayde of you in the defense of the authors of the Admonition, but the Anabaptistes will say the same in theirs: Let the like effectes procéeding from the like causes, and in like manner iudge the likelyhoode betwixte the Anabaptistes and them. One of the chiefe notes that are giuen of Anabaptistes by Zuinglius in hisZuinglius booke called Ecclesiastes, and in his other bookes where he speaketh of them, is, that they sowe discorde and contention in those Churches where the Gospell hath bene truely preached, and that about externall matters, as it may more at large appeare in the seconde edition of my answere to the Admonition, And tell me I praye you what Churche

hath any of them setled themselues in, but in such, wherin the Gospell hath bene wellThe admonitors iustly accused of contention. planted before? or in what place haue they for any time remayned, where they haue not with contention and factions troubled not that place onely, but the whole countrey rounde aboute in lyke manner? Surely if they preached doctrine necessarie to saluation (that is the Gospell) and in those places wherein the Gospell is not receyued, then if contentions shoulde arise, the cause were not to be ascribed vnto them, but vnto their hearers onely: but seyng they ran not teache the Gospell more sincerely than it is taught, and seyng the matters they contend for, be not of such necessitie, that the Churches should for them be disquieted, seyng also that they séeke reformation (as they call it) neither in due time, due place, nor before méete persons: And finally, seyng contentions are raised by them in those places where the Gospell is receiued, I sée not howe they can auoyde the iust accusation of contentieus persons, and disturbers of the peace of the Church. For if you aske of the time: the Admonition was published after the Parliament (to the which it was dedicated) was ended. If youTheir disorder in publishing the Admonition. speake of the place: it was not exhibited in Parliament (as it ought to haue bene) but spred abroade in corners, and sent into the Countrey. If you inquire of the persons: it came first to theyr handes who had least to doe in reforming. Likewyse your sermons of these matters: when preache you them? surely euen in this troublesomeTheir disorder in preaching. and tumultuous tyme, when there is especiall occasion to moue men to prayer, to vnitie, and to the embracing of the substance of Religion, which by all meanes is sought to be ouerthrowne. Where preache you them? euen where they doe least good and most harme: in places where the Gospell hath bene alreadie planted, yea and often times in secrete conuenticles and corners, which the truth neuer séeketh, but vpon extreme necessitie: and before whom preache you? not before such as haue authoritie to redresse, but before the common people, who (although some of them be godly and sober) yet for the most parte be greatly delighted with nouelties, loue such scholemaisters as teach libertie, and continually inueigh against superiors. All this beyng true, as you can not denie it to be true, there is no cause why you shoulde be offended with the setting downe of the first article.
               To preach the Gospell is a thing necessary vnto saluation: to preach that circumcision and suche like ceremonies be not matters of saluation, is a necessarie doctrine, & of the substance of Religiō. Zuinglius and Oecolampadius and other differed frō Luther in some matters of substance, and yet did they orderly and lawfully with the consent of their Magistrates procéed in these matters: wherfore these examples helpe you nothing: for the matters you contend for, be not of ye same nature, neither do you procéede in like maner. The same answere may be made to all other like examples, that you can vse in these matters. But bicause I will not leane onely to mine owne iudgement in this case, let it not gréeue you if I set downe M. Zuinglius opinion touching the same, who in his booke called Ecclesiastes, speaking against the Anabaptistes saith on this sort, If they were sent of God, & endued with the spirit of God, they woulde haueZuingl. in ecclesi. construed in the best parte these externall things, which be not as yet rightly reformed, they woulde haue become all things to all men, that they might haue wonne all to Christ. &c. M. Caluine also in his booke against ye Anabaptists saith, that whē vnder the colour of aCaluin aduersus Anabap. zeale of perfectiō, we cā beare no imperfectiō, either in the body, or in the members of the Church, it is the deuill which puffeth vs vp with pride, and seduceth vs with hypocrisie to make vs forsake Christs flocke.
               
               Whatsoeuer you alleage for the saluing of your contentious doctrine out of ye. 10. ofT. C. vseth the same defense for his contentiō, that the Anabaptists do. Mathew verse. 34. ye same do ye Anabaptists vse for their excuse also, as Zuinglius testifieth in his Ecclesiastes, his words be these. Their doctrine bringeth forth nothing but contention & tumults, in the defense wherof they alleage that Christ said, I came not to sende peace but the sword: to whō we answere, that this sword hath no place among the faithful:Zuing. in ec. for it diuideth the faithfull frō infidels: but they make contentiō and brawling among theThe sworde which Christ sendeth is not betwene the faithfull. faithfull, & that for externall things. Hetherto Zuinglius: which is a sufficiēt answere to you also vsing ye same excuse, & mouing cōtentiōs in like maner & matters. The same sense haue the words of Christ. Luc. 12. ver. 49. for the Gospel is a sword that deuideth the faithfull from infidels, but not the faithfull among themselues.
               
                  It is the greatest offence to the simple, and most worthy of Christian teares and weeping, that men shoulde cloake and colour their arrogancie, contention, and errors, with a false pretence of godly zeale for the purytie of fayth, the sinceritie of the Gospell, and the reformationBucer in. 4. Eph. of the Churche, as Maister Bucer in. 4. ad Ephe. saith that somedyd euen in his time.
               What you thinke and teach of the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate will appeare hereafter more plainely in some other partes of your booke, your additions to your protestation of allowing Magistrates, and of your obedience to them, may colour your abridging of their authoritie: For if they commaunde you any thing wherein you intende not to obey, you may say, they commaunded not that in the Lorde, and that it is against your conscience: These exceptiōs or excuses be very general, & may with you (who in all things pretende the worde of God, and conscience) strayghten the authoritie of the Magistrate to your owne purpose. But hereof we shall something more playnely (although not fully) vnderstande your opinion hereafter. The same Protestation that you make, it may appeare that the Anabaptistes made also in the beginning, as Zuinglius declareth in his Ecclesiastes.
               
               
                  I. VV. The seconde Article. pag. 2. Sect. 2.
                  Secondly, they bitterly inueyed agaynst ministers and preachers of the Gospell, saying, that they were not ordinarily and lawfullyBul. fol. 1. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 18. 87. 102. 244. called to the ministerie, bicause they were called by the Magistrate, and not by the people: that they preached not the Gospel truly, that they were Scribes and Pharisies: that they had not those thinges which Paule required in a minister. 1. Tim. 3. That they did not themselues those things, which they taughte vnto other: that they had stipends, and laboured not, and therefore were ministers of the belly, that they could not teache truly, bicause they had great liuings, and liued wealthily and pleasantly, that they vsed not their authoritie in excommunication, that they attributed to muche vnto the Magistrate.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 3. &. 4.
                     There was neuer Heretike so abhominable, but that he had some truthe to cloke his falshode, should his vntruthes and blasphemies, driue vs from the possession of that, whiche he holdeth truely? no not the Diuell him selfe, saying, that God had giuen his Angels charge ouer his, can thereby wring this sentence from vs, why we should not bothe beleeue it, and speake it, beeing a necessarie truthe to beleeue and speake. You may as well say, we are Anabaptistes, bycause we say, there is but one God, as they dyd, one Christ as they dyd. &c. And heere I will giue the Reader a taste of your Logike, that you make so muche of in your booke. This is your owne Logike, & these be arguments of your owne framing. The Anabaptistes say that the Churches should choose their ministers, and not the Magistrate, and you say so, therfore you are Anabaptistes, or in the way to Anabaptisme. The Anabaptistes complayned, that the Christians vsed not their authoritie in excommunication, and so do you complayne, therefore you are Anabaptistes, or in the way to them. I will not lay to your charge, that you haue not learned Aristotles Priorums, which sayth, it is 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         as often as the meane in any syllogisme, is consequent to bothe the extremes. But haue you not learned that which Seton, or any other halfepeny Logyke telleth you, that you can not conclude affirmatiuely in the seconde figure? And of thys sorte are euery one of your surmises contayned in thys treatise, whiche you entitle, an exhortation. &c. And if I lyked, to make a long booke of little matter (as you doe) I woulde thus gather your argumentes out of euery braunche whyche you ascribe, as common vnto vs with the Anabaptistes, as you make adoe, vpon euery place, whiche is quoted by the Admonition to the Parliament. But answere, I pray you, in good faythe are you of that iudgemente, that the ciuill Magistrate should ordayne ministers? No: but that may be the true church of Christ wherein there is no excommunication: the contrarie whereof the Anabaptist
                              〈1 line〉
                            affyrme. Or that there should be no excommunication, as it was, and is vsed in certayne the Heluetian Churches? If you be, your controuersie is not so muche wyth vs, as wyth the Bishops, whiche bothe call ministers, and excommunicate. If you be not, why is that Anabaptisticall in vs, whiche is Christian and Catholike in you? And why do you go about, to bring vs in hatred for those things, which you do no more allowe, than those whō you thus endeuour to discredite? we do not say that there is no lawfull, or no ordinarie calling in Englande, for we do not denie, but that he maye be lawfully called, which is not ordinarily, as M. Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, Decolampadius. And there be

                        By what a
                              〈1 line〉
                            tho
                              〈1 line〉
                           e presume those parishes so 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         places in England, where the ministers be called by their parishes in such sort, What scriptures, or where▪ will you not quote one▪
                         as the examples of the scripture doe shewe to haue been done, before the eldership & gouernment of the Church be established. I knowe not any, that sayth, that the Gospell is not truely preached in Englande, and by those also that are not of the same iudgement, that the Admonition to the Parliament is of. But if it be sayde, that it is not generally of cuery one of them, and in all poynts, or not so often, or not there where their duetie byndeth them, and they are called vnto, or not so sincerely, or without mixture, as it ought to be, then there is nothing sayde, but that, which we feare, may be too easely proued. It it be sayde of some, that in certayne there are founde some of those things, that were reprehended in the Phariseis, what is that to proue, that they be Anabaptistes that speake of it. Your selfe in one place of your booke, call the authors of the Admonition, and their fauourers, Phariseis, who doe all things to be seene of menne, and therefore they sighe, and holde downe their heades. &c. And this you speake, agaynst them that preache the Gospell. Therefore by your reason you giue sentence of Anabaptisine agaynst your selfe. You promised you woulde not write one worde, whereof you had not your author for it. First you haue This is vntrue peruerted the meanyng of the Anabaptistes, in that wherein they acculed the godly Ministers, that they were not according to that which is written in the thirde of the. 1. Epist. to Timothe, and all bycause you woulde multiply the number of your likelyhoodes. For they charged the Ministers, by that place, of dissolutdnesse and losenesse of lyfe, and corruption of manners, and we allcadge it to proue that they should be able to teache and instructe, agaynst the dumbe Ministerie that is abroade. But that which followeth, vttereth not onely great Is it be not 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o, what maye be 
                              〈◊〉
                            of you▪
                         vntruth and falsification of the author, but sheweth a minde desirous to slaunder, and sorie (as it seemeth) that those which you so greuously discredite, are no lyker the Anabaptistes, than they be. I wyll set downe the wordes, as they are written in the. 102. leafe, that it may appeare howe faythfully you haue dealte. Libere enim dicunt concionatores qui sripendium accipiunt, non esse veros Deiministros, neque posse docere ueritatem, sed esse uentris ministros, qui o
                              〈1 line〉
                           iose accipiant ingentia stipendia, ex illis rebus, quae simulachris immolatae fuerunt, & ex diuitijs splendide & luxuriose uiuant, cum tamen Christus dixit, gratis accepistis, gratis date, & prohibuit duas tunicas, peram & pecuniam habere, preterea Paulum aiunt manibus suis laborasse, & mandasse reliquis, ut idem faciant, itaque concludunt nulla debere stipendia habere sui officii, sed laborare & gratis ministrare, & quia hoc non faciunt, non posse ipsos ueritatem docere. They sayWhat other thing is assirmed in the seconde articles freely (speaking of the Anabaptistes) that the preachers which take stipendes, can not be the true ministers of God, nor teach the truthe, but are ministers of the bellie, which to liue idlely take gret stipendes, of those things which were offered to images, and do of their riches liue gorgeously, and riotousely, when notwithstanding Christ sayde, ye haue receyued freely, giue freely, and forbad thē to haue two coates, or a scrippe, or money. Besydes that, they say that Paule laboured with his owne handes, and gaue commaundement, to the rest of the Ministers, that they shoulde doe so, and therefore they conclude, that they should haue no stipende for their office, but labour and minister for nought, and bicause they do not so, they cannot teach the truthe. Nowe let all men iudge, whether it be one thing, to say, that they ought not to haue stipendes, that labour not, or to saye as the Anabaptistes sayde, that it was not lawfull to haue any stipende, or to say, they could not teach truely, bicause they had great liuings, or bicause they had any liuings at all. Although I neuer read nor heard any of those that you meane, say, that those which had great stipendes and liuings could not preach truely. It may be that diuers haue sayd that it were meete, the ministers should be content, with competent stipendes, and that the ouerplus of that might go to the supplie of the wants of other ministers liuings, and to the maintenaunce of the poóre, or of the vniuersitie, and that that excesse, is the cause of diuers disorders in those persons, that haue it, but that they could not preach truely (when they preached) which had great liuings, I for my parte neuer hearde it. I thinke you would not be exempted from reprehension of that, wherein you faulte, and therefore I knowe not what you meane by these words (that they dyd not those things themselues which thei taught others) we professe no such perfectiō in our liues, but that we are oftentimes behind a great dealein doing of that which is taught to be our dueties to doe, and therefore thinke it necessarie that we should be reprehended, and shewed our faultes. Whereas you say that the Anabaptistes accused the ministers, for giuing to much to the Magistrates, I haue shewed what we giue, and if it be to little, shewe vs and we will amende our fault. I assure you it greeueth me, and I am euen in the beginning wearie, of turning vp this Note his mo
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           est 
                              〈1 line〉
                            manerly speaches. dung, and refuting so baine and friuolous sclanders, with out all shewe and face of truthe, and therfore I will be briefe in the rest.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               I speake not here of the doctrine of the Anabaptists which is the certaine note wherby they may be knowne: but of their other qualities and manner of talke and Preaching. The wordes be M. Bullingers, they be not mine. The argumentes framed, be yours, and neither his nor mine.
               Your disciples magnifie you, bicause your vsuall talke both publike and priuate, isThey seke not the reformatiō but the diffamation of ministers. against the Ministers of the Church, against their calling, against their preaching, against their life. &c. which you doe not to reforme them (for you doe it in their absence and to the people) but to deface them, and to discredite them: not to promote the Gospell (which they preache as diligently and syncerely as you doe) but to bring them into hatred with the people, whereby you might the rather preuaile in your enterprises:

not to reforme their manners (for they maye compare wyth you in all kynde of honestie and dutie) but to erpresse your malice and wrathe: for that whiche Zuinglius
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                         Anabap. 
                     in Elench. contra Anabap.
                   speaketh of them, (It is melancholie and wrathe, not true zeale of whiche they glorie) maye be truly verified of you, and thereof let thys your booke be iudge.
               Nowe if I say, that in this poynte you agrée with the Anabaptistes, I doe not therefore straighteway conclude that you are Anabaptistes: but thys I conclude, that you are not for suche inuemues to bée estéemed as more pure in deede than your brethren, nor they thorough suche slaunde
                     〈1 line〉
                  os speaches of yours to bée discredited: bycause herein you speake or practise nothyng agaynste the true Ministers of the woorde of God, but that whyche the Anabaptistes haue doone in the selfe same forme and manner before you. And that these be qualities woorthie to bée obserued in the Anabaptistes, and suche as procéede in lyke manner, it may appeare not onely by this obseruation of M. Buliinger, but: of other learned and Godlie menne also, that haue written agaynste them, and giuen notes of their qualities. Zuinglius in his Booke before named sayth, That they speake euyll bothe
                        Ibidem Why the 
                           〈◊〉
                         speake euill of magistrate
                           〈1 line〉
                         and 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Idem in 
                              〈1 line〉
                           les
                      of the Ciuill Magistrate, and of the ministers of the Churche, that if at anye tyme eyther of them accordyng to theyr office, reproue them, then they streyghtwaye saye that therefore they bee enimyes vnto them, bycause they tell them of theyr faultes: And in his Ecclesiast. he sayeth thus of them 
                     〈1 line〉
                  . They so slaunder, reuyle, and backebyte the Ministers of the woorde, and of the Churche, that they oughte to be suspected and hated of all Godlye menne: euen for theyr slaunderous and curssed speakyng. But theyr ende and purpose is, by thys meanes to wynne credite vnto them selues, and to discredite suche as sette them selues agaynste them, and detecte theyr erroures. The lyke saying he hathe in hys booke De. Baptismo. To the same effecte also speaketh Gastius of them in his Booke De exordio & erroribus Catabap.
                  Gastiu
                        〈1 line〉
                     . where among other sentences he hath thys: Theyr talke vttereth nothyng else but reprehension of the Ministers of the worde, and libertie in externall things. Now iudge I praye you, whether this hath ben a qualitie woorthie to bée obserued in the Anabaptistes or no?
               I doe not speake agaynste suche as modestly and accordyng to the rule of the Apostle. 1. Tunoth. 5. doo reproue any, but agaynste those that haue nothing else in theyr mouthes, but inuectiues agaynste the Ministers of the woorde, obseruyng neyther place, tyme, nor anye other circumstances, whome I still say in this poynt to be fitly compared to the Anabaptists.
               
               Nowe whether it bée my Logike, or yours that you gyue a taste of in thys placelette the learned Reader iudge, to whome also I committe the tryall of thys spyrite of yours, whyche bursteth out in suche vnséemely manner, vpon the consyderation of your owne deuysed argumentes, to féede your contempte and disdayne with. In déede if you make argumentes where I make none, and if you frame them as it pleaseth you, no meruayle it is though you make a long booke, and cause your Reader to beleeue, that my Logicke is as simple as you woulde haue it. But deale with mée vprightly and honestly, and then set downe my vnskilfulnesse, and spare not, as I trust you woulde doo to the vttermost in euery poynt, if you could, séeing that you doe it where there is no occasion at all offered vnto you by mée, but imagined of youre selfe. Well, let these quarelles goe, more méete to be among boyes than among men. Gratia Dei sum quod sum, neyther haue I any thing but that whiche I haue receyued of him from whom commeth all good things.
               Bothe of the election of ministers, and of excommunication what I thynke, I will declare God willing in their proper places. The woordes here by me alledged (as I haue saide) are Master Bullingers, and they be truly spoken, and to good purpose as there it shall appeare. In the meane while I referre you for that of the Magistrate in electing of ministers, to the 87. and 88. leaues of that his Booke Aduersus Anabap. and for that of excommunication to the. 233. and. 234. leafe of the same Booke.
               
                  You denye, that you saye, there is no lawfull or no ordinarye callyng of Mynisters in Englande, whych is a strange hearyng to mée: for wherevnto then tendeth all that whych is wrytten in your Booke touching the electing and calling of Ministers? orF
                        〈1 line〉
                     st Admonition contrarie to T. C. that which is written in the fyrst Admonition Folio. 9▪
                   where they say in playne termes, that wee haue neyther a ryghte Ministerie of God, nor a righte gouernement of hys Churche. And Folio. 34. 35. 36. &c Folio 157. where they saye, that thys prescripte forme of Seruice vsed in this Churche of Englande mayntayneth an vnlawfull▪ Ministerie: or that whyche is so bytterly spoken agaynst the Booke of orderyng▪ Ministers and Deacons, whyche they call the Pontificall? But you saye that he may be lawfully called, whyche is not ordinarilye. I woulde haue you to speake playnely. Is our calling to the Ministerie here in England lawful, but not ordinarie? If it be lawfull, then is it not agaynste the woorde of God, neyther is there any Lawe in the Scriptures to the contrarie, as you woulde make vs to beléeue. But truly. I thynke that you were not here well aduysed, or else haue you some suttle meaning, for you adde immediately, that there be places in Englande where the Ministers are called by theyr Parishes. &c. So that I suppose you meane, that in some Parishes of Englande, there is a lawfull callyng of Ministers: if it bée so, then is it not withstanding truly sayde, that you denie the maner of callyng Ministers in this Churche of Englande to be lawfull: for that maner of callyng is not to be ascribed to this Churche, which is vsed in some conuenticles and secrete congregations, but that which is allowed by publike and common authoritie.
               Your distinction of lawfull and ordinarie is not simply good, for whatsoeuer is lawfullLauful is ordinarie in a Church established. in a Church established, that is ordinarie: I think that euen very cōmon reason dothe teache this to be true. Wherfore certaynly if our ministerie bée lawfull, it is ordinarie. If any Parishe in Englande doe electe or call their ministers otherwyse than the orders and Lawes of thys Churche dothe permitte, I can not sée howe that Parishe can excuse it selfe of schisme, and I thinke verilye, that suche Parishes ought to bée looked too in tyme.
               I doe not well vnderstande▪ what you meane by these wordes, in suche sorte as the examples of the Scripture doe shewe to haue bene doone, before the Eldership and gouernmente of the Churche bee established. What examples bée these? you quote no places where to fynde them▪ Or when was the gouernmente of the Churche and Eldershyp established? If you had more playnly expressed these two thyngs, wée myghte haue the better vnderstoode youre meanyng. But belyke these Parishes doo not call theyr Ministers in all poyntes accordyng to the rule that you woulde haue prescribed, and therfore you make an Interim of it, vntill your gouernment be fully finished. This is your dealyng to allowe of all things doone out of order: yea though it bée against your owne order, so that it tende to the derogation of publike and common order.
               Whether they saye, that the Gospell is not truely preached in this Churche of EnglandeThe Admomtors denye the Gospell to be truly preached in Englande. or no, looke in the whole discourse of their booke: and in the seconde Admonition page. 6. where you may fynde these wordes, I saye that we are so scarce come to the outwarde face of a Churche ryghtely reformed, that althoughe some truthe be taught by some preachers, yet no preacher maye without greate daunger of the Lawes, vtter all truth comprised in the booke of God, it is so circumscribed and wrapte within the compasse of suche statutes, suche penalties, suche imunctions, suche Aduertisementes, suche Articles, suche sober Caueats,Seconde Admonition pag. 6. and suche manyfolde pamphlets, that in manner it dothe but peepe out from behynd the screene. What say you to these wordes? how can you salue them?
               Whether they generally call all the Ministers of the Gospell which be not on their secte Phariseys or no, lette the whole discourse of bothe the Admonitions iudge, and that Pamphlet entituled, An exhortation to the Bishops to deale brotherlye with theyr brethren: In my answer to which pāphlet, I proue that this name Pharisey doth much more aptely agrée vnto the Authors thereof, and suche lyke, than to the Bishops and other ministers, whome they so often call by that name, and so odiously compare them together in that pamphlet.
               
                  I must once tell you agayne, that I make no argumentes here, I doe but onely compare their qualities and conditions: I haue performed my promise, if I 
                     〈◊〉
                   not, shewe me wherin. I peruert not the meaning of the Anabaptistes▪
                   but set down the verie woordes of M. Bullinger worde for worde, without any addition, 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
                  tion, or alteration: it had bene well if you had examined the places better.
               Touchyng the falsification, and vntruthe you charge mée with, I thynke you be not in good earnest, it is but bycause you could no longer temper your heate: for you make manie of these outcryes, but I suppose you vse them only as meanes to caste vp your melancholie, whyche you call zeale. Whatsoeuer I there speake of the Anabaptistes, I fyndeit in the same forme of woordes in those leaues of M Bullingers booke, whiche I haue quoted in the Margent. Pervse with a little more diligence Fol. 18. where he hath these wordes: Quod stipendia babeant, & non laborent, atque ideo ventris ministri sunt, and the. 102. And if you fynd not there word for worde all this that I haue here spoken, touchyng the stipendes and liuings of ministers, and in the same forme of wordes, then vse your hotte Rhetorike: but I knowe they
                     
                        〈◊◊◊◊〉
                      Idem 
                        〈◊〉
                     . be there, and you reproue you can not tell what. If this so greately trouble you, I wil tell you what Zuinglius also sayth of this matter in his Ecclesi istes, where he speaking of Anabaptists sayth thus: They teach that suche can not preache the Gospell syncerely, whiche haue benefices, but their hope is to haue the true Pastors expelled, that they may succeede in their places, and yet they publikely protest that they seeke for no liuing. Nowe whether you or your men agrée with them in this poynt or no, I neytherZuingl. in Eccles. denie nor affirme: if you be prickte, I can not blame you thoughe you kicke. Neither do I say, that those ought to haue stipends which labour not, I do but report Bullingers wordes of the Anabaptistes, I woulde haue no man exempted from due reprehension: I only reporte this to shewe the malitious spirites of the Anabaptistes agaynst the ministers of the woorde, that it maye be knowne of what societie they may bée suspected to bée, whose talke is wholly bente against the Ministers of the woorde of God.
               That you giue too little to Magistrates it shall be shewed in place.
               Though you bée wearie, it is no meruayle, for it gréeueth you to bée touched so narrowly: And surely if you vse no cleanlyer termes than you doe in this place, or continue in pouring oute your choler in suche aboundance, you will tyre mée also, or euer I make an ende.
               Whatsoeuer I haue here spoken of the Anabaptistes is moste true, and therefore no slaunder.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 3. Article. Pag. 2. Sect. 3.
                  Thirdly, the whole reformation that was then in the Churche displeased them, as not spirituall inough and perfect. For the SacramentesBull. fo. 9. 18▪
                      were not (as they sayd) syncerely ministred, things were not reduced to the Apostolike Churche, excommunication not rightly vsed, no amendement of lyfe appeared since the preaching of the Gospel: therfore the Church then reformed no more the true Churche of Christ, than was the Papisticall Churche.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 4. Sect. 1.
                     Wee prayse God for thys reformation, so farre foorthe, as it is agreeable vnto the worde of God, wee are gladde the woorde of God is preached, that the Sacramentes are ministredthat whiche is wantyng, we desire it maye be added, that whiche is ouermuche, cut off, and wee are not ashamed to professe, yt we desire it may be done according to the institution of the Churches
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 6. Article Pag 3. Sect. 3.
                  Sixthly, they pretended in all their doings, the glorie of God,Bullin. fo. 10. the edifying of the Churche, and the puritie of the Gospell.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 5. Sect. 3.
                     We pretende it not, but we propounde it, and herein we call God to witnesse agaynst our owne soules.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               I can not let you to applie things to your owne selues at your pleasure. 
                     Volenti, non
                     All seeke not the glorie of God, that pretend so to doe. 
                     fit iniuria.
                   I sette that of the Anabaptistes down to this end, that men may vnderstande not al those to séek the glorie of God. &c. which pretend the same: bicause ye 
                  Anabaptistes haue those pretences, and yet they séeke nothing lesse. That the Anabaptistes, and suche lyke disturbers of the Church haue those pretences, not only M. Bullinger in those places by me quoted, but other godlie and learned men also do testifie. Zuinglius in his Ecclesiast. sayth that they boast: that whatsoeuer they speake, they speake it ofZuinglius in Ecclesiast. zeale, being moued with the spirite. Gastius sayth in his booke 
                     De exordio & erroribus catabap. that vnder the pretence of zeale, they subuert whatsoeuer other men haue buylded.Gastius. Bucer in. 4. ad Ephes.
                   sayth, that Satan couereth and cloketh arrogancie, selfeloue, enuye,Bucer. and hatred, with a false pretence of godlie zeale for the puritie of faith, for the sinceritie of Christes doctrine, and for the saluation of the Church. It is expedient for men to know this, else might they thorough simplicitie easily be deceyued.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 7. Article. Pag. 3. Sect. 4.
                  They earnestly cryed out against pride, gluttonie. &c. They spakeBull. fo. 11. 17. much of mortification: they pretended great grauitie, they sighed muche: they seldome or neuer laughed: they were verie austere in reprehendyng: they spake gloriouslye. To be shorte, 
                        Magna & varia erat ipsorum bypocrisis, they were greate hypocrites, thereby to winne authoritie to their heresie, among the simple and ignorant people.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 5. Sect. 4.
                     If you doe note these thinges (which we say not) we wil rather doo them with the Anabaptistes, than leaue them vndone with you. Of our simple heart and meaning in them, we haue beforePsalm. 37. ver. 6. protested. In the meane season, we will paciently abyde, vntill the Lord bring our *rightuousnesse in this behalfe vnto lyght, and our iust dealing as the noone day. Touching our sighing and seldome or neuer laughyng, you giue occasion after to speake of it, vnto the whiche place, I reserue the answere.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               I doe not write this of them bicause I woulde haue men absteyne from reprouing vice, and exhorting to godlinesse, but to lette it be vnderstoode, that these be no certaine proofes of the veritie of the doctrine, being commonly vsed in most vehement sort of the heretikes and sectaries to allure the people vnto them, and to winne credite vnto their opinions.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 8. Article. Pag. 3. Sect. 5.
                  If they were at any tyme punished for their errors, they greatlyBull. fol. 11. complained that nothing was vsed but violence, that the truth was oppressed, that innocent and godly men which would haue al things reformed according to the word of God, could not be heard, nor haue libertie to speak. That Zuinglius stopped their mouths, & defended his cause, not by the word of God, but by ye authoritie of the magistrate.
                  
                     
                     T. C. Page 5. Sect. 5.
                     We are no Stoikes, that we should not be touched with the feeling of our greefes, if our complaints be excessiue, shew them and we will abridge them. what errours we defend, and how you maynteyne your parte by the word of God, it will appeare in the discourse of your Booke.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               And yet your complaint in this point, as it is without iust cause, so is it common to you with the Anabaptists, and therefore no true note of the veritie of your doctrine, nor any sufficient cause why you should therefore be more gratious vnto the people. The chéefest thing that the common sort haue to say in your defense is, that you be persecuted, put from your liuings &c. Which if it were altogither true, as it is reported, yet your complaint is no other, than the Anabaptists is, and therefore no more to be alleadged for the iustifying of you, than the like is for the iustifying of them.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 9. Article. Page. 3 Sect. 6.
                  They found great faulte with the baptising of children, and ceremoniesBu. Fo. 10. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . vsed in the same: But afterward did vtterly condemne it.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 5. Sect. 6.
                     Their finding fault without cause in the ceremonies of baptisme, cannot barre vs from finding fault where there is cause. We allow of the baptisme of children and hope through the goodnesseMarke the 
                              〈◊◊◊〉
                           
                           ▪
                         of God, that it shall be farre from vs, euer to condemne it. But to let your slaunderous tong go (all the strings whereof ye seeme to haue losed, that it may the more freely be throwen ont, ano walke against the innocent) where, where is the modestie you require in other, of not entring to iudge of things vnknowen, which dare insinuate to the Magistrate, that it is like they will condemne childrens baptisme, which do baptise them, preach they shoulde be baptised, and which did neuer by sillable, letter, or countenance, mislike of their baptisme.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Can you denie any thing to be true that I haue spoken of the Anabaptists in thys article? or can you denie but that your selues also mislike the ceremonies vsed in baptisme in this Church? yea and the same that they did? what followed in them is manifest: what wil follow in you God knoweth: I iudge not. What be my suspicions is declared in my answer to the Admonition, which if you haue truly taken away, I am satisfyed: but I am afraid the contrarie will appeare in your booke.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 10. 11. 12. Page. 3. Sect. 7.
                  They taught that the ciuill Magistrate hathe no authoritie inBul. Fol. 19▪
                      Ecclesiasticall matters, and that he ought not to medle in causes of religion and faith.
               
               
                  Page 4. Sect 1.
                  That no man oughte to be compelled to faith and to religion.Bul. Fol. 19. 9
                           〈1 line〉
                         242.
                  
                  That Christians oughte to punish faultes, not with imprisonment, not with the sword, or corporall punishment, but only with excommunication.Fol. 178.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 5. Sect. 7.
                     I answer as vnto the fifth, and for further answer, I will referre the reader to those places, where occasion shall be giuen to speake of those things ag ayne.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               And I referre my selfe also to the Admonitions, and to your owne booke, and to my seuerall answers which shall be made touching these matters.
            
            
               
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 13. Article. Page. 4. Sect. 3.
                  They complayned much of persecution.Fol. 11. 242.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pa. 5. Sect. 8.
                     This is a braunch of the eyght, and added for nothing else but to make vp the tale.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               And yet a worthy note, else shoulde it not haue bin so often repeated, not only of Bullinger, but of other godly men also, as of Zuinglius, Gastius, and others.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 14. Article. Pa 4. Sect. 4.
                  They bragged that they would defend their cause not only withFol. 11. words, but with the shedding of their bloud also.
                  
                     T. C. Pa. 5. Sect. vlt.
                     We feare no shedding of bloud in hir maiesties dayes, for mainteining that which we hope we shall be able to proue out of the word of God, and wherein we agree with the best reformed churches, but certaine of the thinges whiche we stand vpon are such, as that if euery heare of our head were a life, we ought to aford them for the defense of them. We brag not of any the least abilitie of suffering, but in the feare of God, we hope of the assistance of God his holy spirit to abide, whatsoeuer hee shall thinke good to trie vs with, either for profession of this, or any other hys truthe whatsoeuer.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Thanks be vnto God, there is no cause why you should feare. But wherefore do you then beate any such suspition into the peoples heads? or why do you beast of that that you know is nothing néere you? and whiche no man once goeth about to offer vnto you? what meane you in the. 59. page of the second Admonition to say that there is a persecution of poore Christians, and the professours of the Gospell, suffered, not farre vnlikeSecond Admoni. Fol. 59 to the sixe articles, which crafty heads deuised, and brought the king hir noble father vnto, as they would do hir maiestie now? Can any thing be spoken more vntruly, more suspiciously, nay I may rightly say, more seditiously?
               If there be such things in controuersie betwixt vs, that require defense euen vntoThe state of the cōtētiō altered by T. C. death, yea and that if euery heare of our head wer a life, we ought to afoord them for the defense of the same, then truly is there greater matters in hand, than euery body doth consider of. Hitherto it hath bin the common opinion, that our contention was but about trifles, about externall things, such as might admit alteration, and were not of the substance of religion: but if this be true that you here set downe, belike a great sort haue bin hitherto deceiued. Truly if the matters be of such weight that they require defense of life, you are much to blame that haue not hitherto made them better knowen. I trust we shall in this booke vnderstand what they are. In the meane time the stout bragges that are vsed by some, might well be spared: but we haue oftentimes séene greate cloudes and small rayne, and heard great crackes of thunder, and (thanks be vnto God) small harme done. Neither are you more to be credited for these boastings, than were the Anabaptists for vsing the like.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte▪
               
               
                  The. 15. Article. Page. 4. Sect. 5.
                  Their whole intent was to make a separation and a schisme, andFol. 17. 77. to withdraw men from their ordinary Churches and pastours, and therfore most odiously they inueied against such pastours, and sought by all meanes to discredite them.
                  
                     
                     T. C. Page▪ 6. Sect. 1.
                     We make no separation from the Church, we go about to separate al those things, that offend in the Church, to the end that we being al knit to the sincere truth of the Gospel, might afterwards in the same bond of truth, be more neerely and closely ioyned togither. We endeuour that euery Church hauing a lawfull pastoure, whiche is able to instruct, all mighte be ranged to their proper Churches, whereas diuerse, vnlesse they go to other than their owne parishes, are like to heare few sermons in the yeare, so farre are we from withdrawing men from their ordinarie churches and pastours. Let him that inueyeth against any pastoure without good cause, beare the punishment: as for inueying againste heaping of liuing vpon liuing, and ioyning steeple to steeple, and non residence and such ambition and tyrannie, as beareth the sway in diuers ecclesiasticall persons, if the price of the pacification, be the offending of the Lorde, it is better you be displeased, than God bee offended.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte,
               Whether you make a separation or no, and a schisme in the Churche, let all men iudge: and whether you draw the people from their ordinarie pastours or no, let the secrete conuenticles (for I can call them no better) vsed not only in the citie, but in other places of the countrey also testify: whether iustly, and as it becommeth you, you enuey against such pastours and preachers as mislike your opinion, and séeke their discredite, let the bitter inuectiues in sermons before the people, when none of them is present, the common table talke, bothe your Admonitions, the firste and the second, yea and this your passing modeste booke declare. Truly this article and euery content in it, was neuer more truly verefyed of the Anabaptists, than it is, and may be of you.
               What you haue to say against the ambition and tyrannie of any such as you especially shoote at, we shall sée in your particulars, I trust you will speake al you know, and more to, else you do degenerate.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 16. Article. Page. 4. Sect. 6.
                  There was no staye in them, but daily they inuented new opinions,Fol. 18. and did runne from errour to errour.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 6. Sect. 2.
                     We stay ourselues within the bonds of the word of God: we professe our selues to be of the number of those, which should * grow in knowledge, as we do in age, and which labor that the ImageEph. 4. v. 13 Col. 3. v. 10. of God may be dayly renued in vs, not only in holynesse of life, but also in * knowledge of the truth of God, and yet I know no question moued, which hath not bin many yeares before in other churches reformed, holden as truth, and therefore practised, and in our Church also haue bin some yeares debated.
                  
               
            
            
               Io Whitgifte
               Thus muche might they alleadge for themselues also, and applie those textes of scripture to as good purpose as you do. For that place of the fourth to the Ephe. doth4. Eph. teach that God hath therefore appointed his ministerie in the Church, that it mighte be a meanes to bring vs to a perfect knowledge of Christ. The meaning is not that we should be daily altering our iudgement, and broching new opinions: for against such vnconstancie, the same Apostle speaketh in the. 14. verse of the same Chapter.4. Eph. ver. 14. True it is that we must dayly grow in faith and loue, to the full perfection whereof, we cannot attaine in this life: but it doth not therefore follow, that we like children must be carried about with euery wind of doctrine, and neuer remaine constant in one religion. To the same end are the words of the Apostle in the. 3. to the Colloss. to be referred.
               I beléeue it will fall out that in this your replie, there will be found sundry articles, neyther allowed nor practised in any Church reformed, nor in our Church debated at any time heretofore.
            
            
               Io Whitgifte
               
                  The 17. Article. Page. 4. Sect. 7.
                  They were very stubborne and wilfull, which they called constancie:Bu. Eo. 78. 244
                     
they were way ward and froward: without all humanitie, they iudged and condemned all other men.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 6. Sect. 3.
                     If we defend no falshood or inconuenient thing, we cannot be counted stubborne or wilfull, wherof we offer to be tried by the indifferēt reader. For waywardnesse & inhumanitie, we thinke it a fault, as we esteeme godly societie and affabilitie to be commendable: and what is our behauioure heerein: we likewise referre to their iudgements, with whome we are conuersant, and haue to do with, beeing misseiudged and vntruly condemned of you, we iudge nor condemne no man, their vices we condemne, so far foorth as the listes of our vocation doth permit vs.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Bycause the answer to this Article consisteth of (If,) and dependeth especially of the testimonie of such as haue bin a conuenient time conuersant with you, I referre the iudgement héereof to their experience, and indifferent considerations.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 18. Article. Page. 4 Sect. 8.
                  They soughte to ouerthrow common weales, and states of gouernement.Fol. 78.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 6. Sect. 4.
                     We allow of common weales, This seemeth to be contrary to that which be hath. Page. 35 as withoute whiche the Churche cannot long continue, wee speake not against ciuill gouernment, nor pet againste ecclesiasticall, further than the same is an euimie to the gouernment, that God hathe instituted.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               So do the Anabaptists in words protest as it appeareth by these words of Zuinglius
                  Zuingli. in Ecclesi. in his Eccle. Though they protest, and by oth denie that they take any authoritie from magistrates, y et shortly after we should haue seene it come to passe that they would haue bin disobedient to all lawes of magistrates, if once they had increased to that number, that they might haue trusted to their owne strength. But what your doctrine tendeth too (though peraduenture you meane not so) it will, I thinke, appeare when it is examined.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The 19. Article. Page. 4. Sect 9.
                  They gaue honoure and reuerence to none, and they vsed to speakeFol. 79. to such as were in authoritie withoute any signification of honour, neither woulde they call men by their titles, and they aunswered chur
                        〈1 line〉
                     shly.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 6. Sect. 5.
                     If we giue honoure and reuerence to none, let vs not only haue none againe, but let vs be had as those that are vnworthy to liue amongst men. I feare there be of those, which are your fauourers, Ecclesiasticall persons, that if they should meete with my Lord Mayor of London, woulde streine curtesie, whether he or they should put off the cappe first. We giue the titles of Maiestie, to the Queene our soueraygne, of grace, to Duke and Duches, of honoure to those whiche are in honoure, and so to euery one, according to their estate. If we misse, it is not bycause we are not willing, but bycause we know not always what perteineth vnto them, and then our fault is pardonable. For answering churlishly, Wher nothīg is mentioned of it, but it is referred (by like) to this place, and from hence posted ouer thither agayne. it is answered before in the seuenth Article.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Iudéede the Anabaptists in the end reiected all authoritie of superiours, and refused to giue vnto them their due titles and reuerence, yet when they had for a time obtayned their owne desire they tooke that to themselues most ambitiously, which they refused to giue to other. You are not so farre gone as yet in all states, but in the contempte

of the state Ecclesiasticall, you may compare with them to the vttermost: what you will do in the end touching the ciuill Magistrate (if you obtaine your desire) I will not determine, but leaue it to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of such as shall peruse these our bookes of such controuersies.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 20. Article. Page. 4. Sect. 10.
                  They attributed much vnto themselues, and pleased themseluesBul. Fol. 85. very well, other men they contemned, and therefore their mindes were full of pride and contempt.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 6. Sect. 6.
                     With acknowledging of our manyfold wants and ignorances, we doubt not also to take vpon vs, with thanksgiuing, that knowledge, whiche God hath giuen to euery of vs according to the measure of faith: we seeke not to please ourselues, but the Lorde and our briethren, yea all men in that whiche is good. We reuerence other mens giftes, so as we thinke the contempte of them, redoundeth to the giuer. Therefore although the cominon infection be in vs, yet we hope pride dothe not reygne in our mortall bodies.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Well for the right application of this Article, I will go no further than to thys your owne booke. Surely if the rest of your fellowes haue the same spirit, there was neuer Anabaptists in these qualities to be compared vnto you. But I thinke better of some of them, so would I haue done of you also, if I had not séene the contrary in you, euen sithence our first acquaintance, but especially, sithence the time, wherein vpon iust occasions, I began to stirre you: and now most euidently in your Replie, yea this very answer of yours to this article, verifyeth the same to haue place in you, whiche in this 20. Article is ascribed to the Anabaptists.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The. 21. Article. Page. 4. Sect. II.
                  They went not to preach in suche places where the Gospell wasFol. 88. not planted, but only they insinuated themselues into those places, wherein the Gospell had bin diligently preached: and where there were godly and quiet men: there they made a sturre, they raysed vp factions and bredde discord.
                  
                     T. C. Page 6 Sect. vlt.
                     We hold that it is no ministers part, to choose his owne place where he will preach, but to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        arieHow happenet
                              〈1 line〉
                            it then that so many of you flocke togither at London▪ who calleth you? vntill he 
                           〈1 line〉
                        e chosen of others. Likewise, that he insinuate not himself, but abide a lawful calling, & therfore this cannot agree to vs, but to those rather, which cōtent themselues with a rouing & wandering ministerie, and defende the ministers owne presenting and offering himselfe or euer hee bee called.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               And why haue you then hitherto chosen such places to remaine and preach in, as London. &c. Where the Gospell without you, and before your tyme was planted? why haue you there and in suche like places disquieted the Churche and sowen the séede of contention? What calling haue you had in those places, which you might not haue by the selfe same meanes in other places also, where the Gospell is not so well planted? Truly this note is so common to all Anabaptists, and so notorious, that IZuinglius. know very few writing against the Anabaptists, which do omitte it Zuinglius reporteth it of them in his Elenc: contra Anabap. In his Ecclesiastes diuers times, and in hysGastius. booke 
                     de Baptismo. Gastius likewise, in his booke de exordio & erroribus catabaptist. which they would not do, if it were not a note worthy to be noted. Surely I thinke that I

am able to proue diuers of you to haue ins
                     〈1 line〉
                  ated yourselues to places (which pleased you) before you were) called therevnto▪ And I 
                     〈◊〉
                   of that iudgement, that a man 
                     〈◊〉
                   lawfully so 
                     〈◊〉
                   if h
                     〈1 line〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   to do 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   to profite▪ For S. Paule saith Lint. 3.A man may offer his helpe in the ministe tie in some respect. 
                  
                     Qui episcopatum &c If a man desire the office of a Bishop. &c. Which place by the iudgement of all the interpreters that I haue red, doth signify that a man may offer himselfe with a mind to do good, so that he do not intrude himselfe, or séeke by vnlawfull1. Tim. 3. meanes to obtaine that which he desireth: for then it is like that he séeketh not to profite other, but to profyte himselfe.
               If there be any tou
                     〈1 line〉
                  g or wandring ministers it is amongst yourselues, which wander 
                     〈1 line〉
                  p and downe, from place to place to low co
                     〈1 line〉
                  tion, and to deface by 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   reports suche as mislike your pocéedings. Any other that may so truly and 
                     〈1 line〉
                  tly bée called rouers and wanderers I know none.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The 22. &. 23. Articles Pag. 5. Sect. 1. 2.
                  They sought to be free from all lawes, and to do what they list.Fol. 95.
                  
                  They were animated by crafty and suttle Papistes, whiche dydFol. 11. seeke the ouerthrow of the Gospell, and the restoring of Papisme.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 7. Sect. 1.
                     I, answer as to the fifth, and touching the. 23. referre the reader to a further answer in that place, where occasion is offered to speake of it agayne.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               And for iust application of the. 22. Article I referre you to the 60. and. 61. Page of the second Admonition, where I would haue you consider, what their meaning is by that Prouiso, that they would haue for themselues, and by that exemption that they require to haue from the iurisdiction of the Bishops, Iustices of Peace. &c. It is not amisse also to weigh what the equalitie meaneth that they séeke for among the Clergie, and the state of the Segniorie, where the Pastor must be the cheefe of what degrée soeuer the rest of the seniors be, whether Earles, Barons. &c.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  The 24. Article. Page. 5. Sect 3.
                  To be short the people had them in great admiration, bycause ofFol. 11. their hypocrisie, and streightnesse of life, and such as were of contentious natures ioyned with them, and commended their doings.
                  
                     T. C. Pa▪ 7. Sect. 2.
                     So farre foorth as we may (for the infirmities wherewith we are inclosed) we indeuoure to adorne the doctrine of the Gospell, which we professe, we seeke not the admiration of men (if God do giue, that we haue honest reporte, we thinke we ought to mainteine that, to the glory of God, and aduancement of the Gospell. What is our straightnesse of life any other, than is required in all Christians? we bring in I am sure no monachisme or anchorisme, we eate and drinke as other men, we liue as other men, we are apparelled as other men, we lie as other men, we vse those honest recreations that other men do, and we thinke there is no good thing or commoditie of life in the world, but that in sobrietie we may be partakers of, so farre as our degree and calling will suffer vs, and as God maketh vs able to haue it. For the hypocrisie that you so often charge vs with, the day shall trie it. If any man ioyne with vs, with mind to contend, it is against our will, notwithstanding Who is so blind as he that will not see? we know none; and what great stirrers and contenders they be which fauour thys cause, let all men iudge.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               These be faire speaches, sooner said than proued: I accuse you not of these matters, I do but report the qualities of the Anabaptists, if your owne consciences accuse you, or if you will néedes applie these things vnto yourselues (as I haue said before) I can not let you.
            
            
               
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation &c. Pag. 5. Sect. 4. 5.
                  These were the maners, conditions, practises, and proceedings of the Anabaptistes in Germanie, before they vttered their seditious and monstrous heresies.
                  I leaue the application hereof to your wisedomes, who easily can coniecture, what kind of mē they be that come nearest to these steps. Onely I desire you to be circumspecte, and to vnderstande that Anabaptisme (which vsually followeth the preaching of the Gospell) is greatly to be feared in this Church of Englande, and almost playnely professed in this Admonition, the authors whereof agree wyth them in these forenamed practises and qualities.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 7. Sect. 3.
                     Doe you thinke to mocke the worlde so, that when you haue so vniustly, and so haynously accused, you may wipe your mouth, and saye as you dyd before that you will not accuse any? and as nowe, that you leaue the application? Is not this to accuse, to say that the authors of the Admonition doe almost playnely professe Anabaptisme? Is not this to apply, to say that they agree wyth the Anabaptistes in A falsificatio
                              〈1 line〉
                            for 
                              〈1 line〉
                           e addeth this word▪ all▪
                         all the forenamed practises and qualities? you woulde faine strike vs, but you would doe it in the nyghte, when no man shoulde see you, and yet if you haue to doe agaynste Anabaptistes, you neede not feare to proclayme your warre agaynst them: you haue a glorious cause, you shall haue a certayne victorie. I dare promyse you, that you shall haue all the estates and orders of this Realme to clappe, their handes and sing your 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , and triumphant songes. But that you woulde conuey your sting so priuily and hissingly, as the Adder doth, it caryeth with it a suspicion of an euill conscience, and of a worse cause, than you make the worlde beleeue you haue.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Truely I am in good earnest: I mocke not: I greatly feare Anabaptisme, which is an heresie that hath many branches, and créepeth in secretely vnder notable pretenses: and therefore I thought it conuenient to gather these notes together out of suche learned & godly writers as haue had experience of them, the which also I haue more at large set oute in the seconde edition of my booke. If this offende you, the offence isPage. 19. &c. taken and not gyuen: you are not able to accuse me iustly hetherto of any vntruth. I accuse none, bycause I knowe none, that will openly professe himselfe to be one, or playnely affyrme any article which is of the substance of theyr heresye. But I sée diuers walking in the same steppes that the Anabaptistes dyd, towardes theyr heresyes: and therefore I thoughte it my duetie to admonishe those that be in authoritie to take héede of them (Let men apply them as they sée cause, and haue experience) there can be no hurte in that, it shall make them the more circumspect, and arme them agaynst the hypocriste of diuers. Howe the authors of both the Admonitions do agree with the Anabaptistes, in these forenamed practises, I haue declared in my answere to your Reply.
               You falsifie my wordes when you affyrme, that I say they agree wyth the Anabaptists in all the forenamed practises, and qualities, for I haue not this vniuersall signe all: if they agrée with them in many, they are to be suspected. I thinke the Anabaptistes themselues, as they haue diuers and seuerall opinions in doctrine, so had they also sundrie qualities concerning lyfe and conuersation: and yet some there are which be common to them all. I know that all the estates and orders of this Realitie hate Anabaptisme: I require not your promyse for that matter, which you offer vnto me Satis pro imperio. I know their detestation of that heresie, and therefore I am holde to open these practises & qualities vnto them, least they may by some mens hypocrisie, and close dealing be deceiued. My words and writings be publike, my speaches plaine, and therefore if I sting, it is openly inoughe. The priuie hissers and stingers, he those that secretelye

smyte theyr neighbour, and hisse at them in their absence at tables, and in corners, and sting them behinde their backes, whē they are not present to answere for themselues: Such adders and Scorpions, swarme among you.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation &c. Pag. 5. Sect. 6.
                  Moreouer it may please you to consider the conditions & practises of the Donatists, who deuided them selues frō the congregation,Donatistes. and had their peculiar Churches, or rather conuenticles, in Africa. They taughte also that all other Churches were spotted and impure, bycause of their Ministers. Finally, that there ought to be no compulsion vsed in matters of Religion and fayth, and that none should be punished for their conscience.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 7. Sect. 4.
                     Nowe you carie vs from the Anabaptistes in Europe, to the Donatistes in Affricke, and you will paynte vs wyth their colours, but you want the oyle of truth, or 
                           〈◊〉
                         of truth, to cause your colours to cleaue and to endure. The Lorde be praysed, that your breath although it be 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        anke, yet it is not so strong yt it is able eyther to turne vs, or chaunge vs into what formes it pleaseth you. I shall desire the reader to loke Theodoret lib. 4. de fabulis Haereticorum & Augustin, ad quod-uult-Deum: and in his firste and second bookes agaynst 
                           〈◊〉
                         Letters, where he shall fynde of these heretikes, that by comparing them wyth these, to whome M. Doctor lyk
                           〈1 line〉
                        eth them, the smoke of this accusation mighte the better appeare: For these sclaunders are not worthe th
                           〈1 line〉
                         answering. To this diuision from the Churches, and to your supposed conuenticles, I haue answered. They taught that there were no true Churches but in Affrica, we teache nothing lesse, than that there is no true Churche but in Englande. If the Churches be considered in the partes, whether Minister, or people, there is none pure and vnspotted, and this is the faythe of the true Churche, and not of the Donatistes: if it be considered in the whole and generall gouernment and outwarde pollicie of it, it may be pure and vnspotted, for any thing I knowe, if men would laboure to purge it. The Donatists vaunted themselues to be exempted from sinn
                           〈1 line〉
                        , and what lykelyhoode is there betwene any assertion of the authors of the Admonition, and this fansie of the Donatistes. To the last poynt of no compulsion to be vsed in matters of Religion denying it to be true, I referre the further answere to an other place.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               This that I haue set downe of the Donatistes is all true, neyther can you disproue one word of it. I write so much of their practises as he correspondent to the doingsThe admonitors compared with the Donatistes. of the Authors of the Admonition. The Donatistes deuided th
                     〈1 line〉
                  mselues from the co
                     〈1 line〉
                  gregation, and had peculiar Churches, or rather conuenticles in Affrica. These also deuide themselues from the Churche. And although they tye not the Churche of Christ to any one corner, yet haue they their seuerall Churches, and secrete meetings. The 
                     〈◊〉
                   made thys their excuse, why they departed from other Churches? bycause they were not pure and vnspotted, and their ministers of euill life: These men for the lyke causes separat
                     〈1 line〉
                   themselues from the Churche also. The Donatistes woulde haue no 
                     〈◊〉
                   vsed in 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Religion, and fayth: These men in effecte be lykewise mynded: for they woulde haue no 
                     〈◊〉
                   punishement vsed, which may appeare 
                     〈1 line〉
                  y that which is written in the second 
                     〈◊〉
                   fol. 57. where they saye that it 
                     〈◊〉
                   not to make any lawes 
                     〈◊〉
                   m
                     〈1 line〉
                  ere 
                     〈◊〉
                  , bycause the gouernment of theSecond Admoni. fol. 57. Churche is 
                     〈◊〉
                   per 
                     〈◊〉
                   the worde, and fol. 56. and in 
                     〈◊〉
                   plates else they speake to the lyke purpose, whereof occasion willbe g
                     〈1 line〉
                  uen hereafter better to consider.
               Augustine in his 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  de haeresibus ad quod-vult-
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  heweth that some of the DonatistesAug. de baeresib ad quodvult. were also Arians, but not all, 
                     〈◊〉
                   some of them were Circumcellions, of which secte 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in the place by you cyted: But what is all 
                     〈◊〉
                   to▪
                  Lib. 4 de fab. Haeret. the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ? 
                     〈1 line〉
                   speake 
                     〈1 line〉
                  ot of their opinions, nor of all theyr conditions, but of such

onely, wherein these that separate them selues in oure dayes, séeme to agrée wyth them. Similia (as you knowe) agrée not in all poyntes, it is sufficient if they doe in those things in quibus 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Neyther doe I anye otherwyse reporte of them, than M. Caluine him selfe doth in his booke against the Anabaptistes: and Augustine with others that write of them.
               Surely neyther in the whole, nor in parte can the Churche be vnspotted in this world, no not in the outwarde pollicie and gouernment of it: neyther doe I thinke that you are able to shewe any examples of suche Puritie: we haue to the contrarie euen in the Apostolicall Churches in the Apostles tyme, as the Churche of Corinth, and of the Galatians. Maister Caluine in hys booke aduersus Anabaptistas is directly against you, and in déede I thinke that you are not able to shewe one learned writer of your opinion in this poynt.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation &c. Pag. 5. Sect. 7.
                  To conclude, these men flatly ioyne with the Papistes, and by the selfe same assertions, bende their force against this Churche of Englande.
                  
                     T C. Pag. 7. Sect. vlt.
                     Salomon sayth that the beginnyng of the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ordes of an vnwise man is folyshnesse, b
                           〈1 line〉
                        t theEcclef. 10. ver. 13. latter ende of them is mere madnesse: euen so it 
                           〈◊〉
                         oute by you; for whilest you suffer your selfe to be caryed headlong of your affections, you hurle, you knowe not what, nor at whome, whatsoeuer commeth firste to hande, and speake things that the eyes, and eares of all men, fee, and heare, to be otherwyse: 
                           〈◊〉
                         yo
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         them to the Anabaptistes, and Donatistes, 
                           〈◊〉
                         friende of yours mighte thinke, you sayde 
                           〈◊〉
                        , bycause suche alway
                           〈1 line〉
                        s seekyng darke and solitarie places, myghte happely haue some fauourers, whych are not knowne. But when you ioyne them wyth the Papistes whych are commonly knowne to all men, whose doctrine they imp
                           〈1 line〉
                        gne, as And yet in defacing and depr
                              〈1 line〉
                            uing this Church of England they fully ioyne wyth them, and so 
                              〈1 line〉
                           oe not I. well as you, whose markes and badges they can lesse awaye wyth than you, whose companie they flie more than you, whose punishment they haue called for more than you for your parte haue done, and therefore are condemned of them as 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ruell, when you oftentymes carie awaye the name of myldnesse and moderation, whych forsothe knowe (as you haue professed) no commandement in the Scripture to put heretickes to death: when I saye, you ioyne them thus wyth the Papistes, you doe not 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nely 
                           〈◊〉
                         your credite in these vntrue furmises (wherein I truste wyth the indifferent reader your neuer had any) but you make all other things suspected, which you 
                           〈◊〉
                        , so that you gyue 
                           〈◊〉
                         occasion to take vp the common prouerbe agaynst you, I wyll truste you no farther than I see you. After you haue thus yoked them with the Papistes, you go aboute to shewe wherein they drawe wyth them. Wherein I fyrst aske of you, if all they that affyrme or doe any thyng that the enimyes of the Churche doe, are forthwith 
                           〈1 line〉
                        oyned and conspired with them against the Church? what I say, that neither Christe nor Paule ioyned either with Gentil
                              〈1 line〉
                           , Phariseis, or false Apostles against the church say you to S. Paule that ioyned wyth the (*) Pharise
                           〈1 line〉
                        sAct. 23. v. 6 in the resurrection, with the false Apostles in taking no (*) wages of the Corinthians, our2. Cor. II. v. 12. Sauiour Christ, which spake agaynst the Jewes which were then the onely people of God, as the Gentils dyd which were their enimyes, will you saye therefore that eyther Sainte Paule
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Cor. 9. ioyned wyth the Phariseys or false Apostles, agaynst the Churche, or that our Sauiour Christ ioyned agaynst the Jewes wyth the Gentils? but let vs see your slaunders particularly,
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               The same Salomon sayth, that in the mouthe of the foolyshe is the roote of pride.Pro. 14. &c. Euen so it falleth oute with you: for whylest with suche proude wordes you séeke to dryue at me, you doe but condemne your selfe of follye. Pylate and HerodeMen of contrarie iudgements ioyne togither against the truthe. were at enimitie betwi
                     〈1 line〉
                  te them selues, and yet they wyned together againste Christ: The Phariseis and Saduces were of contrarie opinions, yet were they both enimyes to the doctrine of Christ. The Turke and the Pope be of contrarie Religions, yet doe they both conspire agaynst the Gospell: Papistes and Anabaptistes agrée not eyther in opinion or in societie, yet doe they both séeke to deface the Church of Christe: Euen so they, thoughe they impugne the doctrine of the Papists neuer so 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
                  ly, & cast away their markes and badges neuer so farre from them, though they cannot

abyde theyr companie, yet doe they wyth them by the same assertions, (thoughe not by the same argumentes) assaulte this Churche of Englande, and bende their force against it. Dyd not the seditious Iewes within Ierusalem, ioyne wyth the Romains beyng their enimyes, inprocuring the destruction of that Citie? you are not so ignoraunt as you woulde séeme to be, I am sure you vnderstande my meaning.
               Howe or where you haue called for the punishement of the Papistes more than I haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   and therefore you counted cruell, and I made and moderate, certaynely I knowe not, I heare onely your selfe saye so. What I haue done, and where, I minde not to bragge of at this time, I leaue that for you.
               What I haue professed concernyng the putting to deathe of Herotickes, the same doe I professe still, and am ready thereof to gyue an accompte at all tymes as I shal be required: although neyther you, nor any man else, haue heard me teach that doctrine, or professe it: but thys is one of your glances by the waye: when occasion is gyuen me to speake of that matter I wyll plainely vtter my conscience by the grace of God, In the meane tyme, it is no cause why I shoulde be better thoughte of among the Papistes, for bothe theyr practise and theyr doctrine is eleane contrarie.
               To your question I answere, that if they doe that against the Church, which the enimyes doe against the same, then doe they in that conspire wyth them against the Churche: and therefore all your example
                     〈1 line〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   vsed are to no purpose at all. For Saynt Paule ioyned wyth the Phariseys and wyth the false Propheteo in those thyngs which were allowed of the Churche, and for the commoditie of the Church, and therefore in no respecte agaynst the Churche, the same answere I make to the example of Christe iustly reprouing the Iewes: if you woulde haue vsed apte examples for your purpose, then shoulde you haue broughte in suche as beyng of contrarie iudgementes, haue notwythsta
                     〈1 line〉
                  dyng soughte to ouerthrowe one and the selfe same thing, althoughe by diuers meanes: But then shoulde you haue concluded agaynst your selfe, as you must of necessitie dee. So that here where you would séeme to say much, you haue saide nothing at all.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation &c. pag. 5. Sect. vlt.
                  First the Papistes affirme that we are not the true Churche, no, that we haue not so much as the outward face and she we of the true Church, and so doe these men almost in flat and playne termes.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 8. Sect. 1.
                     They doe not denie but there is a visible Church of God in England, and therefore your sayings of them, that they doe almost in plaine and flat termes say, that we haue not so muche as any outwarde face and shewe of the true Church, argueth that you haue almost no loue in you, whieh vpon one word once vttered, contrarie to the tenour of their booke, and course of their whole life, surmise this of them, and how truely you conclude of that word (scarce) it shall appeare when we come to that place.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               They doe in playne and flat termes write as muche as I doe reporte of them in this article: for a manyfest proofe thereof 
                     〈1 line〉
                   referre the reader to the. 6. page of the seconde Admonition, and the. 53. of the first Admonition: and to the whole discourse of both. My (almost) is equiualent to they▪ searse. But whosoeuer shall well considèr the tenour of theyr bookes, and the course of their lyfe, may easily vnderstande, that both I myghte haue leftē oute my almost, and they theyr scarse, lykewise.
            
            
               
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation &c. Pag. 6. Sect. 1.
                  Secondly the Papistes say, that we haue no ministerie, no Byshops, no pastours, bicause they be not rightly and canonically called to these functions: the selfe same do these men affirme.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 8. Sect. 2.
                     I haue answered this in the seconde article of Anabaptisme, that you charge vs with.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Then haue I answered the same there also.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation. &c. Pag. 6. Sect 2.
                  Thirdly the Papistes say that our Sacraments be not rightly ministred: and so say they likewise.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 8. Sect. 3.
                     This is also answered in the thirde.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               That is, you haue there closely confessed this to be true. But that the reader may vnderstande that it is most truely verifyed of them, let him peruse that which is written in the seconde Admonition. fol. 43. where they saye, the sacraments be wickedly2. Admon, fol. 43. ministred: and in the first Admonition. fol. 89. and that also that followeth in thys booke.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation. &c. Pag. 6. Sect. 3.
                  Fourthly the Papistes wholy ▪condemne our booke of common prayers, set out by publike authoritie, and the whole order of our seruice: in that poynt do these men fully ioyne with them also, for they condemne it wholy, and that with most bitternesse.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 8. Sect. 4.
                     I answere, that they doe not condemne it wholy, but finde fault with it, as in some poynts disagreeing with the word of God.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               For the proofe of this article, reade the first Admonition. fol. 85. 86. &c. 148. &c. the seconde Admonition fol. 9. 10. 38. 39. &c.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation. &c. Page. 6. Sect. 4.
                  Fiftly the Papistes would not haue the Scriptures read in the Church to the people: no more would they. For they saye, reading is not feeding, but as euill as playing on a stage and worse to.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 8. Sect. 5.
                     All men shall perceyue, when I come to that place, howe you haue racked their wordes to an other sense, than they spake them, in the meane season it is inoughe that they confesse that readyng in the Church is godly.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Io. Whitgifte.
               It is wel that you confesse it to be godly, it wil appeare when I come to that place, that the authors of the Admonition, both write and thinke farre otherwyse, excepte they write one thing and thinke another.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation &c. pag. 6. Sect 5.
                  Sixtly the Papists denie the ciuill Magistrate to haue any authoritie in Ecclesiasticalll matters, and so doe they.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 8. Sect. 6.
                     I haue answered in the Where you haue not spoken one word of it. tenth article of Anabaptisme.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Your answere is there very confused, and vncertaine: but for the proofe of this article, I referre the reader to certaine notes which I haue collected out of your booke touching this matter in this my defense.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation &c. pag. 6. Sect. 6.
                  To be short, the Papistes refuse to come to our Church, to Communicate with vs in the Lordes Supper: and these men would not haue them by lawes and punishment compelled thervnto.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 8. Sect. vlt.
                     I answere that Doeg, when he saide that Dauid came to Abimilech, sayde nothing but truth, and when they that witnessed against Christ that he sayde, destroy the temple, and in three dayes I will build it vp againe, saide nothing but that our sauiour Christ sayde. But yet Doeg was a slaunderer, and the other, false witnesses: bycause the one spake of minde to hurte, and the other vnderstoode it of another temple, than our sauiour Christ ment it: so although you do in parte rehearse their wordes, yet taking them contrary to their meaning (which might easily appeare by the circumstances) I see not howe you can bee free from these faultes, vnlesse it be done ignorantly, which I wishe were true for your owne sake. And here I wyll desire thee gentle reader, to marke with what conscience this man sayth, that they are ioyned and confederate with the Papistes agaynst the Church. The Papistes mislyke of the Booke of common prayers for nothing else, but bycause it swarueth from their Masse booke, and is not in all poyntes lyke vnto it. And these men mislyke it, for nothing else, but that it hath to much lykelyhoode vnto it. And iudge whether they be more ioyned with the Papistes, which woulde haue no communion or fellowship wyth them, neyther in ceremonies, nor doctrine, nor gouernment, or they, which forsaking their doctrine, reteyne part of theyr ceremonies, & almost their whole gouernment: that is, they that separate themselues, by three walles, or by one, they that woulde be parted by the broade sea from them, or which woulde be beuided by narrowe water, where they maye make a bridge to come agayne, and displace the truth of the Gospell, as they haue done in tymes past: They that woulde not onely vnhorse the Pope, but also take awaye the styrrops, whereby he shoulde neuer get into the sadle agayne: or they that beyng content wyth that, that he is vnhorsed, leaue his ceremonies and his gouernment especially, as styrrops, whereby he maye leape vp agayne when as occasion serueth. They that are content, onely to haue cut the armes and body of Antichristianitie, or they which would haue stumpe, and roote all vp.
                  
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               Better it is to haue a bad excuse than none at all. Their words and meaning is playne, as shal appeare when I come to thē. I thinke in déede their meaning is, that they would not haue them cōpelled to come to our Churches, and to communicate in the Lordes supper with vs, as it is nowe ministred: For it is well knowne, howe they themselues refuse to do the same, and howe they haue defaced both this Church, and the manner and forme of administring the Sacrament: what they woulde doe, if they might haue their owne deuised reformation, and haue the lawe in their owne handes, I can not tell, but it is very lyke that they woulde be sharpe and seuere

inough in compelling men to come. I speake of their opinion touching the compelling of men to come to our Churche, vnto the whiche they come not themselues.
               That whiche followeth in your Replie, I haue sufficiently answered before,Pag. 51. where I haue declared, howe that it is no straunge thing for men of cleane contrarie iudgementes and opinions, to ioyne togither in oppugning one and the selfe same truthe. The Papistes pretende one cause of misliking the booke of Cōmon prayers, and they pretende an other cause of misliking the same, do they not nowe both ioyne in defacing and ouerthrowing it? That which followeth is but words, those things whiche they reproue in that booke be godly, and moste of them not to be bettered. The persons that stande in the defense of that booke, haue all poyntes of Papistrie in as great detestation, as they, and peraduenture greater, for they so occupie themselues in these externall thinges, which be of small importance, that in the meane time theyThe Admonitors gratifie the Papists. slippe ouer matters of weighte and substance, euen the principall poyntes where in we differ from them. Wherefore this comparison of yours standeth vpon a false grounde. For I am fully persuaded, that you and they doo the Pope great good seruice, and that he woulde not misse you for any thing. For what is his desire, but to haue this Churche of Englande (whiche he hathe accursed) vtterly defaced, and discredited, to haue it by any meanes ouerthrowne, if not by forreyne enimies, yet by domesticall dissention. And what fitter and apter instrumentes coulde he haue had for that purpose than you, who vnder pretence of zeale, ouerthrowe that whiche other men haue buylded, vnder colour of puritie, seeke to bring in deformitie, and vnder the cloke of equalitie and humilitie, would vsurpe as great tyrannie and loftyEqualitie made a cloke for ambition. Lordlykenesse ouer your parishes, as euer the Pope did ouer the whole Churche? For who should be the chiefe man of the segniorie but the Pastor, what state and degrée of men soeuer else were in that parishe, yea the Prince hir selfe? looke their Admonitions, and especially the seconde, and this booke also: and tell me whether it be so or no? Wherefore these glorious wordes of yours be but mistes to blinde the eyes of the simple, in lyke manner, and to the like purpose vsed of the Anabaptistes agaynst Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, and suche like sincere professors of the wordIn the second edition of the answere to the Admonition. of God. Peruse the notes that I haue collected, not onely out of Bullinger, but out of Zuinglius, and Gastius also, and you shall sée them in all poyntes to vse these plausible pretences, and to accuse their aduersaries after the like maner.
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  An exhortation, &c. Pag. 6. Sect. vlt.
                  Heereby it is manyfest, that the Papistes and they ioyntly doe seeke to shake, nay to ouerthrow the selfe same foundations, groundes, and pillers of our Churche, althoughe not by the selfe same instrumentes, and engines. Wherefore it is tyme to awake oute of sleepe, and to drawe oute the sworde of discipline, to prouide that lawes, whiche be generall, and made for vniformitie, aswell of doctrine as ceremonies, be generally & vniuersally obserued, that those which according to their consciences and duty execute them, be mainteined, and not discouraged. Either boldly defend the Religion & kind of gouernment in this Realme established, or else (if you can) reforme and better the same: for it can not be but that this freedome giuen to men to obey and disobey what they list, to speake what they list, against whom they list, and where they list, to breche what opinions & doctrine they list, must in the ende burst out into some strange & dangerous effect. The Lord both graunt vnto you that be Magistrats, the spirit of gouernment, and to all other that be subiects, the spirite of true obedience. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  T. C. Pag. 9 Sect. 1.
                  After you haue all to be blacked and grimed with the inke of Anabaptisme, Donatisme, andNote the mildenesse of the 
                           •
                        an in this section. A charitable surmise. Papisme, those whome you founde cleare from the least spot or specke of any of them: You whette the sworde, and blow the fire, and you will haue the godly Magistrate minister of your choler, and therefore in stead of feare of leesing the multitude of your liuings, forgoing your pompe and pryde of men, and delicacie of fare, vnlawfull iurisdiction, which you haue, and heereafter looke for, conscience, religion, and establishment of the common wealthe muste be pretended. What haue you forgotten that which you sayde in the beginning, that you accused none, but suspected certayne? would you haue the sworde to be drawne vpon your suspicions? But now you see, that they, whom you haue accused, are nothing like either Anabaptistes, Donatistes, or Papistes, and your selfe moste vnlike to him that you professe to be, and that you see, that all your sclaunders are quenched by the innocencie (as it were by water) of those men, whome you so haynousely accuse: you are to be put in minde of the lawe of God, which decreeth, that he which accuseth an other, if he proue it not, shall suffer the punishment, which he should haue done, agaynst whome the accusation had binOther similitudes might haue beseemed you better. iustly proued. The Romanes did nourishe in Capitolio, cer
                        •
                     yne dogges, and geese, which by their barking and gagling, should giue warning in the nighte, of theeues that entred in: but if they cried in the day time, when there was no suspicion, and when men came in to worship, then their legges were broken, bicause they cried when there was no cause. If therefore he haue accused iustly, then is he worthy to haue his diet allowed him of the common charges: But if otherwise, we desire not that his legges may be broken (as theirs were) but this we humbly craue, that if this our answere do not sufficiently purge vs, that we may be sifted and searched nearer, that if we nourishe any suche monstrous opinions (as are surmised) we may haue the rewarde of them: if we doe not, then at the least, we may haue the good abearing, agaynst suche sclaunderous tongues, seeing that God hathe not onely committed vnto the Magistrate, the safetie of our goodes and life, but also the preseruation of our honest reporte.
               
            
            
               Io. Whitgifte.
               
                  
                     Conuicta impietas dum non habet quod respondeat, conuertit se ad conuitia. Vngodlynesse being conuicted, when she is destitute of a good answere, turneth hir selfe to reprochefull wordes: but your heate of wordes, and forgetfulnesse of dutie and reuerence, I passe ouer with silence. The multitude of liuings which I haue, I do enioye by law, and may retayne (I thanke God) with a farre better conscience, than T. C. did one liuing for the space of certayne yeres, and would haue done still with all his heart, if he mighte haue bin winked at, thoughe it were expresly agaynst his othe. My pompe is very small, my pride of men is but according to my calling, it were more for my profite if I had fewer. My delicate fare is very simple: I haue witnesses inowe of it, peraduenture if you were kept to that diet, it would not be with you as it is. If my iurisdiction be vnlawfull, I am content it be reformed, it is according to the statutes of the Colledge where I am (to the which T. C. hathe bin sworne) and to the lawes of the Realme. What I heereafter looke for, it is harde for you to iudge: But I most humbly thanke my heauenly father, that in all this storming of yours, wherein you haue blowne out agaynst me what you could possibly imagine, you haue only vttered your boyling stomacke, and not touched me in any thing, whereof I néede to be ashamed, which surely you would haue done if you could.
               I whet the sworde no otherwise agaynst you, than christian charitie and the state ofThe sword of discipline necessarily called for. the Church requireth. It is neither the sworde that taketh away life, nor fire that consumeth the body, which I moue vnto, but it is the sworde of correction and discipline, which may by sundrie other meanes be drawne out, than by shedding of bloud. That sword of discipline, I call for still, and say wyth Zuinglius: If it be permitted that eueryIn his Epistle before his booke called Ecclesiastes. man may freely defend his errors, and spread abrode in the Church false doctrine, there wil be more contentions, sectes and discorde among Christian Churches, than euer there was among Infidels. And again, If euery man may without controlment preach among the people his own priuate phansie and opinion, contrary to the determination and authority of the Church, it will shortly come to passe that we shall haue more errors than Christians.
               
               If I haue accused any man vniustly, there is a lawe, whervnto I am subiecte: but your words are not of that weight, neither your defense suche, that therefore they please or satisfie wise men, bicause you speake them. If they can say no more for them selues than you haue sayd for thē, then they must remayne still in the same suspicion.
               If there be any iust cause why ye shoulde haue the good abearing agaynst any man, if you will come foorthe, and orderly require it. I am sure you may haue it. But oh the mildnesse, the patience, and the quietnesse of this spirite of yours.
               
                  
                  To the godly Readers, grace and peace from God, &c.
                  
                     TWo treatises ye haue heere ensuing (beloued in Christ) which ye muste reade without 1. Thes. 5. 21 Iam. 1. 19. 20 Iam.▪ 2. 1. parcialitie or blinde affection. For otherwyse you shall neither see their meaning: nor refrayne your selues from rashly condemning of them without iust cause. For certayne men there are of great countenance, whiche will not lightly like of them, bicause they principally concerne their persons and vniust dealings▪ whose credite is great, and whose friends are many, we meane the lordely Lords, Archbishops, Bishops, Suffraganes, Deanes, Doctors, Archdeacons, Chauncellours, and the rest of that proude generation, whose kingdome muste downe, holde they neuer so harde: b
                        〈1 line〉
                     cause their tyrannous Lordship can not stande Math. 15. 23 Luc. 16. 15. with Christes kingdome. And it is the speciall mischiefe of our Englishe Churche, and the chiefe cause of backwardnesse, and of all breache & dissention. For they whose authoritie is Mat, 20. 25. 26. Mat. 23. 8. 9 10. Mar. 10. 42. 43. Luc. 22. 15. &c. forbidden by Christ, wil haue their stroke without their felow seruants, yea, though vngratiously, cruelly and Popelike they take vppon them to Mat. 24 48 49. beate them, and that for their own childish Articles, beeing for the most part against the manyfest truthe of God: First, by experience their rigour hathe too playnely appeared euer since their wicked raigne, and specially for the space of these fiue or sixe yeres last past togither. Of the enormities, whiche with suche rigour they maynteine, these treatises do in parte make mention, iustly crauing redrèsse thereof. But the matters do require a larger discourse. Onely the authors of these, thoughte it their partes to admonishe you at this time, of those inconueniences whiche men seeme not to thinke vpon, and whiche without reformation, can not but increase further dissention: the one parte beeing, proude, pontificall, and tyrannous: and the worde of God for the other parte expresse and manifest, as if it pleased the state to examine the matters, it woulde be euident. And woulde to God, that free conference in these matters might be had. For howsoeuer learned and many they seeme to be, they should & may in this realme find inowe, to match them and shame them too, if they holde on as they haue begonne. And out of this realme they haue all the best reformed Churches throughout Christendome agaynst them. But in a fewe wordes to say what we meane. Either muste we haue a right Math. 9. 37. 38. Ephe. 4. 11. 12. ministerie of God, and a right Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17. gouernment of his Churche, according to the Scriptures set vp (both which we lacke) or else there can be no right religion, nor yet for contempt thereof can Pro. 29. 18. Amos. 8. 11. 12. &c. Ma. 21. 23. &c. 1. Cor. 11. 30 Gods plagues be from vs any while differred. And therefore though they linke in togither, and sclaunderously charge poore men (whome they haue made poore) with grieuous faults, calling them Puritans, worse than the Donatists, exasperating & setting on such as be inauthoritie agaynst them, hauing hitherto miserably handled thē with r
                        〈1 line〉
                     uilings▪ depriuations, imprisonments, banishments, & suche like extremities, yet is these poore mens cause neuer the Mat. 10. 16. 26. worse: nor these chalengers the better: nor God his Esai. 59. 1. hand the further of to linke in with his agaynst them: nor you (christian brethren) must neuer the rather without examination Exo. 23. 1. 2. Mat. 7. 1. 2. Iam 4. 11. 12 condemne them. But thankfully take this taste whiche God by these treatises offereth you, and weigh them by the worde of God, and do your endeu
                        〈1 line〉
                     ur, euery man in his 1. Cor. 5. 20 1. Cor. 7. 27 calling, to promote his cause. And let vs all with more Psal. 50. 15. Mat. 7. 7. 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2 earnest prayer than we are wont, earnestly commende it to God hys blessing, and namely that it will please him by his spirite to lighten the heart of our most gracious Soueraigne, and the rest in authoritie, to the benefite of his small flocke, and the ouerthrowe of their proude enimies, that godlinesse may by them proceede in peace, and God his glory through Iesus Christ, be throughly aduaunced. Whiche we call God to witnesse, is our onely labour and suite. And so presently we leaue you: hartily beseeching God to graunt it.
                  Amen.
               
            
         
         
            ¶ An answere to the Preface of the Admonition.
            
               THese two treatises contayned in this Admonition, as they be voyde of sound learning, so are they full of blinde affection, and stuffed with vncharitable and vnchristianArrogancie and vnchristian speches of the Libellers. termes and phrases. Wherfore it is to be feared, that they proceede not of loue, but of hatred, not of zeale, but of malice, not of humilitie, but of arrogancie, not of minds desirous to reforme, but of stomackes seeking to deforme and confounde that which is in due forme and order by lawfull authoritie established. For what charitable, zealous, and humble spirite, would so spitefully and slaunderously speake of their brethren, whose doctrine is pure, whose zeale is feruent, whose suffering for the Gospell hath beene in time of triall comparable with any mans that nowe liueth: who

haue also paynefully taught the worde of God in this Realme, and do at this day, and by whose ministerie the Gospell hathe taken roote, and is come to that encrease that nowe (God be thanked) appeareth. Surely these opprobrious termes, Proude generation, tyrannous Lordships, vngracious, cruell, Popelike, wicked raygne, proude enimies. &c. applied to brethren, proceede not from the humble and mylde spirite of God, but from the proude and arrogante spirite of Sathan. Therefore by this vnseemely Preface, it may appeare from what spirite the rest of this Admonition springeth. Touching the crueltie and rigourPretended persecution. these men complayne of, I shall neede to speake little, beeing manyfest to all that be not with sinister affection blynded, that lacke of seueritie is the principall cause of their licentious libertie. But who seeth not their hypocrisie, whiche woulde make the worlde beleeue that they are persecuted, when they be wyth too muche lenitie punished for their vntollerable contempte of good lawes, and other disordered dealings? Nay suche is their peruersnesse, or rather arrogancie, that if they be debarred, but from the least parte of their wyll and desire, by and by they crie oute of crueltie and persecution, it is to bee doubted what these men wyll doe when persecution commeth in deede, whiche nowe make so muche of a little, or rather of nothing. As for this great bragge,Stout brags. For howe soeuer learned and many they seeme to be, they shoulde and maye in this Realme finde 
                  〈1 line〉
               owe to matche them, and shame them too, if they holde on as they haue begonne, Satis arroganter dictum est, and verifieth that to bee true, that is commonly spoken of these kinde of men, that is, that they contemne all other in comparison of them selues: that they thinke them selues onely zealous, onely learned. &c. But it is possible that they maye be matched, and I knowe no man of learning, afrayde to encounter wyth them, either by worde or wryting. Touching the ministerie and gouernmente of the Churche, what faultes there is to be therein founde we shall vnderstande, when we come to their reasons. God graunt vs humble and meeke spirites, that godly vnitie may be maynteined in the Churche.
            One thing I muste desire thee to note (gentle Reader) (wherein the folly of these men maruellously appeareth) howe they haue paynted the margent of their booke with quoting of Scriptures, as though al were scripture they write, when as in deed they abuse the scripture and thee For what one place of scripture is in all thys Preface alleaged to any purpose, and yet how many is there quoted?
            To proue that we must reade these two treatises without partialitie or blinde affection, heere is noted in the margent. 1. Thes. 5.Scriptures abused in the Admonition. verse. 21. Iam. 1. Iam. 2. The place to the Thessaloniās is this: Trie all thinges, and keepe that vvhiche is good. The place of of the firste of Iames is this: VVherfore my deare brethren, let euery man be svvifte to heare, slovve to speake, and slovve to vvrathe. And the seconde place of Iames is this: My brethren, haue not the faythe of our Lorde Iesus Christe in respecte of persons. And to what purpose are these places alleaged? what proue they? or what neede is there to alleage them?

These Apostles in these places speake not of rayling Libels, but ofScriptures wrested. hearing the worde of God, and iudging of matters of faythe, according to the truthe, and not to the persons.
            To proue that tyrannous lordship can not stande with Christes kingdome, they alleage the. 15, of Matth. and Luke. 16. The place in the. 15. of Math. verse. 23. is this: But he ansvvered hir not a vvorde then came to him his Disciples, and besought hym, saying: sende hir avvay for she cryeth after vs. In the sixeteenth of Luke it is thus: Then he sayde vnto them, ye are they vvhiche iustifie your selues before men, but God knovveth your heartes: for that vvhiche is highly esteemed among men, is abhomination in the sighte of God. I would gladly knowe howe their assertion, and these two textes hang togither. I allowe not tyrannous lordeship to stande with Chrystes kingdome: But it may well inoughe for any thing in these two places to the contrarie. Tyrannous lordship is not esteemed among men, but hated.
            
               ¶ The Replie vnto the answere of the Preface.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 9. Sect. 2.
                  IT maye be sayde vnto you, that whiche Aristotle sayde of a certayne Philosopher, that he knew not his owne voyce: For if that you had remēbred that which you do so often promise, that you will not answere wordes, but matter, the Printer shoulde not haue gayned so muche, men should not haue bestowed so muche money of a thing not of so greate value, nor that (whiche is more) the worlde shoulde not bee burdened with vnprofitable writinges. For howe often runninges out haue you, to drawe the authors of the Admonition into hatred, by inueyghing bitterly agaynst their vnlearnednesse, maliciousnesse. &c. (as it pleaseth you to terme it) so that if there were any excesse of speeche in them, you haue payde it agayne with measure pressed downe, and running ouer. Howe often charge you them with pride and arrogancie, men that confesse once or twice of them selues their wante of skill, and whiche professe nothing of them selues, but onely a bare and naked knowledge of the truthe, whiche maye be done with modestie, euen of them which haue no learning. And yet those that know them, know that they are neither voyde of the knowledge of the tongues, nor of the liberall Artes, albeit they doe not make so many wordes ofPro. 11. v. 9 it, as you. Salomon saythe, that he that is despised, and hathe but one seruaunte, is better than he whiche magnifieth and setteth out him selfe, and yet wanteth bread: whereby he meaneth, that the man that hathe but a little, and carieth his countenance accordingly, is muche more to be esteeined, than he whiche beareth a greate porte, and hathe not to supporte it. These brethren haue not vndertaken the knowledge of Logike, Philosophie, and other schoole learning, whereof notwithstanding they are not destitute: you in so often reproching them, with the ignorance of them, woulde make vs beleeue, that you are so notable a Logician, and Philosopher, as if Logike and Philosophie had beene borne with you, and shoulde dye with you: when as it may appeare partely by that whiche hathe beene spoken, and partely by those thinges, that will fall out heereafter, that you are better acquaynted with the names of Logike and Philosophie, than with any sounde, or substantiall knowledge of them. But let that be the Uniuersities iudgement, where you haue beene brought vp, and are best knowne. To returne to your vnprofitable excursions, howe often times in your booke doe you pull at the Magistrates sworde, and what sworde you woulde haue, I leaue to the consideration of all men, seeing you are not satisfied with their imprisonment: wherevpon also dothe eusue the expense of that whiche they haue. What matter is in all these, that bringeth any helpe to the decision of these causes, that are in question betweene vs? howe many leaues haue you wasted in confuting of the quotations, whiche (you saye) areThoughe they be vayne, yet were they alleaged of them for sounde proofes, and therfore necessarily con
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        ted. vayne, foolishe, vnlearned, and to no purpose of that for whiche they are alleaged? And if they be so, where learned you to spende so muche time aboute them: dyd you neuer learne that 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . to confute It is no tri
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        ing thing to abuse the scripture. tri
                        〈1 line〉
                     ing thinges seriously, is a poynte of those, whiche haue no iudgement to knowe what is meete for the tyme and place, and other suche circumstaunces? If I You would if you could, seing they are the foundation and groundes of that 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ooke. shoulde of the other side nowe goe aboute too mayntayne euery place, too bee not vnfitly quoted, vnto that ende, wherfore it is alleaged, and shewe howe vniuste your reprehensions are, and howe small cause you

haue to leade th
                        〈1 line〉
                     in oftentimes, so gloriously in triumphe (as you do) which I assure you I could do in the most places. As what could be more 
                        〈1 line〉
                     tly alleaged, to induce to reade the booke, than that they shoulde trie all things? what more fitly to holde men from rashe condeinning of thinges, than that they shoulde be slowe 
                        〈1 line〉
                      speake? what more fitly to moue that they shoulde not 
                        〈1 line〉
                     illike of the goodnesse of the cause, for the simplicitie or base degree of them that defende it, than that we shoulde not haue the saythe of our Lorde Iesus Christe in respecte of persons? And what more vmustly done than that you should whip them for the Printers faulte, in putting one place for another? If, I saye, I shoulde thus goe aboute to make good euery place, howe euill should I deserue either of learning, or of the truthe it selfe, in blotting of muche paper, whereby no profite woulde come to the Reader? And if the dayes of a man were as many as the dayes of an oke, I woulde neither willingly trouble, nor be troubled, with suche strife of wordes. Seeing therefore, God hathe shut vs in so narrow
                        〈1 line〉
                      termes, me thinke men shoulde haue conscience of pestering the worlde, with such What mente you then to pester the worlde with your
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                      vnprofitable treatises.
               
               
                  Pag. 10. Sect. 1.
                  Therefore all these, and whatsoeuer else wandring wordes, I shall meete with in thys booke, I ineane (by Gods grace) as deade things and nothing worthe, to burie with silence, and will answere to these things, which couch the matters that lye in controuersie betweene vs. And as for the vnlearnednesse, blind zeale, malice, intollerable pride, contempt of all good orders, and twentie such more things, wherwith M. Doctor chargeth vs, if our life and conuersation doth not confute them sufficiently, our wordes and profesiion of our selues will not doe it. And therefore we will first stay our selues, with the testimonie of our owne consciences, and then in the equitie of the iudgement of all those, which shall indifferently consider these things that we are charged wyth. And as for the sworde that is so hotly and hastily called for, we hope it be in their handes, whiche will vse it better than they are by you directed.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I thinke those that shall reade my booke, with indifferent iudgement, will saye that I haue perfourmed my promise: and am as spare in words without matter, as conueniently I coulde be, and muche more sparing than you are, either in this place where you haue nothing but wor
                           〈1 line〉
                        es, or in the reste of your booke. The vaiue of my booke, and the vnprofitablenesse of it, I referre to the iudgement of others. I haue done my dutie in it (as I am persuaded) and satisfied my conscience.
                     I doe inueighe agaynst the authors of the Admonition in no otherwyse and sorte, than modes
                           〈1 line〉
                        ie, and the cause it selfe requireth: If I haue, shewe the particulars, note the places. I speake not of their knowledge and learning, otherwyse than it is vttered in their booke. I neither despise them in suche sorte, nor magnifie my selfe: I leaue that to you and yours, and thereof I require the testimonie of this your owne booke.
                     I boast not of anye profounde skill in Schoole learning, (I thanke God for that whiche I haue) I refuse not the Uniuersities iudgement of me, from the time of my firste béeing Sophister vnto this day. I thinke it hathe béene, and is better persuaded of me than I am worthy, whiche appeareth in that it hathe layde vpon me (as muche as vpon any one man) from time to time, from my firste péeping out, vnto this day, all the publyke exercises in all sciences that I haue professed, without my séeking, nay agaynst my will: and I trust that I neither haue in dooing of them disgraced hir, nor shamed my selfe. But surely I am ashamed thus to brust out to the defense of my selfe, if I were not therevnto compelled by your vnciuill and opprobrious spéeches.
                     My excursions be necessarie. I pu
                           〈1 line〉
                         no o
                           〈1 line〉
                        tener, nor in any other manner, nor at any other sworde of the Magistrate, than the state of the Churche, my office and vocation, and charitie it selfe requireth: neither doe I meane the authors of the Admonition onely, but their adherentes also. Surely I beléeue that by that meanes these controuers
                           〈1 line〉
                        es woulde shortly be ended, and the Churche kept in great quietnesse and good order.
                     The confutation of the quotations was most necessarie, and it is that, that doth pincheThe bayne quotations were necessarily confuted. you moste sharpely. True it is, that they be vayne, vnlearned, and to no purpose, and yet vsed as groundes of that Admonition, and the doctrine therein contayned. Wherfore the opening of the va
                           〈1 line〉
                        itie and vnap
                           〈1 line〉
                        nesse of them, is the ouerthrowe of that booke: which the common sorte thought to be all Scripture, and nothing else but Scripture,

and therefore the doctrine therein conteyned to be moste true, when as in déede the Scriptures be there as manifestly wrested, and vnfitly vsed as they be of the Papis
                           〈1 line〉
                        es and Anabaptistes. And therefore thoughe they were vaynely alleadged of them, yet were they necessarily confuted by mée. M. Caluine in his booke against the Anabaptistes, sayth, That they winne credite with those that bee zealous, bycauseCaluin 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              duers. they pretende the woorde of God, and haue it alwayes in their mouthe. And thereforeAnabap. though their allegations be friuolous, yet doth he spende muche labour in detectyng them: euen so saye I, you pretende the woorde of God in all thyngs, and thereby you doe deceyue the godlie and zealous people: wherefore it is expedient, that your groundes be layde open, to the intente it maye be knowne howe crookedly and euill fauouredly you buylde vpon them.
                     If you coulde mayntayne euery place, or manie of the places, I dare say you would, but surely I commende youre Khetorike. Those places that you woulde séeme to giue some countenaunce vnto, bewray your lacke of abilitie to defend eyther them, or the reste. For you answere not one woorde to the reasons, for the whiche I disallowe them, nor to the true sense and meaning whiche I giue of them. Truely if you shoulde thus goe aboute to make them good, in so dooing you shoulde doe your cause no greate good. But here you haue wholly omitted, the. 15. of Mathewe, and the. 16. of Luke. The one whereof though it be corrected, yet it is in a maner as farre from the purpose as it was before, as it maye ap
                           〈1 line〉
                        eare in the Additions and alterations, &c. at the ende of the fyrste booke. Your woordes of pleasure whyche folowe, bycause they bée but woordes, I wholly omitte them, as I will also doe in many other places, where I shall fynde nothyng else, least I make this Booke longer than is conuenient.
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Whether Christ forbiddeth rule and superioritie vnto the Ministers. Tractat. 1.
            
               The true interpretation of the twentith of Mathew. &c, Reges gentium. &c.
               
               
                  Chap. 1. The fyrst Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvereto the Admonition. Pag. 13. Sect. 3.
                     TO proue that they whose authoritie is forbidden by Christe, wilScripture
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ested. haue their stroke without their fellowe seruauntes. &c. is quoted,The tru
                              〈1 line〉
                            exposition of the 20. of Math. &c. 
                        Math. 20. Math. 23. Marke. 10. Luke. 22. In the. 20. Math. it is thus written: Yeknovve that the Lordes of the Gentiles haue domination ouer them. &c. In the. 23. of Mathew, Be ye not called Rabbi, for one is your doctour or teacher, to vvit, Christe. The places in Marke and Luke be al one with that in the 20. of Mathew. The conclusion that is gathered of these places is very darke and generali: they shoulde haue declared who they be that haue this authoritie forbidden, and what the authoritie is. Touching these places aileaged in the. 20. of Mathew. 10. of Marke. 22. of Luke, Musculus and dyuers other learned men thinke, that they extend not onely to the Apostles, and menne of the Clergie, as wee call them, but to all Christians, of what state so euer they be. And it is the common opiuion of al wryters, that these woordes of Christ doe not condemne superioritie, Lordeshippe, or any suche lyke authoritie, but the ambitious

desyre of the same, and the tyrannicall vsage thereof.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 10. Sect. 2. &. 3.
                     To come therfore vnto the matter out of the places of the. 20. of Mathewe, and the. 22. of Luke, where our Sauiour Christe, vppon occasion of the mordinate request of the sonnes of zebede, putteth a difference betweeneThis is is a note of your owne deuising. the ciuill and ecclesiasticall function, he placeth the distinction of them in two poyntes, whereof the one is, in theyr office, the other is in theyr names and titles.
                     The distinction of the office, he noteth, in these wordes, the kyngs of the Gentiles haue dominion ouer them, and the Princes exercise authoritie ouer them, but it shall not be so with you. Wherevpon the argument may be thus gathered, that wherin the Ciuill magistrate is seuered from the Ecclesiasticall officer, dothe not agree to one minister ouer an other. But the Petitio principij. ciuil magistrate is seuered from the Ecclesiastical officer by bearing aequiuoeatio. dominion. Therfore bearyng dominion doth not agrec to one minister ouer an other.
                  
                  
                     Page. II Sect. 1. &. 2.
                     Touching their names and titles, he putteth a difference in these wordes: And they are called Gratious Lordes, but it shall not be so vvith you. And so the argument may be framed as before, that forasmuche as they are seuered in titles, and that to the Ciuill minister doth agree the title of gracious Lordes, therefore to the Ecclesiasticall minister the same dothe not agree. For as it is fitte, that they whose offices carrie an outewarde maiestie and pompe, shoulde haue names agreeable to their magnificence, so is it meete, that those that God hathe remoued from that pompe and outwarde shewe, shoulde lykewyse bee remoued from suche swellyng and loftye titles, as doe not agree with the simplicitie of the ministerie whiche they exercise. And whereas it myghte seeme somewhat vniust, that he that hath the greater giftes, shoulde not be preferred to those whiche haue lesse, our sauiour Christe sheweth that the matter is farre otherwyse. For by how muche euery man dothe excell his fellowe in the gifts of the holye Ghost, by so muche more he ought to employe himselfe to the benefyte of others: so that in a maner he shoulde become (as it were) theyr seruaunt to doo them good, whiche although it be in parte, common to the ciuill magistrate, with the minister of the worde, yet he dothe neuer lette downe hymself so lowe, nor giueth his seruice eyther to the Churche or common wealth, but that he dothe and ought in that seruice to retayne that dignitie and countenaunce, with the markes and notes therof, whiche his Princely estate dothe require.
                     In the ende he propoundeth hymselfe for example, in whome he setteth before theyr eyes a perfecte paterne of the ministe
                           〈1 line〉
                        . For seeyng he beeyng Lorde, tooke vpon hym to be a seruant, and beyng Emperour and kyng of heauen and earth, was content to want all the glorie & shewe of the worlde (his ministerie so requiryng) it shoulde be great shame for them whiche were his disciples, chosen out for the ministerie, not to content themselues, but to aspire vnto suche offices and dignities, as they dreamed of.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You saye that Christ in that place putteth a difference, betweene the Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall functions, and that in two poyntes, in theyr office, and in their names and titles: the distinction of the office (you saye) he noteth in these wordes. The Kings of the Gentiles. &c. of their names and titles these: And they are called gratious Lordes, &c. Wherevpon you conclude, as though all were cocke sure.
                        But I pray you tell me, whervpon do you gather that Christ maketh any such distinction here, eyther of offices, or titles? In déede he woulde haue a difference bothe betwixte the authoritie of his Disciples and other Christians, and the dominion of Heathenishe Princes: and also betwixt theyr affections in desiryng the same: and therefore dothe he expressely saye, The kings of the Gentiles. &c. If he had ment any suche distinction of offices or titles, as you woulde make vs beléeue, he would haue sayde, The Kings and Princes of the Iewes, &c. or rather Kings and Princes, without anyGouernment not forbidden of Christ, but the kinde of gouernment. further addition: but séeing that he sayth the Kings and Princes of the Gentiles, it is manyfest, that he forbiddeth not onely to his Disciples, but to all Christians such tyrannicall kynd of gouernment as the Gentiles vsed, and that ambitious desyre and affection of the same whiche ruled in them. For Chryste vseth to call backe those that bée his from errours and corrupt affections, by the example of the Gentiles, as he doth in the. 6. of Mathew from too much carefulnesse for meate & drink, & such lyke. 
                              Nam omnia ista gentes exquirunt, For after all these things do the Gentils seeke:
                           
where he dothe not forbidde them to séeke for meate, drynke, and clothing, but to séeke for it too carefully, and with mistrust of Gods prouidence, as the Gentiles did. In lyke maner here he forbiddeth not gouernment, either in the ciuil or Ecclesiasticall state: but he forbiddeth suche gouernment as the Gentils vsed, and such corrupt affections as they had in desiring the same.
                        Touchying your argument, I saye it hath two faultes. Fyrst, it is a fallacion,Two faultes in the argument of T. C. 
                           à petitione principij, for you take it as graunted, that the Ciuill Magistrate is seuered from the Ecclesiasticall officer, by bearyng dominion, whyche I will not simplye graunte vnto you, for that is partely oure question. Secondly, your minor is ambiguous,The ciuill Magistrate doth not simply biffer from the Ecclesiastical, by bearing dominion. and therfore in that respect, your argumente may be also placed in the fallacion of aequiuocation, for the worde Dominion, may haue diuers significations: It may signifye suche dominion as Christe speaketh of in this place, that is, rule with oppression. It maye also signifie the absolute authoritie of a Prince, suche as is mentioned. 1. Samuell. 8. Thyrdely, it maye signifie any peculiar office of superioritie and gouernment vnder the Prince, at the appoyntment of the Prince, as theDiuers significations of the word Dominion. authoritie of a Iudge, Iustice. Maior. &c. Laste of all, it may signifye any iurisdiction or kynde of gouernment. If you take it in eyther of the two fyrst significations, your minor is true: if in either of the two latter significations, it is false. For wée graunte, that there is greate difference betwixte the dominion of Kings and Princes, and betwixte the Jurisdiction and authoritie of Bishoppes. Kings haue power ouer lyfe and goodes. &c. so haue not Bishops. Kings haue authoritiie in al causes, and ouer all persons withintheir dominions, without any limitation: if Bishops haue any suche dominion, especially in Ciuill causes, it is not in the respects they be Bishops, but it is from the Prince, and limited vnto them.
                        Touching theyr names and titles (you saye) he putteth a difference in these woordes, and they are called gracious Lordes, but it shall not be so with you. &c. The woordes of the twentith of Mathewe bée these: And they that are greate, exercise authoritie ouer them. In the. 10. of Marke, the same woordes be vsed. In the. 22. of Luke, the Gréeke woorde is 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , 
                              benefici vocantur, they are called bountifull, or beneficiall, whyche I sée not howe you can by anye meanes applye to your purpose: For Mathewe and Marke referre thys clause, It shall not bee so among you, not to anye name, but to the ambition and tyrannicall kynde of dominion, whyche our Sauioure Christe there reproueth, as it is moste manyfeste. And therefore thys place of Luke, muste also bée expounded by them. Neither is this woorde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , of any suche imperiousnesse, that Chryste shoulde forbydCaluinus. hys Disciples the name. M. Caluine in his Commentaries interpretyng these woordes of Saincte Luke sayeth thus: As touchyng the woordes: where Mathewe hath, that kings exercise authoritie ouer them, in Luke wee reade, that they are called bountyfull, in the same sense: as though he shoulde saye, Kings haue plenty of all thyngs, and are very ryche, so that they maye bee bountyfull and liberall: And a little after he sayeth, that they doe 
                              appetere laudem munificentiae, desire the commendation of bountyfulnesse. I knowe that certayne of the Kynges of Egypte were called 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , 
                              munifici & benefactores, bountifull and benefactours: and that they were delyghted to bée so called. I know also that among the Hebrues theyr Princes were called Munifici & liberales per antonomasian: But what then? if eyther they vaynegloriously desyred that name, or were so called, when they deserued rather the names of Tyrantes and oppressoures, dothe it therefore followe, that they be vnlawfull names for suche as maye deserue them? The moste that can bée gathered of this place (for any thyng that I perceyue) is, that the Kings of the Gentiles had vayne and flattering titles giuen them, béeing nothing lesse in déede than that whiche their names did signifie: and so maye it bée a good admonition for menneHowe the wordes, Vos autem non sic, may be reserred to names. to learne to answere to theyr names and titles, and to doo in déed that whiche by snche names and titles is signified. Nowe then if you will haue 
                              Vos autem non sic, but it shall not bee so wyth you, to bée a prohibition to all Christians, and especially

to Bishops, that they shall not ambitiously seeke dominion as the Gentiles dyd: vniustly and tyrannously vse their authoritie, as they also dyd: nor haue names and titles to the whiche they doe not accordingly answere, no more than the Gentiles did, then I agrée with you. But if you will haue Vos autem non sic, to restrayne them from being called 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , that is, liberal benefactors. &c. as your interpretatiō agréeth not with the wordes of the other two Euangelistes, so doth it not wyth any learned interpreter that I haue read.
                        To your argument concerning names and titles, I answere as I did to the former.Diuers kyndes of names. Some names & titles are proper to the ciuil Magistrate only, as the names of Emperor, King, Prince, Duke, Erle. &c. These names are not giuē to any of the Clergie in this Church to my knowledge: some names are cōmon to the Ciuill Magistrate,Names common to ciuill and Ecclesiastical persons. with Ecclesiasticall persons, as certaine names of reuerence, of superioritie, & of office. The name of Gratious Lorde, is a name of superioritie, and of reuerence, according to the manner of the countrey where it is vsed, and therefore may well agrée, eyther to the ciuill or Ecclesiasticall persons: and in many places, dyuers are called by this name Lord, (which is in Latin Dominus,) for reuerence and ciuilitie; whiche haue verie small dominion. As for the name of Archebishoppe or Metropolitane, that is not proper to any ciuill Magistrate, and therfore without the compasse of your argument. Thus then you sée, that some titles are proper to the ciuill Magistrate, some to the Ecclesiasticall, and some common to both, wherby your maior is vtterly ouerthrowne. As for this worde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , vpon the whiche you séeme to grouude your argument, I see not why it may not be common to all men, that shewe themselues liberall and beneficiall.
                        There is no man denyeth but that there is, and must be great difference betwixt the pompe and outwarde shewe of a Prince, and the state of an Ecclesiasticall person, bothe in titles and other maiestie: and I thinke that he is verie blynde, that séeth it not so to be in this Churche of England: yet may the Ecclesiasticall person shewe foorth the countenance of his degrée, whervnto he is called of God, by his Prince, and by the lawes of that realme wherein he is a subiect.
                        It is true, that an Ecclesiasticall Minister doth much differ from a ciuil MagistrateMinisters may execute some kinde of ciuill iurisdiction. touching his ministerie and spirituall calling, yet is he not so distincte, that he may exercise no such ciuill office wherein he may doe good, and which is an helpe to his Ecclesiasticall function. As the ciuill Magistrate may in some thynges exercyse iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall, and medle in matters of the Churche, so may the Ecclestasticall person in some causes vse ciuill iurisdiction, and deale in matters of the cō
                           mon wealth, if it shall be thought expedient or necessarie by the chiefe Magistrates.Caluine. 
                           M. Caluine in his Commentaries vpon this texte, thoughe in some poyntes he agréeA temporall lorde may be a preacher. with you, yet hath he these woords. Adde herevnto, that Christe did not so muche respecte the persons of men, as the state of his Churche, for it may so bee, that he which is Lorde of a village or citie, doe also (necessitie constraining) exercise the office of teaching. Wherby it is playne, that a temporall Lorde (if necessitie require) maye together with his Lordship become a preacher of the Gospel. M. Brentius in his. 48. HomilieBrentius. 
                           What kynde of external do minion is denyed to ministers. vpon Luke, speaking of this matter sayeth, that Bishops whiche glorie themselues to be the successours of the Apostles, may not vnder the pretence of their Ecclesiasticall office vsurpe externall dominion ouer kings and Princes, to make kings whom they list, and to displace whome they liste. And by and by he obietteth and answereth as followeth, Therefore thou wilte say, it is not lawfull for a minister of the Churche (whether thou callest hym a Bishop or a preacher) to haue temporall dominion, and to gouerneWhat kind of temporall dominion a Minister may exercise. the people committed vnto him by ciuill pollicie? I answere that it is not lawfull for a Minister of the Churche to vsurpe suche rule and dominion, vnder the pretence of the Gospell, and of his Ecclesiasticall Ministerie: Peter muste not therefore haue dominion ouer Antioche or Rome, bycause he is an Apostle. &c. But if temporall dominion or possession happen to the minister of the Gospell, eyther by inheritance, or ordinarie election, or any other Ciuill or lawfull contracte. &c. then maye he enioye these

externall thyngs. &c. And in his. 52. Homilie, vppon these woordes of Christ noweIdem. in question, he wryteth thus: VVhat shall wee then saye to these thyngs? bycause Chryste sayeth: The kyngs of the Nations beare rule ouer them, and are called bountyfull,
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . but it muste not bee so among you, shall it not bee lawfull for a Christian man to beare rule in a temporall kingdome, and acknowledge the tytles of honoure, as of bountyfulnesse and clemencie, whyche are gyuen vnto Princes? Is it not lawfull also for a Bishop, to haue temporall dominion? Christe in thys place dothe not thynke it vnlawfull for Christians, to bee Magistrates, neyther dothe he forbidde Bishoppes to haue externall dominion. But he sheweth a difference betweene the kingdome of thys worlde, and his kingdome. He teacheth, that the kyngdome of this worlde and his kingdome are so distincte, that he which is a minister of his kingdome, must not in that respecte vsurpe the kingdome of this worlde: for the Apostles thought, that bycause they were Apostles, therefore they shoulde possesse the kingdomes of the worlde. And therefore Christe in this place condemneth their false opinion. &c. Christe doth not condemne Magistracie among Christians. &c. No, he dothe not forbidde Byshops to haue externall dominion, if they come vnto it by inheritaunce, or by lawfull election. It is a verye harde matter bothe to preache the Gospell, and to exercyse temporall dominion, and yet it is not of it selfe vnlawfull together with the ministerie, to keepe and vse temporall dominion, if it come ordinarily and lawfully. For Christe came not to trouble ciuill lawes, and the ordinarie gouernmentes of the kingdomes of this worlde, but rather that these being preserued, his Gospell might be preached quietly. Haec Brentius.
                            But of ciuill authoritie in Ecclesiasticall persons, occasion wil be giuen to speake more at large hereafter.
                        That which Christ sayde, 
                              Quicun
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  maior erit inter vos. &c. VVhosoeuer will be greatQuicun
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  maior erit inter vos. &c. expounded. among you, let him be your minister: though it may especially appertaine to the Apostles, yet it is also a generall rule for all Christians, and so is the example of him also, whiche hée propoundeth vnto them. And so doth Musculus verie truly interprete this place, to whome M. Bucer agréeth, whose woordes be these: The AnabaptistesBuce
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  in. 20. thynke here that they are able to proue, that it pertaineth not to a Christian to beare rule,Mitth. and that no man can be together a Magistrate, and a Christian, bycause Christe saydeThey which
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ear rule godl
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 y, serue. here to his Disciples, Vos autem non sic, not consydering that those, whyche godlylle and according to the wil of the Lord beare rule, Nihil minus quàm dominari, imò maximè seruire, & tantò pluribus, quantò pluribus praefuerint, doe nothyng lesse than beare rule in deede, yea verily doe moste of all serue, and euen vnto so many doo they serue, ouer howe manye so euer they beare rule: surely Christe woulde haue his Apostles to haue their authoritie in Churches, and they themselues did greately require to be obeyed: but bycause in that they sought nothing vnto themselues, but only saluation aud the glorie of God in those whome they ruled, they did gouerne the Churches: they had euery where the superioritie: they ruled suche as beleeued: they woulde haue the godlie to bee obedient vnto them: interim nihilominùs seruierunt omnibus, dominati sunt nemini, And yet in the meane tyme serued all, and had dominion ouer none: So also in the Ciuill gouernmente, who was euer in greater dignitie than Moses, or more to bee feared for his authoritie and power? and yet who euer serued mo, more diligently, and more humblye, whiche neuer soughte any thing for himselfe, or tooke any thing vnto himselfe. &c. but day and nighte to the vttermoste of his power, sought for the safetie of the people. &c. If any now so beare office, and rule the workes of the handes of the Lorde, and gouerne the sheepe of his pasture according to his will, what doth he else but serue all those whom he gouerneth? AndThe place of Math. 20. generall. therefore Christ doth not here dehort from bearing rule, and being a Magistrate, but from seeking rule and dominion: for I had rather take this saying of the Lord in this generalitie, than to restrayne it to the Apostles only: Eò quòd omnino pius Magistratus seruiat non dominetur, habeat
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  per se omnia secundum praesentem domini cohortationem: Bycause a godlie Magistrate doth altogether serue, and not beare rule, and hath by himself all things agreeable to this present exhortation of the Lord. Thus you sée Bucers iudgemente vppon these wordes of Christe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. I. seconde Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 14. lin. 11.
                     And it is the common opinion of all writers, that these words of Christe doe not condemne superioritie, Lordeship, or any suche like authoritie, but the ambitious desire of the same, and the tyrannicall vsage therof.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 11. Sect. 3. &. 4.
                     Agaynst this is sayde, that the places doe nothing else but condemne ambitious desire, and tyrannicall vsage of authoritie, and doth not barre the ministers of these things.The Bishop of Salis burie so allegeth this place in his defēse of the Apologie against M. H
                              〈1 line〉
                            ding. pag. 65
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                        
                     
                     Then belyke all those godly and learned men, whiche haue vsed these places to proue that the Pope, whiche professeth himselfe to be an Ecclesiastical person, ought not to haue the ciuil sword, nor to vsurpe vnto himselfe suche glorious pompe, haue abused them. For you teache hym, howe he shoulde answere, that there is nothing forbidden but ambition and tyrannie, and in dede this is the answere of all the Papistes to that obiection.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Those godlie and learned men whiche haue vsed these places agaynste the Pope,These places are rightly vsed against the Pope, notwithstanding this interpretation. haue rightly vsed them, and if it had pleased you, you might haue vnderstode, that in the verie next leafe folowing I say: that these places may be aptly alleaged against the pryde, tyrannie & ambition of the Bishop of Rome, which seeketh tyrannically to rule, and not to profit, but not against the laufull authoritie in any state of men. They therefore alledge it truly,The Popes dominion such as Christ here forbiddeth. and yet you vntruly expounde it, for the Popes dominion is suche, as is in this place forbidden, that is vsurped and tyrannicall, bicause he hath not onely entred into the spirituall kingdome of Christe, and sought to reigne in mennes consciences, but also pulleth from Princes the power of earthly dominion, saying that he hath that immediatly from God, and the Emperours and Princes immediatly from him. And so doe the learned expounde this place, and it is their answere to the obiection of the Anabaptistes. I fully agrée with my L. of Salisburie his allegation of this place, for Bishops may not be kings, nor haue any such ciuill dominion, as the Pope claymeth and vsurpeth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. I. Diuision. 3.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 14. Sect. 1. & Pag. 15. Sect. 1. &. 2.
                     
                        Musculus expounding these places sayth in this sorte: VVho soMusculus. euer vvill be great among you. &c. He saith not, no man ought to be chiefe among you, vvhich he should haue said, if it had not bin lawful in the kingdome of God for some to be great and chief, or if it had bin necessarie, that all should haue bene in all things equal: the Celestial spirits are not equall: the Starres be not equall: the Apostles themselues vvere not equall: Peter is founde in many places to haue bene chiefe among the rest, vvhich vve do not denie. Therfore this is not Christes meaning to haue none greate or chief among Christians, seing the verie necessitie of our state requireth that some be superiours and betters, so farre is it from being repugnant to charitie. In a common vveale it is necessarie that some should excell other, so is it in a vvell ordered familie: In like maner there must be in the Churche gouernours, presidentes, rulers, of vvhome Paule maketh mention, Ro. 12. 1. Co. 12. Heb. 13 as ther is also in the bodie some principal mēbers,

some inferiour. &c. Therfore Christ doth not require that in his kingdom all should be equall, but this he doth require, that none should desire to bee great, or to be thought and counted chiefe. Hitherto Musculus.
                     
                     Which interpretation must needes be true, else we may saye that Christ in this place reiecteth and disalloweth the Princes and Magistrates of the Gentiles, and also forbiddeth the same among Christians: which is false and Anabaptisticall.
                     Likewise the same Musculus saith, that Christ teacheth in thys place, what he ought to be indeede that desireth to beare rule ouer other, to witte, that he ought to be a seruāt to other, that is (as he doth interpret it) to profite other, and to serue for the commoditie of other: for though the name of a prince and of a Lord be a name of honoure and dignitie, yet is it the office of a Prince and Lord to serue those which be vnder them, in gouerning of them carefully, and in prouiding for their welth and peace.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 11. Sect. 5. &. 6.
                     But Musculus a learned man is of that iudgement.This is a simple answer to oppose one 
                              〈◊〉
                            authoritie against another. And master Caluine as learned as he, and diuers other are of that iudgement that I haue alleadged: this is no great proofe on your side, nor reproofe of ours: let vs therfore see the reasons wherwith this expositiō is warrāted. A false collectiō vpon master Musculus hys words. Musculus reason is this, that if he should haue inent that the Apostles should haue bin equall and none greater than an other, then there should be equalitie of all, and none should haue authoritie ouer other. And so there should be no degrees of the Prince and subiect in the common welth, of master and seruant in a family, of people and minister in the Church. But it is no good reason to say there is, nor ought to be, any inequalitie amongst the Apostls, therfore there is none, nor ought to be none at all. Or to say there is no inequalitie amongst the pastors, therefore there is no inequalitie betwene the pastours and the people. For as the common wealthes, and families, and Churches are preserued by inequalitie, and in that some are higher, and some are lower, some rule, and some obey: so are the same likewise preserued by equalitie of certaine amongst themselues, as albeit the Ministers may haue dominion ouer the people, but one of them must not be aboue another. 1. they may rule but not be ruled. Consuls in Rome were aboue other officers, and the people, yet were they equall betweene themselues. Examples against himselfe And although it be the preseruation of the familie, that the master should be aboue the seruant, and the father aboue the sonne, yet it tendeth also to the quiet of the house, that the seruants amongst themselues, and the brethren amōgst themselues, should be equall. And so we graūt, that for the preseruation of the Church, it is necessarie that there be some should beare rule, and other should be vnder their rule, but I denie, that thereof followeth that one minister should beare rule ouer another. Whereas master Musculus saith that Peter was found in many places chiefe among the rest, if he meane as Eusebius cap.. 14. lib. 2. doth, which saith that he was Eusebius not truly translated. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . or his vertues and gifts he had, one that spake before the rest, and in the name of the rest, (which he seemeth to do in that he doth not absolutely giue any chieflie vnto him, but only in certaine places) I agree with him, and do not denie, but suche chieflie may be amongst the ministers, as shall appeare more at large hereafter.
                     This interpretation of master Musculus (master Doctor saith) must needes be true, or else Christ should reiect Princes and Magistrates, amongst both Christians and other. I haue shewed that it doth not follow bycause he forbiddeth that rule vnto the ministers, therefore he forbiddeth it simply and altogither, no more than the law which forbiddeth that any straunger should be king of the realme, forbiddeth therefore that there should be no king of the realme. Whereas you say master Musculus teacheth how he ought to rule which ruleth, and what he ought to be, I haue told you before, other thinke otherwise, and therefore you hauing set downe his iudgement before, needed not to haue repeated it here againe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Not only master Musculus doth so expound this place, but also Bucer and sundry others, both old and newe writers: as Chrisostome, Theophilact &c I knowe that M. Caluine doth otherwise thinke of it, but that is no sufficient answer to Musculus hys reasons. The firste reason of Musculus you collect on this sort: If Christe should haue meant, that the Apostles should haue bin equall. &c. then there should be equalitie of all: wherein you deale with Musculus, as you deale with me: that is, you make his arguments against his expresse words: for where doth Musculus reason in that manner?Musculus his reasons vpon the. 20. of Math.
                        
                        The first reason of Musculus is this. If Christ had ment that it should not be lawful in the kingdome of God for some to be great and chiefe, then would he haue said, no man ought to be great among you, but he said not so, for his words be, whosoeuer will be great
                           
                           among you. &c. therefore. &c. And this is a better reason than you can well answere. If you could haue done it, you would not haue shifted it off with a vaine confutation, not of Musculus, but of your owne deuised argument.
                        
                           Musculus his second reason is this. There is superioritie in the kingdome of God, and one aboue another, as there is in the celestiall spirites, in the starres, and in other states. For Peter is found in many places to haue bin chiefe among the rest, and therefore this is not the meaning of Christ, that none should be great or chiefe among Christians.
                        
                        His third reason may be thus gathered. The very necessitie of our state requireth that some should be superiours and betters, as well in the Church, as in the common welth &c. therefore it is not Christes meaning to haue no superiours. &c.
                        
                        In like manner doth he reason out of the. 12. of the Rom. 1. Cor. 12. Heb. 13. and of the parts and members of mans body: And in the end thus he concludeth: Therfore Christ dothe not require that in his kingdome all should be equall, but this he dothe require, that none should desire to be great. &c.
                           Musculus his reasons not answered but shifted off by. T. C.
                        
                        To these reasons you answer not one word, but shift them off by telling vs, that as common weales and families and Churches are preserued by inequalitie. &c. and as albeit the consuls of Roome. &c. which be to no purpose, and make directly against you. For not only in a family the maister is aboue the seruante, but one seruant also aboue another,Thexamples of. T. C. against himself Math. 24.
                            wherevnto Christ himselfe alludeth Mat. 24. when he saith, who is a faithfull seruant whome his master hath made ruler ouer his houshold. &c. In like manner not only the father is aboue the sonne, but also in the same family one brother is aboue another: and euen in the scripture Gen. 49. and other places, it may be séene that preheminence of dignitie hath bin always (for the most part) giuen to the eldest: whereforeGe. 49. vers. 3. these similitudes help you not.
                        And whereas you séeme to graunt, that the pastour must be superiour to the people, and yet one Pastour not to be aboue another, the words of Christ rather import the contrary: for the dominion that is here forbidden, is not of one minister ouer another, but ouer the people of God, as the similitude of them that sit at the table, and of them that serue doth euidently declare: for who are they that sit at the table to be serued, but the people (which is the Church) in respect of whome the ministers are seruants? Therefore this place is very vnfitly alleadged, to proue that there shoulde be no superioritie betwéene ministers: for suche superioritie in gouernment as by your owne confession may be in ministers ouer the people, may also be in one minister ouer another, for any thing that this place hath to the contrary.
                        But whether one minister ought to be aboue another or no, shal be discussed in hisTract. 8. proper place.
                        What superioritie soeuer M. Musculus giueth vnto Peter ouer the rest, that example is aptly applied to the iustifying of his exposition vpon this place, that we haue now in hand. But I must tell you that you do not truly translate the words of Eusebius concerning Peter. For this worde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            signifyeth not only to speake before the rest, and in the name of the rest (as you translate it) but it signifyeth also 
                              principem in omni re gerenda: a chiefe ruler or guide, in euery matter or businesse. Wherfore I say still that this interpretation of M. Musculus must needes be true, and that it may as well be alleadged to take away superioritie from Christian Princes, as it may from ecclesiasticall ministers.
                        This of M. Musculus that he saith, that Christ heere teacheth, what he ought to be indeede, that beareth rule ouer other, neither haue I before rehersed, nor you hitherto answered.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. I. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition Page. 15. Sect. 3. &. 4.
                     Moreouer the Greeke words that Christ vseth in al these places,

as 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , & 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         do signifie to rule with oppression, & to rule as a man list.
                     Furthermore Christ doth not say, that no mā shall be great among them, or beare rule, but he saith. 
                           Quicunque voluerit inter vos magnus fieri. &c. He that desireth to be great among you. &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     T C. Pa. 12. lin. 8.
                     But the greeke words (you say 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         do signifie to rule with oppression, And why may not I say that this preposition Bycause the
                              〈1 line〉
                            you should say contrary to the iudgement of a
                              〈1 line〉
                            learned men. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , doth not signify heere a peruersnesse of rule, but an absolutenesse and a full power, and iurisdiction, as 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , is not to learne, or to perceiue, euilly, and peruersly, but to learne exactly, and to perceiue throughly and perfectly? but what neede we to follow coniectures in so plaine a matter? whē as S. Luke vseth the simple words without any composition of 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         you not perceiue that the preposition wherein you put so great confidence deceiueth you, besides the manifest vntruth you committe in saying, that all Vntruth, for 
                              〈1 line〉
                            name not three Euangelista. three Euangelistes haue 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Furthermore you say that our sauiour Christ saith not that no man shall be great amongst them, but he that desireth to be great amongst thē. He had said so before, whē he had said, it shall not be so amongst you, and therefore needed not to repeate it. And yet another Euangelist saith not, he that desireth to be great, but let the greatest among you be as the least, whereby he dothe not reprehende, onely the desire of being greate, but will not haue them to be one aboutLu. 22. v. 26 another.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You aske me why you may not say that this preposition 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            doth not signify heere a peruersnesseThe true interpretatiō of 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              . of rule, but an absolutenesse, and a full power and iurisdiction? I answer that if you should so say, you should say otherwise than the truth is, and contrary to the iudgement of the best interpreters. Erasmus expounding that place of Mathew, saith thus, 
                              Nec est simpliciter dominantur sed 
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              , dominantur in eas, siue aduersus eas, frequenter enim ea praepositio in malum sonat, quod tyranni populi male gerant principalum, neither is it simply they haue dominion, but they haue dominion ouer them, or against them: for thatEra. in annot. preposition (
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              ) doth oftentimes sound in euill part, bycause the Tyrannes of the people do rule euill. And expounding the other word 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            he saith. 
                              Et praepositio similiter in partem malam sonat, iudicans eam protestatem esse tyrannicam & cum malo parentium esse coniunctam: And the preposition (
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              ) likewise soundeth in the euill part, declaring that power to be tyrannicall, and ioyned with the hurt of the subiects. M. Beza in hysBez. in annot. notes vpon the same place, wel alloweth of this interpretation. But this also (saith he) is to be vnderstanded (which Erasmus did not let passe) hoc vocabulo & eo quod proximê sequitur, non quamuis dominationem significari, sed cum imperiosa quadam acerbitate coniunctam, quam prohibet Paulus Eph. 6. &c. that by this word, and that which nexte followeth, al kynde of domination is not signifyed, but that which is ioyned with a certaine imperious crueltie, whiche Paule forbiddeth. Eph. 6. so it is taken. Acts. 19. &. 1. Peter. 5. For otherwise the faithfull ministers of the word of God do exercise an authoritie, not at all to be contemned: And therefore also I haue interpreted 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              , licentia vtuntur aduersus eas, They vse licence or vnlawfull libertie against them. That place of the. 19. of the Actes, verse. 16. doth manifestly declare the true meaning and signification of thisAl5. ias. 15. worde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , both in this place, and in the. 1. Pet. 5. vers. 3. for there it is manifest that it signifieth a violent kinde of dominion.
                        The place of Saint Luke must be interpreted by these places of Mathewe, and Marke. It is sufficient that these two Euangelists haue these words, and a manifest declaration how that place of Saint Luke is to be vnderstoode.
                        My words be not as you report them, I do not say in all thr
                              〈1 line〉
                           e Euangelistes, but in all these places, meaning of Mathewe and Marke. This is but a shift to dallie of a matter which you cannot answere, and the vntruth returned vpon your selfe.
                        When I say that Christ doth not say that no man shall be great among them, but he that doth desire to be great. &c. I saye as the wordes be, and as

                           Musculus himselfe noteth. That place of Luke which you recite is so farre from answeringThe place of Luke insinuateth a 
                                 〈◊〉
                               among the Apostles. this, that it doth confirme it rather. For in that that Christ there saith, he that is great among you. &c. he insinuateth that there must be some great among them, whom he ther teacheth how to vse himself, as I haue before declared out of M. Bucer, and as Musculus doth likewise note.Luke. 22.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 15. Sect. 5. &. 6.
                     To conclude, it is manifest, that in Matthew and Marke he reproueth the ambition of the sonnes of Zebedie, who ambitiously desired the one to sit on his right hande, the other on his left. And in Luke the ambition of the rest of the Apostles, who contended amōg themselues which of them should be greatest.
                     So that it is plaine, that these places suppresse ambition and desire of rule, in all kind of mē: and not superioritie, not magistracie, not iurisdiction in any kind of persons.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 12. Sect. 1.
                     Last of all you conclude that our sauioure Christ in the. 20. of Mathew reproueth the ambition of the sonnes of Zebedie, and in the. 22. of S. Luke all the rest of the Apostles. I grant you, he doth so, and that could not be done better, than in telling them, that they desired thinges not meete for them, and which would not stand with their calling. And if as you say the ambition Vntruth, fo
                              〈1 line〉
                            say not, only. only was reprehended, and the desire of rule to oppresse others with, the answere you attribute to our sauioure is not so fit, for they might haue replied and said, that he forbad tyrannicall rule and oppression of their inferiours, but they desired that which was a moderate and well ruled gouernment. And seemeth it vnto you a probable thing that S. Luke meaneth tyrantes and oppressours, when as he sayth they are called beneficiall and gracious Lords? That is not so men do not vse to call oppressours, liberall or bountifull Lords, neyther is it to be thought of all the Apostles, that they desired rule one ouer another, to the end that they would vse crueltie, or tyrannie, or oppression, one ouer another, for that were to do them great iniurie. Besides that it is sayd, that the rest of the disciples disdayned at the two brethren, which they would not haue done, if they had had any purpose or mind to haue oppressed them, then they would haue contemned them, rather than haue disdayned them, if they had broken out into such grosse faults. For Aristotle teacheth that 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         (whicheIn his rhet
                              〈1 line〉
                           . ad Theod. is the It is not the same, for one is more generall than the other. same that 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         is, the verb whereof the Euangelist vseth) is against those that are supposed of them that beare the disdayne, to be lifted vp higher and into better estate than they are worthy of, which agreeth with that interpretation which I haue alleadged, and cannot agree with the other, which you set downe. For who (speaking properly) would speake after this forte? The rest of the Apostles disdayned at the two brethren, or thought them vnwoorthy that they should beare tyrannicall rule ouer them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue declared both my authours and their reasons concerning the exposition of these places, which may satisfye any man that is not wilful. Your reasons to the cō
                           trary, haue no ground, but only vsed, that it may be thought that you haue said something. Beit, that Christ told the sonnes of Zebede, that they desired thinges not meete for them, what is that to the purpose, to proue that he did not reproue their ambition? as though there may not be ambition both in desiring that which is vnlawfull, and that also which is lawful.
                        I do not say that their ambitiō only was reprehended (I maruel what you meane so to falsifie my words) for I thinke also that he reproueth the tyrannicall rule of the kings of the Gentiles. But this I with Musculus, Bucer and other learned men constantly affirme, that he condemneth not rule, but violent and heathenish rule, not superioritie or gouernment, but the ambitious and gréedy desire of the same.
                        If it so displease you that I interprete the Gréeke words to signify a tyrannical rule, and a gouernment by oppression, blame Erasmus, Musculus, and Beza, who so interprete them: nay blame S. Luke who doth most euidently in the. 19. of the Act. ver. 16. vseMē called by titles not deserued. one of these words in the same signification. Why they were called Liberal and bountifull,

notwithstanding they be tyrants and oppressours, I haue before declar
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            desired the commendation of bountifulnesse and liberalitie, though they 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           eserue it. It is no straunge matter for men of great authoritie to be called by such 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           tles, as they do not deserue. The Pope is called sanctissimus, and seru
                                 〈1 line〉
                              s seruorum Dei. and yet is he farre from doing any thing by these names signifyed. Men vse to call their rulers and gouernours by their accustomed titles, howsoeuer they deserue them, though it be gracious or bountifull Lords, when they haue no sparke of grace or bountifulnesse. What rule or superioritie soeuer it was that the Apostles desired, they desired it ambitiously and out of time, and therefore were iustly reproued for theyr ambition.
                        I told you before that Christe in those places condemneth not ambition only, but vnlawfull gouernmente also, euen such as the Gentiles vsed of whome Christe in those places speaketh. And whereas you say that the rest of the disciples disdayned the two brethren. &c. you do but spend inke and paper in dallying. The disciples heard by their request that they desired promotion and preferment aboue the rest and therfore they disdayned them: what opinion they had of their vsage in their offices, that is vnknowen either to you, or to me, bycause the scripture hath not expressed it: but thys I think, that they were as ambitious in disdaining, as the other were in desiring. Your definition of 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            out of Aristotle is néedelesse (but only that thereby we may know you to be an Aristotelian) for the Apostles, disdained them, bycause they desired rule and dominion, not bycause they desired to rule well or to rule euil. And surely an enuious person and a disdainfull, hath not so much respect to the lawfulnesse or vnlawfulnesse of the preferment and promotion of him, whome he doth enuy and disdayne, as he hath to the partie that is preferred, and to the preferment it selfe: as it is not vnlike that there are some of you that disdaine such as be in place aboue you, be they Deanes, Byshops, or Archbyshops, although you say that their offices be vnlawful, and tyrannicall. And this vice is too common among you, for you thinke some of vs to be lifted vp higher, and to better estate, that be not so worthy as yourselues, & hinc illae lachrymae: if I iudge amisse, let the modesty of your booke reproue me.
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               & 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               not one.
                        
                        In that you say 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            and 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            be all one, you are much deceiued: for 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            is 
                              indignatio ob res prosperas alicuius seu foelicitatem, qua indignus est, a disdayne for the prosperitie or felicitie of some man, which he is vnwoorthy of: 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               
                              est indignatio stomachatio quaelibet & de qualibet causa, is any kind of indignation or stomacking, and for any cause: so that 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            doth conteine 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            and is as it were genus vnto it.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Exposition of the place Matth. 23. Chapter. 2.
               
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition Page. 15. Sect. vlt. &. Page. 16. Sect. 1. &. 2.
                  Touching the place in the. 23. of Matth. where Christe saide vntoRabbi Ma
                           〈1 line〉
                         The place of Math. 23. expounded. his disciples Be not you called Rabbi, cal no man father, be not called masters. Who is so ignorant to thinke that Christ forbiddeth by these words one Christian man to cal another Lord, master, Father? shal not children call their parents father? shall not schollers call theyr teacher master? and shal not seruants call him master, vnder whose gouernment they are? Is it not lawfull for one to call another master, Doctor, Father, Lord. &c. Paule (notwithstanding these words of Christ). 1. Cor. 4. calleth himselfe their father: and. 1. Tim. 2. he calleth himselfe the Doctour of the Gentiles. Wherefore it is manifest

that these names be not here prohibited, muche lesse the offices: but only the Pharisaical, ambitious, and arrogant affection of superioritie: As it is also manifest by this that followeth: whosoeuer exalteth himselfe. &c And surely as Christ condemneth heere the ambitious affection of suche as ambitiously desire these names of superioritie, so dothe he in lyke manner condemne those who be so puffed vp with pride and arrogancie, that they contemne and disdaine to call men in authoritie by the titles of their offices. For pride, contempte, and arrogancie, is as well in refusing to gyue honoure and reuerence, as it is in ambtiouslye desyring the same.
                  But the chiefe purpose of Christ in this place is, to teache vs not so to depende vpon men, as though it were not lawfull to breake their decrees, or to decline from their authoritie: For there is one onely father, Lorde, and maister, to whome we are so bounde, that by no meanes we may declyne at any tyme from hys preceptes.
                  These places therefore may be aptly alleadged agaynste the pride, tyrannie, and ambition of the Byshop of Rome, whiche seeketh tyrannically to rule, and not to profyte: but it maketh nothing at all agaynste the lawfull authoritie of any other in any state or condition of men.
               
               
                  T. C. Page. 12. Sect. vlt.
                  Concerning the exposition and sense of that place I agree with you, andBylike it was fondly alleadged, when you do but suppose their meaning. suppose that it is quoted of the authours of the Admonition, rather to note
                        〈1 line〉
                     e ambition of certaine, whiche gape greedily at these bishoppricks whiche wee haue, to the ende they might be saluted by the name of Lords, and honours, than to proue that one minister should not haue dominion ouer another. And therefore although these places be against no lawfull authoritie of any estate or condition of men, yet as they are aptly alleadged against the bishop of Rome, the one against his estate and authoritie simply, the other againste his tyrannie, and euill vsage of himselfe in that authoritie: so it may be aptly alleadged agaynste any other, whyche shall fall into the lyke faulte of the Byshoppe of Rome.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     It is manifest that they quote this same place for the selfe same purpose that they do the other: there can be no mist so thicke, that may darken the eyes of men from séeing it, except they séeing will not sée, as you do at this time,
                     I am glad that you agree with me in the exposition of this place: surely in so doing you must also agrée with me in the exposition of the other. For as Christ héere doth not forbid the names but the arrogant and ambitious desire of them, so doth he not there forbid authoritie and superioritie, but the coueting of it, and ambitious and inordinate desire of the same. And if you well marke the words, Christ doth here much more plainly forbid these names, then he doth thare those offices of superioritie.
                     If any man doth imitate the Byshop of Romes ambition, either in office or in name, he hathe me as greate an enimie, as he hath you. But in that you passe ouer with silence, these words of mine, these places therefore may be aptly alleadged. &c. you séeme eyther to allow my expositions of the other places also, or else you are ashamed of your owne vnfaithful and subtil dealing, which before would haue made your Reader beléeue, that I had misliked all those godly & learned mens iudgments, which vse these places against the Byshop of Rome: it had bin plaine dealing to haue set downe my words in order, as I haue done yours.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 17. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                  Howe aptly that place of the. 24. of Mathew, But if the euil seruant
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . shall say in his heart, &c. is alleaged, let all men iudge. I thinke it forbiddeth not to punish such as breake good lawes. But Lorde howe these men are beaten, which do as they list, say what they list, & that with reioycing therto? that is, if they be no otherwise beaten than hitherto they haue bin, they will not only with schismes & 
                        〈1 line〉
                     actions teare in sunder this Church of Englande, but in time ouerthrow the whole state of the common wealth.
                  To proue that either we must haue a right ministerie of God, and a right gouernment of his Church according to the Scriptures set vp. &c. or else there can be no right religion &c. is alleaged the ninth of Mathew, the fourth to the Ephe. and the eightenth of Mat. In the ninthe of Mathew the place they alleage is this: Surely the haruest is great, but the labourers be fevve: vvherfore. &c. In the fourthe to the Ephe. He therfore gaue some to be Apostles. &c. In the eightenth of Mat. If thy brother trespasse agaynst thee. &c. The first place declareth that ministers of the word are necessarie in Christes Churche. The seconde, that there is diuers kindes and degrees of them. And the thirde sheweth an order of correcting secrete sinnes, and priuate offences, and medleth not with those that be open and knowne to other. Now therfore consider to what purpose those places be noted in the margent, and how little they proue that which is concluded.
                  As for all the rest of the places of scripture that followeth, noted in the margent of this Preface, I knowe not to what purpose they be alleaged, but only for vayne glory, to bleare the eyes of the ignorantSubtilty in quoting places only. people, and to make them beléeue, that al that which is written in this booke, is nothing else but scripture it selfe. They haue delte very subtilly, to quote the places only, and not to set them downe in playne wordes, for by this meanes they thinke that of the most part it shall neuer be vnderstanded, howe vnaptly, and to what small purpose they be alleaged.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     All this L. C. passeth ouer in silence, thereby (as I thinke) acknowledging it to be true.
                  
               
               
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 18.
                  This name Puritane is very aptly giuen to these men, not bicauseThe name of Puri
                           〈1 line〉
                        ane. they be pure, no more than were the Heretikes called Cathari, but bicause they thinke them selues to be 
                        mundiores caeteris, more pure than others, as Cathari dyd, & separate themselues from al other Churches and congregations as spotted and defiled. Bicause also they suppose the church which they haue deuised, to be without all impuritie.
               
               
                  T. C Pag. 13. Lin. 1. & Sect. 1.
                  The purenesse that we boast of, is the innocencie of our fauiour Christ, who shal couer al our vnpurenesse, and not impute it vnto vs. And for so much as fayth purisieth the heart, we doubt not but God of his goodnesse hath begon our sanctificatiō, & hope that he wil make an end of it euē vntu ye day of our Lorde Iesus. Albeit we hold diuers points more purely thā they do, which impugne

them, yet I knowe none that by comparison hathe either sayde or written, that all these that thinke as we doe in those poyntes, are more holy, and more vnblameable in lyfe, than any of those that thinke otherwyse. If we saye that in those poyntes whiche we holde from them, that we thinke soundlyer than they doe, we are ready to proue it, if we saye also, that we lyue not so offensiuely to the worlde commonly, by getting And yet some of you haue a competent number, without doing any duetie at them. so many liuinges into oure handes, as woulde finde foure or fyue good learned able Ministers, all the world will beare vs witnesse. Other purenesse we take not vpon vs. And therefore, as the name was first by the Papistes maliciously inuented, so is it of you very vnbrotherly confirmed. Whereas you saye, that they are Puritanes, whiche suppose the Churche whiche they haue deuised, to be without all impuritie, if you meane without sinne, you doe notably sclaunder them, and it is already answered. If you meane that those are Puritanes or Catharanes, whiche doe set foorthe a true and perfecte paterne or platforme of reforming the Churche, then the marke of this heresie reacheth vnto those, whiche made the booke of common prayer, An vntruthe, for I do not saye so in any place. whiche you saye is a perfecte and absolute rule to gouerne this Churche, wherein nothing is wanting, or too little, nor nothing running ouer, nor too muche. As for the Catharanes (whiche were the same that are otherwise called Nouatians) I knowe no suche opinion they had, and they whome you charge, are as farre from their corruption, as you bee.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     You haue sayde vnto me in one place of your booke, Quid verba audiam cumfacta videam? euen so I saye to you, for why will they not come to oure Sermens, or to oure Churches? why will they not communicate with vs in oure Sacramentes? not salute vs in the stréetes? nay spitte in our faces, and openly reuile vs? whye haue they their secrete conuenticles? You knowe all this to be true in a number of them. I knowe not why they shoulde doe so, excepte they thinke them selues to be contaminated by hearing vs preache, or by comming to our Churches, or by communicating otherwyse with vs. Whiche if they doe, it argueth that they persuade them selues not onely of suche an outwarde perfection, but of suche an inwarde puritie also, that they may as iustly for the same be called Puritanes, as the Nouatians
                        The qualities of Nouatus, and cause of his heresie. were. You knowe that the first occasion why Nouatus did separate him selfe from the Churche, was bicause he coulde not obtayne the Bishoprike of Rome, whiche he ambitiously desired. You knowe also that his pretence was bicause the Bishops dyd receyue those into the Churche, whiche had fallen in the time of persecution. Afterwardes he fell into greater and mo absurdities, for commonly suche as once deuide them selues from the Churche, fall from errour to errour, without staye. This Nouatus thoughe he séemed to condemne ambition in all other men, yet was he most ambitious him selfe: thoughe he by vehement othes denied him selfe to desire a Bishoprike, yet did he most gréedily séeke for it: though he boasted of more perfection in lyfe, and of a more perfecte platforme of a Churche than he thoughte others had, yet was it nothing so. He was the firste that I reade of, that forseeke hisNouatus the first that forsooke his ministerie. ministerie, and that sayde, 
                           Se nolle amplius presbyterum esse, sed alterius Philosophiae studiosum: that he woulde no longer be a Minister, but a student in other Philosophie. Reade Eusebius in his sixte booke of his Ecclesiasticall historie, 
                           Cap. 43 and Nicephorus in his sixte booke also, and third chapter. Surely the storie of Nouatus is worthy to be noted, bycause there be so many at these dayes, which do not so much differ from him in opinions, as they agrée with him in conditions.
                     You affirme that I saye, The booke of common prayer to be a perfecte and absolute rule to gouerne this Churche, wherin nothing is wanting or too little, nor nothing running ouer, or too muche. If I haue sayd any suche thing, quote the place, that the Reader may consider of it, and knowe that you speake the truthe. But if I neuer eyther spake, or writte any suche thing, then are you a false witnesse, and I haue to desire the Reader to consider of the reste of your sclaunderous reportes, according to the truthe of this. I haue learned with Sainct Augustine to giue this reuerence onely to the wryters of Canonicali Scriptures, that I thinke none of them to haueThe canonicall scriptures are only absolute & perfect. erred in wryting. And I doe firmely beléeue, that onely the bookes of the Canonicall Scripture, are of that absolutenesse, and perfection, that nothing maye be taken

awaye from them, nothing added to them. I doe not thinke the Communion booke to be such, but that it may admitte alteration. I doe not beléeue it to bée so perfecte, but that there maye be bothe added to it, and taken from it. But thys I saye, that it is a godly booke, withoute any errour in substance of doctrine, and nothing in it (that I knowe) agaynst the worde of God: and those imperfections, or rather motes that you saye to be in it, not to be suche, that any godly man oughte to stirre vp any contention in the Churche for them, muche lesse to make a schisme, and least of all to deuide him selfe from the Churche. This is my opinion of that booke, whiche vnlesse by learning and good authoritie I iustifie, let me haue the blame and shame of it. I will not enter into your heartes, to iudge what you thinke of your inwarde puritie, (whiche notwithstanding in comparison you haue in this present place arrogated vnto your selues) that very perfection of an outwarde platforme of a Churche whiche you chalenge vnto your selues, is one steppe to Nouatianisme, and well deserueth the name of Catharisme.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Of the authoritie of the Churche in things indifferent. Tract. 2.
            
               Some thinges may be tollerated in the Churche touching order, ceremonies, discipline, and kinde of gouernmente, not expressed in the word of God.
               
                  Chap. 1. the first Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     
                        SEing that nothing in thys mortall lyfe is more diligently to bee soughte for, and carefully to bee, looked vnto (2. Reg. 23. 3. Chro. 17. 2. Chro. 29. 30. 31. Psal. 132. 2. 3. 4. Mat. 21. 12. Ioh. 2. 15.) than the restitution of true religion and reformation of Gods Churche: it shall bee your partes (dearely beloued) in this present Parliamente assembled, as muche as in you lyeth to promote the same, and to employe your whole laboure and studie, not onely in abandoning all Popishe remnauntes bothe in ceremonies and regimente, but also in bringing in and placing in Gods Churche those thinges onely, whiche the Lorde him selfe (Deut. 4. 2. Deut. 12. 32.) in hys worde commandeth. Bicause it is not mought to take paynes in taking away euill, (Psal. 37. 27. Rom. 12. 9.) but also to be occupied in placing good in the steade thereof. Nowe bicause many men see not all thinges, and the (1. Cor. 2. 14) worlde in thys respecte is maruellously blinded, it hathe beene thoughte good to profer to your godly consyderations a true platforme of a Churche reformed, to the ende that it beeing layde before your eyes, to beholde the greate vnlykenesse betweene it and thys our Englishe Churche: you maye learne, eyther with perfecte (Psal. 31. 6. Psal. 139. 22.) hatred to deteste the one, and with singular loue to embrace, and carefull endeuour to plante the other: or else to be without excuse before (Iohn. 15. 21.) the maiestie of our God, who (for the discharge of our conscience, & manifestation of his truthe) hathe by vs reuealed vnto you at this presente, the sinceritie and simplicitie of his Gospel. Not that you should either (1. Tim. 3. 8.) wilfully withstand, or vngraciously tread (Math. 7. 6.) the same vnder yourfeete, for God doth not disclose his wil to any such ende, but that you should yet nowe at the length with all your mayne and mighte, endeuour that Christe (whose (Mat. 11. 3
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                        ) easie yoke and light burthen we haue of long tyme cast of from vs) might rule and reigne in hys Churche by the scepter of his worde onely.
                     
                        ¶ Answere to the Admonition. Pag. 20. Sect. 1. &. 2.
                        
                           I Will not answere wordes, but matter, nor bare affirmations or negations, but reasons: and therefore in as fewe words as I can, I will comprehende many lines.
                        But before I enter into their reasons, I thinke it not amisse to examine that assertion which is the chiefe andThe grounde of the Admonition. principall grounde (so farre as I can gather) of their booke, that is, that those things only are to be placed in the church, which the Lord himselfe in his worde commaundeth. As though they shoulde saye, nothing is to be tollerated in the Churche of Christ, touching either doctrine, order, ceremonies, discipline, or gouernment, except it be expressed in the word of God. And therfore the most of their argumēts in this booke be taken ab authoritate negatiuè, whiche by the rules of Logike proue nothing at all.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 13. Sect. 2.
                     YOu giue occasion of suspicion, that your ende will be scarse good, whiche haue made so euill a beginning. For wheras you had gathered out of the Admonition, that nothing shuld be placed in the Churche, but that God hath in his worde commaunded, as though the words were not playne mough, you will giue them some light by your exposition. And what is that? you answere that it is as muche as though they would say, nothing is to be tollerated in the Church of Christ, touching either doctrine, order, ceremonies, discipline, or gouernment, excepte it be expressed in the word of God. Is this to interprete? is it all one to say, But their quarell is in tollerating, not in placing. nothing muste be placed in the Church, and nothing muste bee tollerated in the Churche? he hathe but small iudgemente, that can not tell, that certayne thinges maye be tollerated, and borne with for a tyme. Which if they were to be set in and placed, could not be done without the great faulte of them that should place

them. Agayne, are these of like waighte, excepte it be commaunded in the worde of God, and excepte it be expressed in the worde of God? Many thinges are bothe commaunded and forbidden, of whiche there is no expresse mention in the worde, whiche are as A Papisticall assertion. necessarily to bee followed or auoyded, as those whereof expresse mention is made. Therefore vnlesse your weightes be truer, if I coulde let it, you shoulde waighe none of my wordes. Heerevpon you conclude, that their argumentes taken ab authoritate negatiue, proue nothing. When the question is of the authoritie of a man, in deede it neither holdeth Vntrue. affirmatiuely nor negatiuely. For as it is no good argument to saye, it is not true bicause Aristotle or Plato sayde it not: so is it not to saye, it is true bicause they sayde so. The reason whereof is, bicause the infirmitie of man can neither attayne to the perfection of any thing, whereby he mighte speake all things that are to be spoken of it, neither yet bee free from errour in those thinges, whiche hee speaketh or giueth oute, and therefore this argument neither affirmatiuely, nor negatiuely compelleth the heare
                           〈1 line〉
                        : but onely induceth him to some lyking or mislyking of that, for whiche it is broughte, and is rather for an Oratour to persuade the simpler sorte, than for a disputer to inforce him that is learned. But for so muche as the Lorde God, determining to set before our eyes a perfecte forme of his Churche, is bothe able to doe it, and hathe done it, a man maye reason bothe wayes necessarily. The Lorde hathe commaunded it shoulde be in his Churche: therefore it muste. And of the other side, he hath not commaunded: therefore it muste not be. And it is not harde to shewe, that the Prophetes haue so reasoned negatiuely. As when in the person of the Lorde the Prophet saythe, whereof I haue not spoken, and whiche neuer entred into my heart: and as where he condemneth them,Ierem. 7. ver. 31. 32. Esay. 30. V. 2 *bicause they haue not asked counsell at the mouth of the Lorde.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This my interpretation of their wordes is grounded vpon the whole discourse and drifte of their booke, as it may euidently appeare to be true to any that hathe eyes to sée, and eares to heare: and shewe you if you can any one place in their booke, whiche dothe ouerthrowe this my interpretation of their wordes. I knowe it is one thing to saye, that nothing muste be placed in the Churche, and an other thing to saye, that nothing muste be tolerated, but I sée that they make no difference betwéene them neither in their writing, nor yet in their practise. And I thinke also that there is some difference betwixte these two manner of spéeches, excepte it be commaunded in the worde of God, and excepte it be expressed in the worde of God. For I knowe sundrie thinges to be expressed in the worde of God, whiche are not commaunded: as Christ his fasting fortie dayes, and his other myracles, and therefore by that interpretation I haue giuen vnto them a larger scope than they them selues require, whiche if it be an iniurie, it is to my selfe, and not to them.
                        But I thinke you were not well aduised, when you sayde, that many things are bothAn vnaduised assertion of T. C. tending to Papistrie. commaunded and forbidden, of whiche there is no expresse mention in the word of God, whiche are as necessarilie to be followed or auoyded, as those whereof expresse mention is made. If you meane that many things are commaunded or forbidden in the worde; which are not expressed in the worde, in my opinion you speake contraries: For howe can it be commaunded or forbidden in the worde, excepte it be also expressed in the same? If you meane, that many thinges are commaunded or forbidden to bée doone, necessarie vnto saluation, whiche notwithstanding are not expressed in the worde of God, then I sée not howe you differ from that opinion, whiche is the grounde of all Papistrie, that is, that all things necessary vnto saluation are not expressed in the scriptures. How soeuer you meane it, it can not be true: for there is nothing necessarie to eternall life, whichWhat is sayd to be expressed in the Scripture. is not bothe commaunded and expressed in the Scripture. I counte it expressed, when it is either in manyfest wordes contayned in Scripture, or therof gathered by necessary collection. If I had to doe with a Papist, I coulde proue this to be true by the manyfest testimonies of the Scripture it selfe, and also by sundrie other, bothe auncient and late wryters, but bicause I thinke it hathe but ouerslipped you, and that vpon better aduise you will reforme it, therfore I will cease to deale further in it, vntill I vnderstande more of your meaning.
                        My conclusion touching Argumentes negatiue ab authoritate,
                            (as I vnderstande it,Argumentes ab authoritate negatiue.
                            and haue expounded it, in the wordes following) is very true, and muste of necessitie be so. You saye, that when the question is of the authoritie of a man, it holdeth neither affirmatiuely, nor negatiuely. Wherein you shewe your selfe not to be so skilfull in that, the

ignorance whereof you do so often in your booke obiecte vnto me: for not in AristotleAn arg
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ent ab authoritate holdeth affirmatiuely. onely, lib. 3. Top. and lib. 2. Rhet. ad Theod. but in euery halfe penie Logike, (as you terme them) the place ab authoritate is expressed, and the argumentes taken oute of the same, sayde to holde affirmatiuely, and not otherwyse: the rule whereof is thys, Vnicui
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               in sua arte perito credendum est. It is a good argument to saye, that it is true bicause1. Top. Cap. 8. Aristotle or Plato sayde it, if it be of any thing pertayning to that Arte, wherein Aristotle or Plato were cunning and expert.
                        Whether all things pertayning to the outwarde forme of the Churche be particularly expressed, or commaunded in the Scripture, or no, is the question that we haue nowe in controuersie: that God coulde doo it, and therefore hathe done it, is no good reason, no more than it is for the reall presence in the Sacrament.
                        Affirmatiuely the argument is alwayes good of the authoritie of the Scripture: as God hathe there commaunded it to be done, therefore it muste be done. Or the Scripture affirmeth it to be so, Ergo, it is so. But negatiuely it holdeth not, excepte in matters of saluation and damnation, whiche is not my opinion onely, but the opinion of the best interpreters. Zuinglius in Elencho contra Catabaptist.
                            reproueth themZuinglius in Elench. for reasoning on this sorte, his wordes be these: You shall finde no way to escape, for fondly you reason à factis & exemplis negatiuely: yea à non factis & non exemplis: for what other reason vse you than this: we reade not that the Apostles baptized infants, Ergo they are not to be baptized.
                        
                        The examples that you vse in the. 7. of Ierem. verse. 31. 32. and. 30. of Esay. ver. 2.The places which T. C. quoteth, proue not his purpose. to proue that in externall and indifferent matters, we may reason negatiuely of the authoritie of the Scriptures, are farre fetched, and nothing to your purpose. For that whiche the Prophet Ieremie speaketh of, is a matter of great importance, euen moste horrible and cruell sacrifices, wherein they burnte their sonnes, and daughters.Iere. 7. ver. 31. Whiche they were not only not commaunded to doo, but expressely forbidden, as it appeareth in the. 18. of Leuiti. verse. 21. and the. 20. of Leuiti. verse. 3. and the. 18. of Deutero. verse. 10. Nowe to reason thus, God hathe commaunded that you shall not giue your children to be offered to Moloche, and he hathe not giuen you any commaundement to the contrarie, therefore you oughte not to haue offered them: is affirmatiue, not negatiue: althoughe in this case, béeing a matter of substance, and of saluation or damnation (for to kill and murther is of that nature) a negatiue argument is very strong. The Prophet Esay reproueth the Iewes for vsing theirEsa. 30. ver. 2. owne aduise, séeking helpe of the Egyptians, in the time of their aduersitie, and not of the Lorde. Whiche they dyd bothe contrarie to their owne promise, and also contrarie to the commaundement of God, Deutero. 17. verse. 16. But what is this to proue that we may reason negatiuely of the authoritie of the Scriptures, in matters of rites and ceremonies, and other indifferent things? You accuse me for not alleadging of Scriptures, better it were to alleadge none, than thus to alleage them to no purpose, or rather to abuse them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 21. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                     It is most true, that nothing ought to be tollerated in the Churche, as necessarie vnto saluation, or as an article of faythe, excepteWherein the scripture is sufficient. it be expresly contayned in the worde of God, or may manyfestly thereof be gathered: and therefore we vtterly condemne and reiecte Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Masse, the authoritie of the Bishop of Rome, worshipping of Images. &c.
                     And in this case an argumente taken ab authoritate Scripturae negatiuè, is most strong: As for example. It is not to be founde in Scripture, that the Bishop of Rome oughte to be the head of the Churche, and

therfore it is not necessarie to saluation, to beleeue that he ought to be the head of the Church. &c.
                     It is also true, that nothing in ceremonies, order, discipline, or gouernment in the Church is to be suffred, beyng against the worde of God: And therefore we reiecte all ceremonies, wherein there is any opinion to saluation, worshipping of God, or merite: As creeping to the crosse, holy bread, holywater, holycandle. &c.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 14. Lin. 3.
                     But you say, that in matters of faith and necessarie to saluation it holdeth, which things you oppose after, and set against matters of ceremonies, orders, discipline, & gouernment,As thoughe i
                              〈1 line〉
                            were inough for you to say 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           on such sillie proofes. as thoughe matters of discipline and kinde of gouernment were not matters necessarie to saluation, and of faith.arg. ex solis particularibus. The case which you put, whither the Bishop of Rome be head of the Church, is a matter that concerneth the gouernment, and the kinde of gouernment of the Churche, and the same is a matter that toucheth faith, and that standeth vpon our saluation. Excommunication, and other censures of the Church, which are forerunners vnto excommunication, are matters of discipline, and the same are also of faith, and of saluation. The sacramentes of the Lordes Supper, and of baptisme are ceremonies, and are matters of faith, and necessarie to saluation. And therefore you which distinguishe betwene these, and say, that the former, that is matters of faith and necessary to saluation may not be tolerated in the Churche, vnlesse they be expressely contained in the worde of God or manifestly gathered: But that this later which are, ceremonies, order, discipline, gouernment in the Churche, may not be receyued against the worde of God, and consequently receyued if there be no worde against thē, although there be none for them: you I say distinguishing or deuiding after this sorte, doe proue your selfe to be as euill a deuider, as you shewed your selfe before an expounder, for this is to breake in pieces, and not to deuide.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        That matters of ceremonies, discipline, and kinde of gouernment be matters necessarie vnto saluation is a doctrine strange, and vnheard of to me, wherof I will by and by speake more at large, after I haue in a word or two answered your obiections of the Byshop of Rome, and of the sacraments of Baptisme, and the Lordes Supper: for you saye, The case which I put whither the Bishop of Rome be head of the Church, is a matter that concerneth the gouernment, and the kinde of gouernment of the Churche, and the same is a matter that toucheth faith, and that standeth vpon saluation. Wherevpon bylike you woulde conclude, that matters of gouernment, and kinde of gouernment, are matters necessarie to saluation. Surely I put no such case: but I put such an example, to proue that we maye reason ab authoritate scripturae negatiuè, for this is a good argument, we finde it not in Scripture that the Bishop of Rome ought to be the head of the Churche: Ergo, it is not necessarie to saluation to beléeue, that the Bishop of Rome is the head of the Church: the which thing notwithstanding the Papistes doe affirme: for they say thus, 
                              Subesse Romano pontifici omni animae est de necessitate salutis: to be subiecte to the Byshop of Rome is of necessitie of saluation to all men. Now sir, my reason is framed thus against them, whatsoeuer is necessarie to saluation is contained in the Scriptures, but that she Pope shoulde be the head of the Churche, is not conteyned in the Scriptures: Therefore it is not necessarie to saluation. But you reason cleane contrarie, for you conclude thus, whether the Pope be the head of the Churche is a matter of gouernment and of the kinde of gouernment, but the Papistes say (for that I take to be your meaning) that it is a matter necessary vnto saluation, that the Pope should be the head of the Church: Ergo matters of gouernment and kinde of gouernment are necessarie vnto saluation. Thus you sée howe popishely, with a popishe reason you make a verie popishe conclusion. Certainely no gouernment is to be brought into the Church that is directly against the word of God, as the Popes is, which doth not onely vsurpe the office and authoritie of kings and Princes, but of Christe also, and commaundeth things contrarie to faith, and to the manifest worde of God, wherefore his authoritie is wicked and damnable, but it doth not therfore followe to make this a generall rule, that the gouernment of the Churche or kinde of gouernment is necessarie to saluation. Doe you not knowe of what force an argument is ex solis particularibus?
                        
                        
                           To proue that Ceremonies are necessarie to saluation you reason thus: The Sacraments of the Lordes Supper, and of baptisme, are ceremonies, and are matters of fayth, and necessarie to saluation: Ergo, &c.
                        Undoubtedly you are as euill a reasoner, as I am either an expounder or deuider, bycause the Supper of the Lord, and Baptisme be matters of saluation, therefore are all ceremonyes matters of saluation? wyll you ex solis particularibus conclude an vniuersall proposition? furthermore you knowe that the Supper and Baptisme be not onely Ceremonyes, but also Sacramentes, instituted and commaunded by Christ, hauyng promyses of saluation, annexed vnto them: and so haue not other ceremonies. And you speake too basely of them, when you cal them ceremonyes, not shewing how or in what sorte they may be so called. It is the nexte waye to bryng the Sacramentes into contempte, and it argueth that you haue not so reuerent an opinion of them, as you ought to haue. Therefore the reader muste vnderstande that there be two kyndes of Ceremonyes,Two kinds of ceremonies. the one substantiall, the other accidentall: substantiall Ceremonyes I callSubstantiall ceremonies. those which be 
                              de substantia Religionis, of the substance of Religion, and commaunded in the worde of God as necessarie, and haue promyses annexed vnto them, as the Supper of the Lorde, and Baptisme. Accidentall I call suche as maye be done orAccidentall ceremonies. vndone as order requireth, and altered accordyng to tyme, place, person, and other circumstances, wythoute any opinion of Iustification, necessitie, or worship in the same, pertayning onely to externall comelynesse, order, decencie. &c. of the whiche kynde these be that the Apostle Saint Paule mentioneth. 1. Cor. 11. that, men shoulde1. Cor. 11. praye bareheaded, and not women, and suche lyke, as I haue in my answere to the Admonition more particularly declared. Such Ceremonyes I denie to be matters ofFol. 15. Sect. 5. saluation: and in suche I saye (as you also afterwardes confesse) the Churche hath authoritie to appoynt from tyme to tyme, as shall be thoughte expedient, thoughe the same Ceremonyes be not expressed in the worde of God: so that my diuision holdeth, and is stronger than you shall be able to oūerthrowe wyth all the force you haue.
                        But nowe to your Paradox, you saye that matters of discipline and kynde of gouernmente,Matters of ye kinde of gouernment and discipline are not necessarie to saluation. Two kindes of gouernmēt of the church. are matters necessarie to saluation, and of fayth. And you adde that excommunication and other censures of the Church, whych are forerunners vnto excommunication, are matters of discipline, and the same are also of fayth and of saluation. There are two kyndes of gouernment in the Churche, the one inuisible, the other visible, the one spirituall, the other externall. The inuisible and spirituall gouernment of the Churche is, when God by hys spirite, gyftes, and Ministerie of hys worde dothe gouerne it, by ruling in the heartes and consciences of men, and directing them in all things necessarie to euerlasting lyfe: thys kynde of gouernmente in déede is necessarie to saluation, and it is in the Churche of the electe onely. The visible and externall gouernment, is that whiche is executed by man, and consisteth of externall discipline, and visible Ceremonyes practised in that Churche, and ouer that Churche, that contayneth in it bothe good and euyll, which is vsually called, the visible Churche of Chryst, and compared by Christe to a fielde wherein bothe good seedes and taresMath. 13. were sowen: and to a nette that gathered of all kynde of fyshes. If you meane this kynde of gouernment, then muste I aske you thys question, whyther your meanyng is, that to haue a gouernmente is necessarye to saluation, Or to haue some one certayne forme, and kynde of gouernmente, not to be altered in respecte of time, persons, or place? Lykewise woulde I knowe of you, what you meane by necessarye vnto saluation. Whyther you meane suche thyngs, wythoute the whiche we can not be saued: or suche thyngs onely as be necessarie or ordinarie helpes vnto saluation: for you knowe that this worde necessarye signifyeth eyther that wythoutDiuerse signification of the word necessarie. the which a thing can not be, or that, wythout the which it can not so well and conueniently be.
                        But for so muche as you afterwarde make mention of excommunication, and other censures of the Churche, whiche are forerunners vnto excommunication, I take it that you meane the externall gouernment of the Churche, and that kynde of gouernment.

And yet muste I aske you another question, that is, whyther you meane that this gouernmente, and kynde of gouermente is necessarye at all tymes, or then when the Churche is collected together, and in suche place where it maye haue gouernment. For you knowe that the Churche is sometymes by persecution so dispersed, that it appeareth not, as we reade Apocal. 6. Nor hath anye certayne place to remayne in, so that it can not haue anye externall gouernment, or exercise of any discipline. But to be shorte, I confesse that in a Churche collected togither in one place, andIn what 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              specte gouernment is necessarie. at libertie, gouernment is necessarie in the seconde kinde of necessitie, but that any one kynde of gouernment is so necessarie that withoute it the Churche can not be saued, or that it maye not be altered into some other kynde thought to be more expedient, I vtterly denye, and the reasons that moue me so to doe be these.
                        The firste is, bycause I fynde no one certaine and perfitte kynde of gouernmenteReasons why the Church 
                                 〈◊〉
                               not tied to any one certayne kinde of externall gouernment. prescribed or commaunded in the Scriptures to the Churche of Christ, which no doubt shoulde haue bene done, if it had bene a matter necessarie vnto the saluation of the Church.
                        Secondly bycause the essentiall notes of the Churche be these onely: The true preaching of the worde of God, and the righte administration of the Sacramentes:Onely two essentiall notes of the church. for (as Maister Caluine sayth in his Booke agaynst the Anabaptistes) Thys honour is meete to be gyuen to the worde of God, and to his Sacramentes, that wheresoeuer weCaluine aduer. Anabap. see the worde of God truely preached, and God accordyng to the same truely worshypped, and the Sacramentes wythoute superstition administred, there we maye wythoute all controuersie conclude the Churche of God to be: and a little after, so muche we muste esteeme the worde of God, and hys Sacramentes, that wheresoeuer we fynde them to be, there we maye certaynely knowe the Churche of God to be, althoughe in the common life of men, manye faultes and errours be founde. The same is the opinion of other godly and learned writers, and the iudgement of the reformedConfess. Heb uetica. cap. 17. Churches, as appeareth by their confessions. So that notwythstanding gouernment or some kynde of gouernment maye be a parte of the Churche, touching the outwarde forme and perfection of it, yet is it not suche a parte of the essence and being: but that it may be the Churche of Christ without this or that kinde of gouernment, and therefore the kynde of gouernmente of the Churche is not necessarie vnto saluation.
                        The Church of Corinth when Paule did write vnto it, was the Church of Christ, for so doth he call it. 1. Cor. 1. where also he doth giue vnto it, a singular commendation, and yet it had not at that time when he so commendeth it, that kynde of gouernment and discipline, that you meane of, that is, excommunication as appeareth. 1. Cor. 5.
                        My thirde reason is this. If excommunicatiō (which is a kind of gouernment) be necessarie to saluation, then any man may separate him selfe from euerie Church wherin is no excommunication, but no man may separate himselfe from euery Church wherin is no excommunicatiō, therfore excommunication (which is a kynde of gouernment) is not necessarie to saluation. The first proposition is euident, for no man is bounde to remaine in that Churche where any thing is wanting, without the which he cannotwant of excō
                              munication is no iust cause of separation from any Churche. be saued. As for the seconde proposition (that is to saye) that no man ought to separate him selfe from euerie Churche, where excommunication is not, bycause it is learnedly proued by suche as haue written against the Anabaptistes, who both dyd teache and practise the contrarie, it shall be sufficient to referre you vnto them. Maister Caluine, in hys Booke against the Anabaptistes fayth thus. Herein is the controuersieCaluine aduer. Anabap. betwixte the Anabaptistes and vs, that they thinke there is no Church where this gouernment (meaning excommunication) is not appointed, or not vsed and exercised, as it ought to be, nor that a Christian mā there ought to receiue the Supper and vnder that pretence they separate themselues from the Churches where the worde of God is truely preached. &c. M. Bullinger also in his sixt booke against the Anabaptistes saith. This the AnabaptistesBul. lib. 6. aduer. Anabap. do vrge, that there is no true Church acceptable vnto God, where there is no excommunication, the whiche they vse. To these therefore we answere, that the Churche of Corinth was a true Church, and so acknowledged of Paule to be. 1. Cor. 1. before there was

any vse of excommunication in it. &c. of the same iudgement is M. Gaulter writing vponGualter in. 1. Cor. 5. the first to the Corinth. 5. VVhilest the Anabaptistes persuade themselues that there can be no discipline wythout excommunication, they trouble the Churches euery where. &c. In the same Chapter he sayth, that there is no one certaine kinde of gouernment or discipline prescribed to ye Churches, but that the same may be altered as the profit of the Churches shall require. His words among other be these, Let euery Church followIbidem. that maner of discipline, which doth most agree, with the people with whō it abideth, and which seemeth to be most fit, for the place and time. And let no man here rashely prescribe vnto others, neither let him binde all Churches to one and the same forme. But of this matter I shall haue occasion to speake more hereafter, where it shall appeare howe farre this learned man M. Gualter is, from allowing that kinde of g
                              〈1 line〉
                           uernment now in this state of the Churche, the which T. C. woulde make vs to beléeue to be so necessarie. This haue I briefely set downe, not to disalowe discipline or gouernment (for I thinke it very conuenient in the Church of Christ,) nor yet to reiect excommunicatiō, which also hath a necessarie vse in the gouernment of the Church, but to declare that this assertion can not stande with the truth, & with learning, that the kynde of gouernment (meaning as I thinke some one certaine kinde of externall gouernment) is necessarie to saluation.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the thirde Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 14. Sect. 1. &. 2.
                     And it is no small iniurie which you do vnto the word of God, to pinne it in so narrow roome, as that it should be able to direct vs, but in the principall poyntes of our Religion, or as though the substance of Religion, or some rude and vnfashioned matter of building of the Churche were vttered in them, and those things were lefte out, that should pertaine to the forme and fashion of it: or as if there were in the Scriptures T. C. accoun
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           th externall gouemm
                              〈1 line〉
                           t more precious thā the doctrine of faith. only to couer hir nakednesse, & not also chaines and bracelets and rings, and other iewels to adorne hir and set hir out: or that to conclude, there were sufficient to quench hir thirste, and kill hir hunger, but not to minister, vnto hir a more liberall, and (as it were) a móre delicious and daintie dyet. These things you seen
                           〈1 line〉
                        e to say, when you saye, that 
                           〈1 line〉
                        atters necessarie to saluation and of faith are contayned in the Scripture, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        specially when you oppose these things, to ceremonies, order, discipline, and gouernment.
                     And if you meane by matters of faith and necessarie to saluation, those without whiche a man can not be saued, then the Note this 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ssertion. doctrine that teacheth there is no free will, or prayer for the dead, is not within your compasse. For I dou
                           〈1 line〉
                        t not, but diuers of the fathers of the Greeke Church, which were great patrons of free will, are saued, He that dyeth in the opinion of free will, holdeth not this foundation holding the foundation of the faith which is Christ. The like might be sayde of a number of other, as necessarie doctrines as that, wherein men being misseled, haue notwithstāding bene saued. Therfore seing that the point of the question l
                           〈1 line〉
                        eth chiefly in this distinction, it had bene good, that you had spoken Why then 
                              〈1 line〉
                           aue not you done it, speaking so daungerously? more certainely and properly of these things.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        When you say, That it i
                              〈1 line〉
                           no small in
                              〈1 line〉
                           urie that I doe vnto the worde of God to pinne it vp in so narrowe roome. &c. You doe but enlarge the volume of your booke with bare words that myght well be spared. I gy
                              〈1 line〉
                           e that perfection to the worde of God, which the worde it selfe requireth, and all godly learned men consent vnto: and muche more doe I attribute vnto it than you do, in saying that many things are both commaunded and forbyddē of the which there is no expresse mentiō in the word, which are as necessary to be followedPag. 13. Sect. 2. or auoyded, as those whereof expresse mention is made, which I take to derogate much from the perfection of the Scriptures, to be méere Papisticall, and quite contrarie to that, that you doe pretende. I also confesse, that in all other things we muste so be directed by the Scriptures, that we doe nothing contrarie to the true sense and meaning of them, no not in externall and in the leaste matters: neyther doe I otherwise write, teache, or speake of the perfec
                              〈1 line〉
                           ion and authoritie of the Scriptures, than all other leane
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           
men, and the reformed Churches, teache, write, and beléeue: wherefore I passe ouer your words and come to your reasons.
                        If I meane, say you, by matters of fayth and necessarie to saluation, those without the which a man can not be saued. &c. I can not but muse what you meane willingly to pretende ignorance. Is this thinke you a sounde argument: Diuers of the fathers of the Greeke Churche, which were greate patrons of free will, are saued, holding the foundation of the fayth which is Christ: Ergo The doctrine of free will is not a doctrine of saluation or damnation? you myght as well say, that many in the popishe Church which beléeued that the Pope was supreme head of the Church, that the Masse was a sacrifice for the quicke & the dead, and such like poynts of p
                              •
                           pisticall Religion be saued, Ergo these are no matters of saluatiō or damnatiō. Surely by the same reason al other kinde of sinnes (almost)The mercie of God infinite. might be without this compasse. But it may please you to vnderstand, that the mercie of God in his sonne Iesus Christ is infinite, and that he pardoneth at his good will and pleasure, not onely misbeliefe procéeding of ignorance, but wilfull erreurs, and sinnes also, thoughe they be of themselues damnable: he also altereth the minde of man euen in a moment, and therefore as hys mercyes be infinite, so be his iudgementes vnsearchable. Wherefore this your reason is vttered without due consideration. The doctrine of free wyll bycause it is an enimye to the grace of God, must néedes be of it selfe a damnable doctrine, yet doth it not preiudice the mercie of God, nor finally shut oute repentance the gifte of God. And full well doe you knowe, that he can not hold ye foundation of faith (that is Christ) perfectly, which is a mayntayner of free will. But leauiug the weight of such kind of argumentes to the consideration of the Reader: I come to the purpose. When I saye that an argument holdeth negatiuely from the authoritie of the Scripture in matters of fayth and necessarie to saluation, my meaning is manifest: which is this, that the Scriptures doe containe all things necessarie to be beléeued, and to saluation: and therfore whatsoeuer is taught vnto vs, as an article of fayth and necessarie to saluation, not contained in the scriptures, that same to be false and vntrue, and therefore to be reiected. As for example, the doctrine of fre wyll, of Purgatorie, of praying for the dead, of praying to Saint
                              〈1 line〉
                           , of the sacrifice of the Masse, &c. are not contayned in the Scriptures, and therefore they be not doctrines to be beléeued, nor necessarie to saluation, but damnable d
                              〈1 line〉
                           ctrynes of themselues, and repugnant to saluation. Surely I thinke in this poynte that you neither vnderstande me nor your selfe: my meaning is plaine, that nothing is necessarie to saluation, which is not plainely contained in the Scriptures.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 21. Sect. 4.
                     But, that no ceremonie, order, discipline, or kinde of gouernmenteWhat things the Scripture hath not expressed, but left to the ordering of the Church. may be in the Churche, except the same be expressed in the worde of God, is a great absurditie, and breedeth many inconueniences.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 14. Sect. 3.
                     But to the ende it may appeare, that this speach of yours: doth some thing take vp and shrinke the armes of the Scripture, which otherwise are so long & large: I say that the word of God containeth the direction of all things pertaining to the Church, yea of whatsoeuer things can fall into any part of mans lyfe. For so Salomon saith in the seconde chapter of the Prouerbes. My sonne if thou receiue my words, and hide my preceptes in the. &c. then thou shalt vnderstande iustice andThe Scripture wrested by T. C. iudgement, and equitie, and euery good way. S. Paule sayth that whither we eate or drinke, or1. Cor. 10. what soeuer we do, we must doe it to the glory of God. But no man can glorifie God in any thing but by obedience, and there is no obedience, but in respecte of the commaundement and worde of God: therefore it followeth that the word of God directeth a man in all his actions: & that which1. Tim. 4. S. Paule sayd of meates and drinkes, that they are sanctifyed vnto vs by the word of God, the same is to be vnderstanded of all things else whatsoeuer we haue the vse of. But the place of S. Paule in the. 14. to the Rom. is of all other most cleare, where speaking of those things which are called indifferent, in the ende he concludeth, that whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne: but faith is not but in respect of the word of God, therfore whatsoeuer is not done by the word of God, is sin. And

if any will saye that S. Paule meaneth there, a full persuasion and 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         that that which he doth is well done, I graunt it. But from whence can that spring but from fayth, and how can we persuade and assure ouresclues that we doe well, but whereas we haue the worde o
                           〈1 line〉
                         God for our warrant? so that the Apostle by a metonunie, Subjecti pro adiuncto, doth giue to vnderstand from whence the assured persuasion doth spring, wherevpon it falleth out, that for as much as ma
                           〈1 line〉
                         our actions euen ciuill and priuate, we ought to follow the direction of the word of God, in matters of the Churche, & which concerne all, there may be nothing done but by the word of Go
                           〈1 line〉
                        . Then haue you heth
                              〈1 line〉
                           r to stri
                              〈1 line〉
                           ed in vaine Not that we say, as you charge vs in these wordes, when you say, that we say, that Holde you here. no 
                           〈◊〉
                        . &c. may be in the Church, except the same be expressed in the word of God, but that in making orders & ceremonies of the Church, it is not lawful to do what men list, but they are bound to follow the generall rules of the scripture, that are giuen to be the squire, wherby those should be squared out.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        When I say that the scriptures containe all things necessary vnto saluation, I doeNow 
                                 〈1 line〉
                               scripture 
                                 〈◊〉
                               the direction of all things belonging to the life of man. 
                                 Page. 15.
                            not meane that it containeth those things onely, neither doe I denie but that the worde of God, so containeth generally the direction of all things pertayning to the Churche, or that 
                              〈◊〉
                            fall into any part of mans life, that nothing ought to be done in the Churche, or in the life of man contrarie to the word of God, or not according to the true intent and meaning of the same. Yet doe I denie that the scriptures doe expresse particularly euerie thing that is to be done in the Church (which you your selfe afterward confesse) or that it doth set downe any one certaine forme and kynd of gouernment of the Churche, to be perpetuall for all times, persons, and places, without alteration, as I shall hereafter more particularly declare.
                        The place you do alleage out of the. 2. chap. of Salomons Prouerbes, doth not proue your purpose, for Salomon there teacheth the fruites and commoditie of wisedome, and in the person of hir, declareth what vnderstanding he shall haue in righteousnesse, iudgement, equitie, and euery good pathe, that harkeneth vnto wisedome, obeyeth hir commaundements, and giueth his hart to knowledge. But what is this to proue, that the scripture hath expressed euery particular ceremonie, or kind of gouernment in the Church? how followeth this reason, if Princes and such as be in authoritie, receiue the words of wisedome, and hide hir commaundements within them. &c. they shall vnderstandPro
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 er. 2. righteousnesse, iudgement, and equitie, and euerie good pathe. &c. therfore the scriptures do expresse euerie ceremonie, order, discipline or kinde of gouernment that is to be vsed in the Church? surely except you take héede you wil wander as farre out of the way in aleaging the scriptures, as the authors of the Admonition did in quoting them. I graunt you that Princes muste giue them selues to the vnderstanding of wysedome, and especially of the wisedome of God contained in his word, for so shall they vnderstande righteousnesse, iudgement, and equitie, and euerye good pathe. &c. But what is this to our question? Magistrates must be directed by the worde of God: Ergo they must make no ciuill or ecclesiasticall lawe, or order, which is not expressed in the word of God: I deny this argument. Your other text is written in the. 1. Cor. 10. VVhither therfore we eate or drinke. &c. Whervpon you frame this argument: whatsoeuer1. Cor. 10. we do, we must do it to the glory of God: but no man can glorisie God in any thing but by obedience, and there is no obedience, but in respect of the commaundement and word of God. Therfore it followeth, that the word of God directeth a man in all his actions: (to omit the vndigested forme of this argument, wherin the conclusion agréeth not with the 
                              〈◊〉
                           ) this text is as farre frō the purpose as is the other, for what sequele is this, we must do all to the glory of God, we must obey the cōmandement & wordes of God: Ergo we must do nothing in our whole life, but that which is particularly expressed in the worde of God: Or, therfore the scripture expresseth euery particular ceremonie, or
                              〈1 line〉
                           er, or kind of gouernment to be vsed in the Church? You may as well by this place conclude, that euery ciuil actiō, euery priuate actiō, euery ciuil kind of gouernment, is expressed in y• word. For this rule of S. Paule is general, and pertaineth to all Christians, of what state, conditiō or degrée so euer they be. But the true meaning of S. Paule in yt place is, that we seke ye glory of God in all things, & do nothing that is against his word and commādement. He glori
                              〈1 line〉
                           ieth God in meate & drinke which acknowledgeth God to be the giuer of them, and then is thankefull for them, and vseth them moderately, &c. the like is to be said of all other actions.

That whiche Saincte Paule (you say) sayde of meates and drinkes, that they are sanctified vnto vs by the worde of God. &c. It is true, but to what purpose doe you alledge that1. Tim. 4. place? The woorde of God pronounceth all Gods creatures to bée good, and the vse of them to bée lawful (for al thyngs are cleane to those that bee cleane) the same are toTit. 1. 15. be desyred by vs of hym, as the author and giuer of them, and when we haue them wée must be thankefull for them: But what is this to the proofe of any thing that wée haue nowe in controuersie?
                        But the place of Saincte Paule in the. 14. to the Romains (you saye) is of all other moste cleare. &c. Wherevpon you frame this argumente, Paule speaking of things which are called indifferent, sayeth that whatsoeuer is not of sayth, is synne, but faythe is not but in respecte of the woorde of God: therefore what soeuer is not doone by the woorde of God is synne: still I omitte the euill framing of your argumentes: For I respecte not the defacing of your skill, but the groundes of youre proofes. That sentence of SaincteThe place in the. 14. to the Rom. expoū
                              ded. Paule is also generall, and it is to be extended to all ciuill actions, as well as it is to Ecclesiasticall, and therefore if it proue that all Ciuill and Politike actions and kyndes of gouernmente muste bée particularlye expressed in the Scrptures: it proueth the same in Ecclesiasticall matters also: else not. But the meanyng of the Apostle is, that wée shoulde doe nothyng agaynste oure conscience, nothing but that whyche wée doe beléeue not to displease God, not to bée agaynste hys woord, or cōmaundement. For not to be of Fayth, hath dyuers significations. Fyrst, it signifieth that, that is contrarie to the perswasion of the faythe and iudgement of the conscience: Secondly it signifyeth, not to be taken as an article of Faith. If it be taken in the fyrst signification: Then it is not true that whatsoeuer can not be proued in the worde of God, is not of fayth, for then to take vp a strawe, to obserue manie Ciuill orders, and to doo a number of particular actions, were agaynste faythe, and so deadely synne: bycause it is not founde in the woorde of God, that wée shoulde doe them. The whyche doctrine muste néedes bryng a greate seruitude and bondage to the conscience, restrayne or rather vtterly ouerthrowe that parte of Christian libertie, whiche consisteth in the frée vse of indifferent thinges, neyther commaunded nor forbidden in the worde of God, and throwe men headlong into desperation. For what man is able to shewe the woorde of God for all thyngs he dothe? If it bée taken in the seconde signification, then it is true, that that is not of Faythe, whyche can not bée proued by the woord. For nothyng is to bée beléeued as an article of faith, which cannot bée proued by the woord of God. In this. 14. to the Romaines, not to bée of Faythe is taken in the fyrste signification, that is agaynste the persuasion of the faythe and iudgemente of the conscience: as thoughe hée shoulde saye, whatsoeuer a man dothe agaynste his conscience, that is synne. And thys to bée the true meanyng of thys place, the woordesRom. 14. vers. 22. goyng before, doe declare, where the Apostle sayeth, Blessed is he that condemneth not himselfe in the thyng whiche he alloweth, that is, whose dooyngs are not agaynste hys conscience.
                        Thys rule (I saye) of Saincte Paule, extendeth as well to Ciuill actions, as it dothe to Ceremonies and orders of the Churche, and therefore what you wil conclude of the one, that muste you also conclude of the other: But I thinke you will not saye, that euery ciuill action muste be expressed or commaunded in the woorde of God: wherefore neyther can you proue by these wordes of S. Paule, that euery ceremonie, order, or kinde of gouernmente in the Churche must be commanded by the woorde of God.
                        But what néede I laboure so muche in a matter at the lengthe confessed,The matter in controuersie is by T. C. confessed. by youre selfe: for you denye that you saye, That no Ceremonie. &c. maye bee in the Churche, excepte the same bee expressed in the woorde of God, but that in makyng orders and ceremonies of the Church, it is not lawfull to doe what men liste. &c.
                        Holde you here, and wée shall soone agrée. For neyther dothe that, that I haue hythertoo spoken in thys matter, nor that whyche I intende to speake héereafter, disagrée from thys: the whyche you myghte haue séene, yf it

it had pleased you, page. 22. and. 28. of the Answere to the Admonition, and in myPag. 22. sect. 2. Pag. 28. sect. 2. whole discourse of that matter. Wherfore if you were constant, and not contrarie vnto your selfe, or at the least not desirous to haue shewed your selfe contrary to that which I haue in this point written (though you here confesse it to be true) you might haue both eased your selfe and me of this labour.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the fyfte Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 15. lin. 8. & Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
                     Which rules I will here sette downe, as those which I would haue as wel all orders and ceremonies of the Church framed by, as by the which I will be content, that all those orders and ceremonies which are now in question, whether they be good and conuenient or no, should be tried and examined by. And they are those rules, whiche Sainct Paule gaue in suche cases, as are not particularly mentioned of in the Scripture.1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 14.
                     
                     
                        The fyrste, that they offend not any You ad, especially, to the text especially the Churche of God.
                        The seconde is, (that which you cite also out of Paule) that all be done in order and comelynesse.1. Cor. 14. Rom. 14.
                        
                        The thirde, that all be doone to edifying.
                        The last, that they be done to the glorie of God.
                     
                     So that you see that those thyngs which you recken vp of the houre, and time, & day of prayer, &c. albeit they be not specified in the Scripture, yet they are not left to any, to order at their pleasure▪ or so that they be not against the worde of God: but euen by and according to the woorde of God, they must be established, and those alone to be taken, which doe agree best & neerest with these rules before recited. And so it is brought to passe (which you thinke a greate absurditie,) that all things in the Churche shoulde be appointed, according to the worde of God: whereby it lykewyse appeareth, that we denye not but Here in effect T. C. confesseth the matter in question. certayn thyngs are left to the order of the Church, bycause they are of that nature, which are varyed by tymes, places, persons, and other circumstances, and so coulde not at once be set downe and established for euer: What is affirmed otherwise▪ in the answer to the Admonitiō
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         and yet so left to the order of the church, as that it doe nothing agaynst the rules aforesayd. But howe doth this followe, that certaine things are left to the order of the Churche, therfore to make a new ministerie by making an Archebishop, to alter the ministerie that is appoynted, by making a Bishoppe or pastor without a Churche or flocke, to make a Deacon, without appoynting him his Church wherof he is deacon, and where he myght exercise his charge of prouiding for the poore, to abrogate cleane both name and office of the eldet, with other more: how I say do these followe that bycause the Church hath power to order certayne things, therefore it hath power to do so of these whiche God hath ordeyned and established: of the which there is no tyme, nor place, nor person, nor any other circumstaunce, whiche can cause any alteration or change? whyche thing shall better appeare both in the Discourse of the whole booke: and especially there where you go about to shew certaine reasons, why there shoulde be other gouernment nowe, than was in the tyme of the Apostles.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You sette downe foure rules, whiche you woulde haue all orders and ceremonies ofThe first rule of T. C. concerning ceremonies examined. the Church framed by. &c. The first is. 1. Cor. 10. that they offende not any, especially the Churche of God, whiche rule I thinke you take out of these wordes of that Chapter, 
                              Tales estote, vt nullum praebeatis offendiculum, neque Iudaeis. &c. be suche as you giue no offence neither to the Iewes, nor to the Grecians, nor to the Churche of God. But truly they make1. Co. 10. ve. 32. little or nothing for your purpose, neither yet any other thing conteyned in that chapter. For the Apostle there sheweth how one priuate man should behaue himself towardes an other, yea and towardes the Church in things that may be done, or notThe orders of the Church depend not vpon euery mans liking, or mislyking. be done: he prescribeth no generall rule for the Churche to make orders and appoynte Ceremonies by. For what reason were it that the orders of the Churche shoulde so depende vppon one or two mennes lyking or misselyking, that she should be compelled to alter the same, so ofte as any shoulde therwith be offended? Which must of necessitie come to passe, if thys your rule were generall. For what Churche is voide of some contentious persons, & quarellers, whō no order, no reason, no reformatiō
                           Musculus. can please? It is true that Musculus sayth: There bee some whō no churche can please, hauing alwayes some thing to reproue in other men, and nothing in themselues. The Anabaptistes, the Libertines, the Papistes, and other vnquiet myndes, and

contentious persons are offended with such rites and Ceremonies as the reformed Churches vse: neither is there (as I suppose) any reformed Church voyde of some of these kinde of persons: shall they therfore by and by alter the forme and state? S. Paule in this place would haue no iuste offence giuen to any either faithfull or infidell. For Christians ought to be such, at whose examples, doctrine, and lyfe, no man mighte iustely take any offence. True it is, that in all orders and Ceremonies the Church must take héed that there be no iust offence giuen, but she hath not to depend vpon euery priuate mans iudgement.
                        Whereas you say, especially the Churche of God, you adde to the wordes of the Apostle,T. C. addeth to the texte, to make it serue his turne. for he sayth not especially: and if you marke his meaning well, you shall rather finde that he woulde haue especiall care taken, that there be no offence giuen to such as are not yet come to the Churche (whiche some vnderstand by the Iewes and Grecians) least they shoulde still be withdrawne from the Churche, when as there is no suche feare to be had of those that be alreadie membres of the same.The seconde rule of T. C. allowed. The iudgemēt of comelinesse and order, resteth not in euery priuate person. The thirde rule examined.
                        
                        Your seconde rule. 1. Cor, 14. is a good and necessarie rule, not onely alledged by me, b
                              〈1 line〉
                           t allowed and imbraced as moste conueniente: but who shall iudge what is moste comely and the best order? shall euery priuate man, or rather such as haue the chiefe care and gouernment of the Churche? This is a rule prescribed by the Apostle to the Church, wherby she must direct hir orders and gouernment, not to euery priuato person to picke a quarell to disquiet the Church.
                        The third. 1. Cor. 14. that all be doone to edifying. This sentence can not be applyed ge nerally to all things vsed in the Churche, if we truly interprete the meaning of the Apostle, but to the gifte of toungs, to prayers, and to prophecies, whereof he hath made mētion before. Neither can I perceiue that any learned Interpreter doth take it as a general rule for al rites and ceremonies, but only for the exercises of Praying, singing of Psalmes, interpreting, and Prophecying. For of things vsed in the Church, some pertaine to instruction, and some to order and comelinesse. For the firste he giueth thys rule, Letal things be done to edifying. For both the first and the second he giueth this, 
                              Omnia decenter. &c. Let all things be done decently and in order. Althoughe those ceremonies and rites whiche are appointed by the Churche for order and comlinesse, do edifieIn the treatise of appare tract. 7. as Ceremonies, that is, not of themselues, but 
                              per accidens, accidentally, as I haue in an other place declared It is sufficient if the Gouernours of the Church, and suche as haue authoritie to ordeyne suche rites, doe thynke them to be profitable in the respect of the tyme, person, and place: neyther muste euerie priuate mannes iudgement in this case be respected, as it is well sette downe by the Articles agréed vpon by the Dutche Churche in London, allowed by M. Beza, and by diuers other reformed Churches. It is the thirde article: 
                              Quid porrò ad aedificationem faciat. &c. MoreouerTheses Ecclesia Belgio-germanicae. arti. 3. what is profytable to edifye, and what is not, is not to be determined by the iudgemente of the common people, nor of some on man, nor yet by the issue of mens actions. &c.
                        
                        I can net vnderstande out of what parte of the. 14. to the Romaines, youre lasteThe last rule pertaineth no more to ceremonies thā to other actions. rule is taken, except it be the sixt, seuen, or eyght verses, out of the whiche I would gladly knowe howe you can deriue any rule to frame ceremonies by, rather than all other actions of man whatsoeuer.
                        These be your rules to square by, and truly we refuse them not, thoughe some of them pertain nothing to your purpose. The Dutch Churche and the other Churches in the. 11. of those articles before mentioned, touching cōmaunding or forbidding indifferent things, determin thus. 
                              Qui propter aliam rationem. &c. They whiche for any other cause either cōmand or forbid at their pleasure, the free vse of indifferēt things, then for oneTheses Eccles. Belg. art. 11. of these three, that is neither for edifying, nor for policy, nor ecclesiastical order, & especially those which do rashly iudge other mēs cōsciences in these matters, offēd heynonsly against god, & against their neighbours. Wherby they séeme to allow any order takē in indifferent things, if it tend either to edifying, or policie, or ecclesiastical order. But to return to your Reply: yt which you speak of houre, time, & day of prayer. &c. iustifie my saying: for

they be not expressed in the scripture, as you also now affirm, but left to the ordering (not of euery priuate man) but of the Churche, or such as haue the chief care and gouernment of the same, to appoint as they shal thinke most conuenient and agréeable to the generall rules giuen in the scripture for that purpose. Neither is this contrarie to any thing that I haue written. But bothe in this and that also whiche immediatly foloweth, you are contrarie to your self, and directly ad oppositum to the Admonition,T. C. is contrarie to himselfe and to the Admonition, and agreeth with the answere. As by conference may appeare: for these be your owne wordes, Whereby it lykewyse appeareth, that we denye not but certayne things are lefte to the order of the Churche, bycause they are of that nature which are varyed by tymes, places, persons, & other circumstances, and so coulde not at once be set downe and established for euer. And yet so left to the order of the Church, as that it doe nothyng against the rules aforesayde. What dothe this differ from these wordes of myne: It is also true that nothing in Ceremonies, order, discipline, or gouernmente of the Churche is to be suffered against the word of God? and to this end doe all those authorities and places tende, that I haue alledged for this matter. So that eyther you vnderstand not me, or not your selfe, or else your quarell is againste the person, not the cause. The admonition in this poynt you defende not: for it sayeth directly, that those things only are to be placed inFol. 19. Gods Church, whiche the Lorde himselfe in his worde commaundeth. And although peraduenture you will shifte this off, by saying that they meane suche things only as bée commaunded eyther generally or specially, yet the whole discourse of their booke declareth, that their meaning is, that nothing ought to be placed in the Church which is not specially commaunded in the worde of God.
                        But séeing you and I agrée in this, that the Church hath authoritie to ordeyn ceremonies and make Orders, whiche are not expressed in the woorde of God, it remayneth to bée considered wherein we differ: whiche is (as I thinke) in this, that I say, the Churche of England hath lawfully vsed her authoritie, in suche ceremonies & orders, as she hath appointed, & nowe retaineth, and you denie the same: so that your controuersie is against the Church of England, and the Ceremonies and orders vsed therein. And therefore you adde and saye, but howe doth this follow, that certaine things are left to the order of the Churche, therfore to make a newe ministerie. &c. Whereby you giue vs to vnderstande, that the things you misselike in this Church, are the office and name of an Archbishop, whiche you vntruly call a newe ministerie, (as it is by me declared in my answere to the Admonition) oure ministerie, the gouernment of our Church, and (as you say) other more, that is, all thinges at your pleasure. But how iustly and truly this is spoken, shall appeare in their proper places. In the meane tyme it is sufficient to tell you, that you are an vnwoorthy member of this Churche, whiche so vniustly report of it, so vnchristianly slaunder it, and so without groundes and sounde proofes condemne it. There is nothyng by it, or in it altered, which God hath ordeined and established, not to be altered.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the syxt Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 21 Sect. 5. 6. & Pag. 22. Sect. 1. 2.
                     The Scripture hath not prescribed any place or time, wherein or when the Lordes Supper should be celebrated, neither yet in what manner. The Scripture hath not appoynted what tyme, or where the congregation shall meete for common Prayer, and for the hearing of the word of God, neither yet any discipline for the correcting of such as shall contemne the same.
                     The Scripture hath not appointed what day in the weeke, should be most meete for the Saboth day, whither Saterday, which is the Iewes Saboth, or the day now obserued, which was appointed by the Churche.
                     
                        The Scripture hath not determined what forme is to be vs
                           〈1 line〉
                        d in matrimonie, what words, what prayers, what exhortations.
                     The Scripture speaketh not one worde of standing, sitting or kneling at the Communion, of meeting in Churches, fieldes, or houses, to heare the word of God: of preaching in pulpets, chaires, or otherwise: of Baptising in fontes, in basons, or riuers: openly or priuately, at home, or in the Church, euery day in the weeke, or on the Sabaoth day only. And yet no man (as I suppose) is so simple to thinke that the Church hath no authoritie to take order in these matters.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 15. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 16. Sect. 1.
                     But whyle you goe about to seeme to say muche, and rake vp a great number of things, you haue made very euill meslyn, and you haue put, in one, things which are not paires nor matches. Bycause I will not drawe the Reader willingly into more questions than are alreadie put vp, I will not stande to dispute, whether the Lordes day (which we call Sonday) being the day of the Resurrection of our Sauior Christ, and so the day wherin the world was renued: as the Iewes Sabboth was the day wherin the world was finished, and being in all the Churches in the Apostles tymes (as it seemeth) vsed for the day of the rest and seruing of God, ought or may be changed or no. This one thing I may say, that there was no It is lesse true dealing for you to charg
                              〈1 line〉
                            men wi
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ey haue not affir
                              〈1 line〉
                           ed. great indgement to make it as arbitrarie and chaungeable, as the houre and the place of prayer. But where was pour iudgement, when you wrote that the scripture hath appointed no discipline nor correction for such as shal contemne the common prayers, and hearing the word of God? what Church discipline would you haue other than admonitions reprehensions, and if these will not profit excommunication? and are they not appointed of our Sauiour Christ Scriptures vnskilfully alleaged. Math. 18? There are also ciuill punishments, and punishments of the body likewise appointed by the worde of God in diuers places Scriptures vnskilfully alleaged. in the. 22. of Exodus. He that sacrificeth to other gods, & not to the Lord, alone, shal die the death. And in ye 
                        Scriptures vnskilfully alleaged. 19. of Deutronomie. Thou shalte turne out the euill out of the middest of thee, that the rest may 
                           〈1 line〉
                        eare and feare, and not dare do the lyke. The execution of this lawe appeareth in the Scriptures vnskilfully alleaged. 15. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        . 2. Chro. by king Aza, who made alawe that al those that did not seeke the Lord, should be killed. And thus you see the ciuill punishment of contemners of the worde and prayers.
                     There are other for suche as neglect the worde, whiche are according to the quantitie of the faulte: so that whether you meane ciuill or Ecciesiasticall correction, the scripture Or else you are deceyued. hath defined of them bothe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Out of all these things whiche I saye the Scripture hath not prescribed or appointed,T. C. seeketh quarels wher none are offered. you choose to carpe at first, The Lordes daye, whiche we call Sonday, and you saye, that you will not dispute whether it ought or may be changed or no: when as you should rather haue proued it, to be appointed by the scriptures (which no doubt you would haue done if you coulde) for that is it whych I denye. Where haue you hearde mée say, that it may or ought to bée altered? if you will confute, confute that whyche I haue sette downe and affirme, not that whiche it pleaseth you to imagine.
                        In good sooth, this is no true dealyng. No maruell it is that you haue not sette downe my booke, séeing you deale thus corruptely with it. I doe not thinke thatThe determination of the church ought not lightly to be altered. that whiche the Churche hath once determined, and by long continuance proued to be necessarie, ought to be altered, without great and especiall consideration. I saye with Sainct Augustin 
                              Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. If any thyng be vniuersallye obserued of the whole Churche, not to obserue that, or to call it into question, is meere madnesse, therfore,Aug. ep. 118. seing that it hath had suche time of continuaunce, that it was for so good and iuste causes appoynted, and is so generallye obserued of the Churche, I doe not thynke it nowe arbitrarie, nor to be chaunged: muche lesse doe I make it as arbitrarie or chaungeable as the place and houre of prayer, whiche may be diuers in diuers churches, and it is among those rites and orders that be diuersly obserued in diuers places, wherof also August. maketh mention in that Epistle. Surely as there had bene little iudgement in me, if I had made it chaungeable, so is there small honestie in you to alter my wordes, and to falsifie my meaning.
                        
                           Secondly, you myslike that I should say, The scripture not to haue appointed discipline or correction, for such as shall contemne the cōmon Prayers, and hearing the worde of God. And you aske me where my iudgement was? but I haue more cause to deiliaulide of you, where that learning and skillScriptures vnskilfully alledged by T. C. is which you so muche bragge of, séeing that you so vnskilfully alledge the Scriptures against their true meaning and sense? For where haue you learned that Christ in the. 18. of Mathew dothe appointe any generall rule for publike offences, suche as negligence, and contempt in frequenting publike Prayers, and hearing of the word of God is? The very words of Christ, If thy brother trespasse agay
                                 〈1 line〉
                              st thee &c. do teathMath. 18. that he meaneth not there of open and knowne, but of secrete and particular sinnes. The which thing also the note that is in the margent of the Bible printed at Geneua, myghte haue taught you, if you had bene as well disposed to haue followed the same in this place, as you séeme to haue doone in other places. M. Caluine in his boke agaynst the Anabap. reprouing them for vsing this place to the establishing of their kynde of discipline by excommunication, saythe on this sorte: They are againe deceyued,Caluin. aduer. Anabap. in that they consider not that the Lorde speaketh in that place of secrete faultes: for as for those, which are manifest and giue vnto the people cause of offence, they are to be corrected by other meanes than by secrete admonitions. You muste therfore séeke for some other place than this, if you will proue that the Scripture hath appointed any discipline and correction for suche as shall contemne the Common Prayers, and hearing of the worde.
                        To proue that there are also ciuill punishmentes, and punishments of the bodie for contemnyng common prayers, and hearing of the worde, appointed by the worde of God, you cite 22. of Exodus. 19. of Deuteronomie &c. But before I come to the answering of these places, I pray you let me aske of you these questions.
                        First, whether you would haue both Ecclesiasticall & ciuil punishment for the selfe same faulte?
                        Secondly, whether you woulde haue negligence or contempte in frequenting of common prayers & hearing of the word, punished with death or no? for that punishment is appoynted in those places by you alleaged.
                        Last of all, whether you thinke the Iudiciall lawes to be perpetual, & to binde the ciuill Magistrate to the obseruing of them, & to restrain him from making any other,The vnaptnesse of the proofes of T. C. as shall be thought to him most conuenient? for except you wil haue two kinds of punishments for one and the self same offence: except you will punish with death suche as be negligent in cōming to publike prayers: to be shorte, except you will haue the ciuill Magistrate bound of necessitie to practise these iudicial lawes of Moses, (which in déede you affirme afterwardes in your booke) those places make nothing for your purpose. So that you are yet as farre to séeke for Scripture, that appointeth any certaine kinde of discipline for these matters, as euer you were.
                        But that it may be vnderstode howe vnreasonably you wring & wrest the scriptures, so make them serue your turne, I will in one woorde or two declare ye meaning of those places, and set open the might of your argumentes.
                        In the. 22. of Exodus the place by you alleaged, the punishment of death is appointedExod. 22. for Idolaters, whervpon you would ground this argument. God in the. 22. of Exodus appointeth death as a punishment for Idolaters, Ergo
                            the word of God appointeth a certain kind of punishment for such as be negligent in frequenting publik prayers, and contemne the hearing of the worde. I say there is no sequele in this argument, vnlesse you wil make all those that be negligent in cōming to publike praiers, and cō
                           temne to heare the word Idolaters, and this to be a perpetuall lawe.
                        In the 19. of Deuteronomie ther is nothing tending to any such purpose, only in theDeut. 19. latter end of the chapter, there is a punishment appointed for him that beareth false witnesse, whervpon these woords, so thou shalt take euill away from the middest of thee &c. by you here alledged, do folow. Now if you will thus conclude, God in the. 19. of Deutronomie appointeth a punishment for a false witnesse: Ergo, the scripture hath appointed discipline for such as neglect to come to publike praiers. &c. then indéed you

may proue any thing, & it is but in vaine to strine with you. But Lord what gybing & flouting would there be, if I shold bappē to fall into so manifest & open absurdities.
                        In the. 2. Chro. 15. Aza made the same punishmente for Idolatrie, that is mentioned2▪ Chro 1
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . in the. 22. of Exo. and therefore the same answere serueth that place. Truly I thinke you take your selfe to haue frée libertie to applie the scriptures at your pleasure, else would you neuer thus abuse them without all iudgement or reason.
                        What I thinke of the necessitie or continuance of these lawes, I will declare in aT. C. triumpheth before the victoris. more speciall place: In the meane time, you blow the triumph before the victorie: for as yet, you haue not proued that the scripture doth appoint any certaine kind eyther of ciuill punishment or Church discipline for such as contemne or neglecte the comming to publike prayers, and hearing of the word of God.
                        You say that there are other punishments for such as neglect the word of God. &c. but you neither tell vs what they be, nor where to find them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 16. Sect. 1. line. 3.
                     I omit that there be examples of Pulpits in Esdras, of chaires in the. 23. of Math. whereby the chaire of Moses our sauioure Christ meaning the doctrine of Moses, doth also declare the manner which they vsed in teaching: of sitting at the Communion (whiche the Euangelist noteth to haue bin done of our fauioure Christ with his disciples) whiche examples are not to be lightly chaunged, and vppon many occasions.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Examples of Pulpits you say, we find in Esdras. True it is that in the. 8. of Nehem. we reade Esdras stoode vpon a Pulpit of wood, which he had made for the preaching, but the same was placed in the open stréete, neyther did Esdras any thing but reade. The other persons with the Leuites mentioned vers. 7. of that Chap. did cause the people to vnderstand the law: that is, made them giue diligent eare to the reading of the law. And although there be words in the. 8. verse, which (as they be translated) séeme to insinuate some kinde of interpretation, yet the meaning is nothing so: for these be the words, Et apposuerunt intellectum, & intellexerunt scripturam illam, that is (as learned men do interprete it) 
                              aduerterunt animum, they were attentiue to the reading, orNebem. 8. as some translate it, 
                              Et legerunt in libro legis Dei distinctè & appositè ad intelligendum: & intellexerunt cum legeretur, And they read in the booke of the law of God, distinctly and in such sort, as they might easily vnderstand. Hereof may I much better gather that reading is preaching, than you can do that the scripture appointeth Pulpits. For though Esdras did so, is it therefore by and by a rule to be followed? You reade not of any of the Apostles that did in like manner, neither is there any mention made of Pulpits, from the beginning of the new testament to the end of the same. And this place maketh rather for Pulpits to reade in, than for Pulpits to preach in.
                        It is most certaine that by the chaire of Moses in that place, is ment the doctrine of Moses, whether it declare any place or no made for Moses to teach the people in, that is but coniecturall: neyther haue we any example expressed either in Moses himselfe, or in any other that may resolue that doubt. Howsoeuer it is, the matter is not great. For things vsed in the old Church do not prescribe any rule to the Church of Christe, vnlesse it can be shewed Christe himselfe and his Apostles to haue vsed the same.
                        My meaning is that in the whole scripture, there is neither Pulpit nor chaire prescribed to be vsed in the Church of Christe, but that and such other like things left to the disposition of the Church, as shall be thought most conuenient from time to time.
                        What though Christ sat at his last supper, doth it therefore follow that of necessitie we must néedes sit? why must we not then as well be bound to receiue the same after supper? I say agayne that the scripture dothe no where prescribe, whither we shall sit, stand, or knéele, at the communion: if it do prescribe sitting why do some of

you vse walking, othersome standing, whiche both do more differ from sitting than knéeling doth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. The eight Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 16. Sect. 2. &. 3.
                     But this I cannot omit, that you make it an indifferent thing to preach the worde of God in Churches or in houses, that is to say, priuately or publikely. For what better interpretation can I haue than of your owne words, which saith by and by after, of Baptisme, that it is An vntruth, for there is no such thing said. at the order of the Church, to make it priuate or publike. For if it be in the power of the Church to order that Baptis
                           〈1 line〉
                        e may be ministred at the house of euery priuate person, it is also in hir power to ordayne that the word be preached also priuately. And then where is that whiche Salomon saith that A place of scripture strāge lv applied. wisedome crieth openly and in the streates, and at the corners of the streates where many 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ieete? and where be the examples of the old Church, which had besides the Temple at Ierusalem, erected vp Sinagogues in euery towne to heare the word of God, & minister the circumcisiō? These places proue that the word ought to be preached publikely, but not onely publikely. what is become of the commaundement of our sauioure Christ, whiche willed his disciples that they should preach openly, and vpon the house topps, that which they hard in the eare of him and secretly? and how do we obserue the example of our sauioure Christ, who to deliuer his doctrine from all suspicion of tumults and other disorders, sayd that he preached openly in the temple, and in the Sinagogues, albeit the same were very daungerous vnto him? and the example of the Apostles that did the sa
                           〈1 line〉
                        ie? for as for the time of persecution, when the Church dare not, nor it is not meete, that it should shew it selfe to the enimie, no not then is the word of God nor the sacramentes priuately preached or ministred, nor ought to be.
                     For although they be done in the house of a priuate man, yet bycause they are and ought to be ministred in the presence of the congregation, there is neither priuate preaching, nor priuate baptisme. For like as wheresoeuer the Queenes maiestie lyeth there is the Court, although it be in a gentleman his house, so wheresoeuer the Church meeteth, it is not to be holden priuate as touching the prayers, preachings, and sacraments, that shall be there ministred: so that I denie vnto you that the Chnrch hathe power to ordeyne at hir pleasure, whither preaching or ministring of Sacraments should be priuate or publike, when they ought not to be, but where the Church is, and the Church This is only said, but not proued. ought not to assemble (if it be not letteed by persecution) but in open places: and when it is driuen from them, those places where it gathereth itselfe togither, although they be otherwise priuate, yet are they for the time that the Churches do there assemble, and for respect of the word and sacraments, that are there ministred in the presence of the Churche, publike places. And so you see those (whome you charge slanderously with conuiuticles) are fayne to glase vp the windowes that you open to secret and priuate conuenticles.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        But this you cannot omitte, that I make it an indifferent thing to preach the worde of God in Churches or in houses. &c. it is an argument that you lacke good matter, when you make such excursions from the purpose. My words be, that the scriptures speake not one worde of meeting in Churches, fieldes, or houses too heare the word of God, of baptising in fonts, in basons, or riuets, openly or priuately, at home or in the Church. &c. If I haue said vntruly, conuince me with scripture, and shew me those places, where these things be determined. Where do I say that these things be now indifferent? to haue the word preached is not indifferent but necessarie, to haue it preached in this place or in that place, in Churches, in fieldes, or in houses, is indifferent, vntill suche time as the ChurcheThings indifferent lose the nature of iudifferencie when they are commaunded. hath otherwise determined. So is it likewise in baptisme, the sacrament is necessary, the circumstances of time and place. &c. be committed to the disposition of the Churche, and remayne so long indifferent, vntill the Churche hathe taken order in them: which being done, then they be no more indifferente. Do you not know that, wherevnto so many Churches reformed, and learned men haue of late subscribed? it is the. 6. assertion. 
                              Res alioqui per se mediae, mutant quodammodò natur
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 m. &c. Things otherwiseTheses eccles. Belgio. art. 6. indifferente of themselues, after a sorte change their nature, when by some lawfull commaundemente, they are either commaunded, or forbidden, bycause neyther then

can be omitted contrary to the commaundement, if they are once commaunded, neyther done contrary to prohibition if they be prohibited, as it appeareth in the ceremoniall law. The place is not of the substance either of the word or of the sacraments: but yet to contemne or willingly to breake the order appointed by the Church in such matters, is sinne.
                        You say that I affirme it to be at the order of the Churche, to make baptisme priuate or publike. Surely you do me greate iniurie, and win your selfe small credite by thysT. C. peruerteth ye words of the Answer kind of dealing. Is it all one to say, that the scripture hath not determined whether baptisme should be ministred opēly or priuately, at home or in the Church, and to say, that the Church may make baptisme priuate or publike? For hereby you would giue your readers to vnderstand, that I thinke it in the power of the Church to appoint that there should be no publike baptisme, wherin (as I said) you do me greate iniurie. My words therefore and meaning tend to this end, that the scripture hathe not any where expressed when baptisme should be celebrated publikely, when priuately: but hathe left that to the determination of the Church, to do therin according to the circumstances of time, person. &c. Neither do I call baptisme priuate in any otherBaptisme is called pr
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ce in respec
                                 〈1 line〉
                               of the place. respect than of the place: and therefore my meaning is, that the scripture hathe not determined where, or when we should baptise, at home in priuate families, or in publike and open places, as fields, Churches, &c. For we haue examples in scripture both of baptising in houses, and of baptising in fields. Act. 8. 9. 10. &. 26. Therefore touching the place, the scripture hath not determined any thing, and in the respect of the place I call it publike or priuate: although I sée nothing in the scripture to the cōtrary, but vpon necessarie occasion, and other circumstances it may be priuate in the respect of persons, that be presente at the celebrating of baptisme: for the number of standers by or of such as are to be baptised, is not of the substance of the sacramente, therefore in that also the Church may take order and hath therein to deale.
                        And as I thinke, that in such respects baptisme may be priuately administred, soThe worde may be preached priuately both in r
                                 〈1 line〉
                              pect of the place and persons. thinke I also that in the like respects the word may be priuately preached. Neyther did the Apostles only preache in the Sinagogues, and in open places, but in priuate families and houses also, as it is manifest. Act. 5. Where it is said that the Apostles did not cease daily to teach and to preach Iesus Christ in the temple, and house by house. Act.Act. 5. 10. Peter preached in Cornelius his house. &. Acts. 16. Paule preached in prison. AndAct. 10. not only was the word preached priuately in respect of the place▪ but sometimes alsoAct. 6. in the respect of the persons, as Christe preached to the woman of Samaria alone.Io 4. Io. 4. And Philip in the chariot to the Eunuch. Act. 8.Act. 8.
                        
                        Your scriptures brought in to proue that there may be no priuate preaching, are very farre fetched, and some of them very straungely applied. That which Salomon saith Prouerb. 8. proueth that God calleth all men by his word and by his works, to follow that which is good, and flye from that which is euill. And I thinke that the meaning of Salomon in that place is that God dothe offer his worde to all persons, in all places, so that there can be no ignorance pretended. But I pray you, how doth this argument follow, the worde of God is offered to all, and openly proclaymed: Ergo it may not be also priuately taught? all your proofes and examples that follow, be of like effect: they proue that the word of God ought publikely to be preached, but they do not take away priuate exhortations and preachings. It is true that both Christe and his Apostles taught in Smagogues, so it is true also that they taught in priuate families, as I haue declared: but yet I say, the scripture hathe not appointed any certaine place of preaching. For Esdras red the law in the streates, Nehem. 8. wisedome crieth in the toppsNehem. 8. of the high places by the way side in the pathes, in the gates before the Citie. Pro. 8. ChristPro. 8. preached in the Mountaine Math. 5. in the Sinagogue, Math. 4. the Apostles in theMath. 5. temple, and in priuate families: do not you therfore sée, that there is no determinatiō
                           ofMath. 4. any place? wherefore the aptnesse of the place, and the conueniencie of it: likewiseAct. 5. when the word is to be preached publikely, when priuately, is left to the iudgement and ordering of the Church. And therefore it is true that I haue set downe, that

the scripture hath not dermined any thing of meeting in Churches, fieldes or houses to heare the worde of God: or of preaching in Pulpits, chaires, or otherwise.
                        There are and may be occasions, euen in the time of prosperitie, when bothe the word may be preached, and the Sacraments administred in priuate families, so that they be done according to the order of the Churche, and not in the contempt of common and publike assemblies. And I thinke that suche noble men and gentlemen as vpon oceasion either of infirmitie of body, or of distance of place, or some other vrgēt cause, haue the word of God preached in their priuate families, and the Sacraments ministred according to the order of the Churche, are greatly to be commended. Neyther doth this open any window, to secrete and schismaticall conuenticles, (suche I meane as seeke corners) bycause they wil not kéep the orders & lawes of the Church, but contemne the same, and conspire in some new and erroneous opinions. In the which number those be, whome I haue truly charged with conuenticles, for they despising the order of the Churche, haue wickedly separated themselues from the same, whose opinions notwithstanding you mainteine, although you would séeme to condemne their conuenticles. But it may be that you coumpt this time to be a time of persecution, and so excuse their doings.
                        To be short, when I speake either of priuate preaching or of priuate ministring the sacraments, I meane it especially in respecte of the place, and not in the respect of any schismaticall separation: so that hitherto you haue said nothing, that impugneth any thing that I haue written. Neyther haue I spoken any otherwise in all these things, than other learned and godly men haue done, as it is to be séene by all theyr seuerall authorities, which I haue in their places set downe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 1. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Page. 22. Sect. 2.
                     I pray you what ment Saint Paule in. 1. Co. 14. after he had prescribed certaine orders vnto them to be obserued in the Church, thus generally to conclude, 
                           Omnia decenter & ordine fiant. Let all things be done decently and in order. Doth he not there giue vnto them authoritie to make orders in the Church, so that al things be done in order and decently? The best interpreters doe vnderstande this as a generall rule giuen vnto the Churche to examine hir traditions and constitutions by: And therefore without all doubt their iudgement is, that the Church hath authoritie in externall things, to make orders, and appoint lawes not expressed in the worde of God, so that this rule of the Apostle be obserued.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Here haue you not answered one word to that which I haue alleadged out of theThe ground of the assertion vnanswered by. T. C. 1. Cor. 14. for the i
                              〈1 line〉
                           stifying of my generall assertion in this point, nor to the interpretation of it: that therefore being graunted, the rest must néedes stande in full force, that is, that the scripture hathe lefte many thinges to the discretion of the Church.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The opinion of auncient fathers and Councelles of things indifferent.
               
                  Chap. 2. the first Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 22 Sect. 3. 4.
                     NOw if either godly councels, or auncient fathers were any thingAuncient fathers of thīgs indifferent. at all regarded of these men (as they be not, suche is their arrogancie) this controuersie might soone be decided.
                     For the most auncient fathers and best learned, as Iustinus Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, and other, do expressely declare that euen from the Apostles time, the Church hath always had authoritie in such matters, and hathe obserued diuers orders and ceremonies, not once mentioned in the word of God.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 16. Sect. 3. &. Page. 17. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Here are broughte in Iustin Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Councells as Wilfull ignorance, for you know very well that euery one of them greatly fauoureth this cause. dumbe persons in the stage only to make a shew, and so they go out of the stage without saying any thing. And if they had had any thing to say in this cause for these matters in controuersie, there is no doubt but M. Doctor would haue made them speake. For when he placeth the greatest strēgth of his cause in antiquitie, he would not haue passed by Iustin, Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, being so auncient, and taken Augustine which was a great time after them. And if the godly councels could haue helped here, it is small wisedome to take Augustine, and leaue them. For I thinke he might haue learned that amongst the authorities of men, the credite of many be better than of one: and that this is a generall rule, that as the iudgement of some notable personage is looked vnto in a matter that is debated, more than theirs of the common sort, so the iudgement of a counsell, where many learned men be gathered togither carieth more likelihoode of truth with it, than the iudgement of one man, although it be but a prouinciall counsell, much more than if it be generall, & therfore you do your cause greate iniurie, if you could alleadge them, and do not. This is once to bee obserued of the reader throughout your whole booke, that you haue well prouided that you should not be taken in the trip, for misaledging the scriptures, for that vnlesse it be in Moe scriptures than you, and something better applyed. one or two points we heare continually (in stead of Esay, and Ierenty. S. Paule, and S. Peter, and the rest of theAnd as we say in our tonge, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ettles amōg roses. Prophets and Apostles, S. Augustine, and S. Ambrose 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Dionisius Areopagita, Clement. &c. And therefore I cannot tell with what face we can call the Papistes from their antiquitie, councels and fathers to the triall of the scriptures, which in the controuersies which rise amongst ourselues, flie so far from them, that it wanteth not much, that they are not banished of your part, from the deciding of all these controuersies.
                     And if this be a sufficient proofe of things to say A better proofe, than to say, I say so, as you commonly vse to do. such a doctor said so, suche a councell decreede so, there is almost nothing so true but I can impugne, nothing so false, but I can make true: And well assured I am, that by their meanes, the principall groundes of our faythe maye be shaken.
                     And therefore bycause you haue Petitio principij. no proofein the word of God, we comfort ourselues, assured, that for so much as the foundations of the Archbyshop, and Lordship of Byshops and of other things, whiche are in question be not in heauen, that they will fall and come to the grounde, from whence they were taken. Now it is knowne they are from beneath and of the earth, and that they are of men and not of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Here are many words which might well haue bin spared, but that you are desirousSect. 1. to haue your modest speaches knowne to the world. In the. 25. page I haue told you where some of these dumbe persons speake their partes, but you are blinde when you should sée, and deafe when you should heare that which you would not gladly sée or here. I told you there, that Iustinus Martyr speaketh of this matter in his second Apologie, and in his booke of questions, and that Tertullian speaketh of the same in his booke de corona militis. It hathe pleased you in that whiche followeth toNeyther dumbe nor speaking persons cā please T. C. reproue me for translating into my booke other mens opinions, and authorities, and here though I haue quoted the places where you may find them, yet is it also your pleasure to spende your gibing and iesting eloquence vppon me for not translating

them. Well I will deceyue your expectation, and make them speake. Iustinus Martyr in his second Apology sayth that they vsed in baptising to call vpon the name of God for suche as were baptised, and after baptisme to carrie hym that was baptisedIustin. Apo. 2. to the place, where the brethren be gathered togyther, to praye bothe for themselues, and for hym also that is baptised, and in the ende of their prayers that they salute one another with a kisse. Likewise he there saythe, that when they celebrated theIbidem. Lordes supper, there was vsed certaine prayers, and thankesgyuing to the whiche the people sayde Amen. Also that the Deacons did gyue to the people the bread and the cuppe, and carrie them lykewise to suche as were absent. In his booke of questions,Iustin. lib. quae. he sheweth howe that singing was vsed in the Churche, and commendeth it, and that they vsed not to kneele at prayers on the Sunday, in token of the resurrection. Dyuers other suche ceremonies and orders dothe he recite, vsed in hys tyme, not prescribed by the worde of God, but appoynted by the Church, whereof some now be abrogated, bycause they be not so fitte for this time, as they were for that time.
                        Irenaeus speaketh very playnelye in that Epistle whyche he writte toIrenaeus. Uictor Byshoppe of Rome, whereof also Eusebius maketh mention lib. 5. cap. 25. &. 26. In that Epistle he declareth the diuersitie of diuers Churches for the daye of Easter, the tyme of fasting, and such like: whiche plainely argueth that the scripture hath not determined all things, but left muche to the disposition of the Church.
                        Tertullian in his booke aduersus Praxean. saythe that the Churche then vsed tern
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 
                              
                           
                           Tertul. Idem. 
                           mersione in baptismo, thirst dipping in baptisme. And in his booke de corona militis, although he recite some thinges whiche in tyme grew to be superstitious, yet dothe he there playnely declare, what his opinion is in this matter, he reciteth diuers customs of the Churche then vsed, whereof there is no mention in the scriptures: he declareth that those whiche were to be baptised, must firste professe that they renounced the Deuill, his pomp, and his Angels, and that then they were thrice dipt in the water, amplius aliquid respondentes quam dominus in Euangelio determinauit: answering somewhat more than the Lorde hath determined in the gospell. Likewise he sheweth, that the sacrament of the supper, which the Lord celebrated at supper, and commaunded to all, was then celebrated in the morning, and ministred only by those that be the chiefe. And in the end he sayth barum & aliarum buiusmodi disciplinarum si legem expostules scripturarum, nullam inuenies. &c.
                            of these and such like orders, if thou shouldest require a law out of the scriptures, thou shalt finde none, and a litle after he addeth, Annon putas omni fideli licere concipere & constituere duntaxat quod Deo congruat, quod disciplinae conducat, quod Saluti proficiat, dicente domino? Cur autem non & a vobis ipsis quod iustum est iudicatis?
                            doest thou not thinke that it is lawfull for euery faithfull man, to conceiue and appoynte at the least that which agreeth to God, whiche is conuenient for discipline, whiche is profitable vnto saluation, seeing the Lord sayth, why do you not of your selues iudge that that is right? And in his booke De virginibus Veland. He hath these manifest words. Regula
                           
                           Idem. 
                           quidem fidei vna omninò est, sola immobilis & irreformabilis, credendi scilicet in Deum, vnicum
                           ☞ 
                           omnipotentem. &c. Hac lege fidei manente, caetera iam disciplinae & conuersationis admittunt nouitatem correctionis, operante scilicet & proficiente vsque in fiuem gratia Dei. There is only one rule of faith, which alone is immoueable, and not to be altered, to witte, to beleeue in one God the omnipotent creator of the worlde and in his sonne Iesus Christe borne of the Virgine Mary, crucifyed vnder Pontius Pilate, risen the thirde day from the dead, receyued into Heauen, sitting nowe at the righte hande of the father, and shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead, by resurrection of the fleshe: this lawe of faithe remayning, the other thynges of disciplyne, and trade of lyfe, do admitte alteration of amendmente, the grace of GOD woorking and profiting too the ende.
                        
                           
                           Cyprian Lib. 10. Epist. 12.
                            mentioneth certaine rites about Baptisme, no where spoken of in the Scriptures: and Lib. 4. Epist. 6. he sheweth it to haue bene the maner of the Church then, to receiue the Communion euery day, which the Scripture doth not commaunde.Cyprian. Idem.
                        
                        Thus you sée that these Doctors be not dumbe, but can speake sufficiently in that matter for the which they are alleaged. And leaste you should cauill bycause I saye that others also be of the same Iudgement, recyting onely Saynte Augustyne, I haue caused Ambrose, Ierome, and Basill to beare wytnesse in the same matter. The wordes of Ambrose be these, After that Churches were appoynted in euery place,Ambrose in 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . Ephe. and offices ordayned, the matter beganne otherwyse to be ordered. &c. And after that he had declared the difference betwixte the Apostolicall Churche, and the Churche in hys tyme touchyng Ceremonyes and gouernmente he concludeth thus. Therefore☜ doe not the writyngs of the Apostles in all respectes agree, wyth the order which is now in the Churche, bycause these were written in the firste beginnings. Ierome writing 
                              ad
                              Ierome. 
                              Lucinium,
                            and answering hys questions touchyng fastyng on the Sabboth daye, and dayly receyuyng the Communion, sayth on this sorte, 
                              sed ego illud te breuiter admonendum puto, traditiones ecclesiasticas (presertim quae fidei non officiant) ita obseruandas, vt à maioribus traditae sunt. Nec aliorum consuetudinem, aliorum contrario modo subuerti. But this thyng I thinke meete briefely to admonishe thee of, that the Ecclesiasticall traditions (namely suche as doe not hynder faythe) are so to be obserued as they are delyuered of oure elders, neyther is the custome of one to be ouerthrowne with the contrarie custome of others.
                        
                        
                           Basill in hys. 63. Epistle written to the Ministers of Neocaesaria, recyteth the mannersBasill. and Customes aboute publike prayers and singing of Psalmes then vsed in the Churche, and there playnely declareth what hys iudgemente is touchyng thys question. I omit that whyche he speaketh of this matter in his booke de sancto spiritu,
                           Idem. where althoughe he gyueth too muche authoritie to vnwritten traditions, yet dothe it there appeare, that many thyngs were then vsed in the Church of Christ, whyche were not expressed in the worde of God. I myghte here alleage Socrates, whoSocrates. in his sifte Booke and. 22. Chapter of hys ecclesiasticall historie handleth this matter at large: and speakyng of Easter he saythe, The Apostle and the Gospell doe in no place laye a bonde of seruitude vpon them, whyche come to the preaching, But men them selues haue euery one, according as they thoughte meete, in theyr countryes celebrated of custome the feast of Easter, and other feastes for the resting from laboure, and the remembrance of the healthfull passion. &c. and in the same Chapter: No Religion obserueth the same rytes, althoughe it embrace the same doctrine of them, for they doe differ among themselues in rytes, whiche are of the same fayth. And so he procéedeth in declaryng the varietie of Ceremonyes and other obseruances and rytes in the Churches, whereby it is manyfest that (by hys Indgement) many things are committed to the disposition of the Churche, whyche are not expressed in the worde of God. And that the Churche hathe vsed thys libertie from tyme to tyme, to the same effecte speaketh Sozome. Lib. 7. Cap. 19. They (he meaneth Policarpus and Victor) thoughtSozome. it follye, (and not wythoute cause) to be separated one from another for Ceremonyes or Customes, whyche dyd agree in the principall poyntes of Religion, for you can not fynde the same rytes, and altogether lyke in all Churches, no thoughe they doe agree together. I myghte pester thys Booke (and that you knowe well enoughe) wyth the iudgement of all the auncient Fathers, that haue any occasion to speake of this matter, but these maye suffice to declare that I haue not vainely vsed their names, for mutes on the stage.
                        Touchyng Councels, I maruayle you wyll make any doubte of them, whervntoCouncels of things indifferent. tende the moste of theyr Canons, in matters of Ceremonyes, and gouernmente of the Churche, but to teache that the Scriptures haue not expressed all thyngs concernyng the same, bnt lefte them to the order and appoyntment of the Churche? I praye you where shall you fynde in the Scripture the. 13. Canon
                              
                              Ancyrani: Conci. de vicarijs Episcoporum & eorum potestate?
                            or the. 
                              15. non debere pr
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 sbyteros
                              Ancyranum. 
                              ecclesiastica iura vendere:
                            and diuerse others in the same Councell? or the. 
                              11. Canon Concil.
                              Nencaes. Nicaenum. 
                              Neocaesari.
                            of the certayne age of hym that ought to be minister? or the. 1. Canon Concil Nicaeni: of Enuches? the fourth of ordering Byshoppes? the sixte of Metropolitans? the seuenth of the Byshop of Ierusalem? the twentith of standyng in the tyme of Prayer? or the. 7. Canon Concil. Gangren or the. 18. or. 20. or ye. 11. 15. 18. 19. &c. Concil. Arelatens.
                           Gangrense. Arelatens. But what shoulde I trouble the reader wyth suche particular rehearsals, of so manye Councels, whiche haue made suche a number of Canons concernyng suche matters, as muste be ordered in the Churche, whereof the Scripture hath particularly determyned nothyng? is it not therefore manyfest that Councels both generall and prouinciall, by their actes declare, that touchyng Cer
                              〈1 line〉
                           monyes, discipline, and gouernment of the Churche, many things are lefte to the discretion of the Church, whiche be not expressed in the Scriptures?
                        And whereas you charge me for not alleaging of Scriptures, if I wouldeScriptures of things indifferent. wythoute discretion cyte places, nothyng pertayning to the purpose, as you hytherto haue done, I coulde vse a number: but I had rather haue one texte to my purpose, than a hundred wroong and wrested as yours be. Howebeit, there is no cause why you shoulde as yet complayne, for hitherto I haue alleaged moe than you haue answered. To the. 1. Cor. 14. (as yet vnanswered) I maye ioyne that which the1. Cor. 14. 1. Cor. 11. 2. Apostle sayth. 1. Cor. 11. 
                              Quemadmodùm tradidi vobis instituta tenetis. You keepe the ordinances as I delyuered them to you. The whych wordes Maister Caluine expoundyng sayth on thys sorte, I doe not denye but that there were some traditions of the ApostlesCaluine. not written, but I doe not graunt them to haue beene taken as partes of doctrine, or necessarie vnto saluation. VVhat then? euen suche as dyd pertayne to order and pollicie. For vve knovve that euerie Churche hathe libertie to ordayne and appoint suche a forme of gouernment, as is apte and profitable for it, bycause the Lorde therein hath prescribed no certainetie. So Paule the firste founder of the Church of Corinthe, dyd also frame it, wyth honest and godly institutions, that all things might there be done decently▪ and in order. And that also which is in the end of the Chapter: Other things wyll I set in order when I come. Wherevpon the same Maister1. Cor. 11. 34. Caluine. Caluine sayth, But let suche toyes passe, seyng that it is certaine that Paule speaketh but of externall comelynesse, the vvhiche as it is put in the libertie of the Churche, so it is to be appoynted accordyng to the tyme, places, and persons.
                        
                        In déede I glory not in wordes so muche of the Scriptures as yeu dee, but I truste that I haue as sure grounde there for anye thyng that I haue affyrmed, as you haue, and muche more, else woulde I be sorye. It is not beasting of the Scriptures in wordes, and falsely applying of them, that can cary away the matter with those that be learned and wyse, you knowe what Maister Caluine saythe of the Anabaptists in hys Booke written against them, 
                              Quià verò nulla specie illustriore seduci possunt miseri
                              
                                 Caluin aduersus Anabap. Why the Anabaptists alwayes pretended the worde of God. 
                              Christiani. &c. But bicause the wofull Christians, whiche with a zeale doe followe God, can not by any other more notable shewe be seduced, than when the worde of God is pretended: the Anabaptistes (agaynst whome we write) haue that euermore in their mouthe, and alwayes talke of it. And yet in lawfull matters, not expressed in the Scriptures, I knowe not to whome we shoulde resorte to knowe the vse and antiquitie of them, but to the Councels, stories, and doctors.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The opinion of S. Augustine of things indifferent.
               
                  Chap. 3. the first Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 23. Sect. 1.
                     That notable learned Father Augustine hathe diuerse sayingsAugustin
                              〈1 line〉
                           . touchyng thys matter worthy to be noted. In his Epistle 
                           ad Casulanum. 86. he sayth thus, 
                           In his rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura diuina, mos populi Dei, vel instituta maiorum, pro lege tenenda sunt, in those thyngs vvherein the holy Scripture hathe determined no certainetie, the custome of the people of God, & the traditions or decrees of our forefathers, are to be holden for a lavve. Whereby it is manifest, that those things maye be retained in the Churche whych are not expressed in the Scripture. In the same Epistle he reporteth the aunswere that Ambrose made vnto hym, beyng demaunded whether it were lawfull to faste on the Sabboth daye, or not to faste, seyng that among the Churches there was some diuersitie in thys poyut. Quando bic sum, sayth he, 
                           non ie
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              uno
                           Idem. 
                           Sabbato, quando Romae sum, ieiuno Sabbato, & ad quamcunque ecclesiam veneritis, eius morem seruate, si pati scandalum non vultis aut facere. VVhen I am here, I faste not on the Sabboth, vvhen I am at Rome, I doe faste on the Sabboth, and to what Churche so euer you come, keepe the custome thereof, if you vvill neyther suffer offence nor gyue offence. The whole Epistle is worthy of reading.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 17. Sect. 3. 4. 5. 6.
                     The Answerer goeth aboute to proue, that they came yet out of good earthe, and from good men, whych if he had obtayned, yet he maye well knowe, that it is no good argumente to proue that they are good. ForA true sayings, but not truely applyed. as the beste earthe bryngeth forth weedes, so doe the beste men bring forthlyes and errours. But let vs heare what is brought
                           〈1 line〉
                        , that if this visarde and shewe of truth be taken awaye, all men may perceiue, howe good occasion we haue to complaine, and howe iust cause there is of reformation. In the fyrst place of Saynt Augustine there is nothing against any thing which we holde, for that, that the Churche may haue things not expressed in, the scripture, is notBut it is against that, that nothing should be placed in the Churche whyche God in his word
                              〈1 line〉
                            hath not commaunded: and therefore you do here but shifte of the controuersie
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         against, that it ought to haue nothing but that may be warranted by the scripture. For they may be according to the scripture, and by the Scripture, which are not by plaine ter
                           〈1 line〉
                        es expressed in the Scripture. But agaynst you it▪ maketh much, and ouerturneth all your buylding in this booke. For if in those things which are not expressed in the Scripture, they are to be obserued of the Churche, which are the customes of the people of God, and the decrees of oure forefathers, then how can these things be varyed according to time, place, and persons, (which you saye should be) when as that is to be retayned, which the people of God hath vsed, and the decrees of the forefathers haue ordayned. And then also howe can we doe safelyer, than to followe the Apostles customes and the Churches in theyr tyme, whych we are sure are oure forefathers, and the people of God.
                     Besides that, how can we retaine the customes and constitutions of the Papists in such things, which were neither the people of God nor our forefathers.
                     I will not enter nowe to discusse, whether it were well done to fast in all places, according to the custome of the place. You Vntruth, proceeding of Ignorance. oppose Ambrose and Augustine: I coulde oppose Ignatius & TertullianTertul. de cor. milit. Ignat. ad phi. epist. 5. whereof the one sayth, it is (nefas) a detestable thing to fast vpon the Lordes day, the other that it is to kill the Lord, and this is the inconuenience that commeth of suche vnlearned kinde of reasoning: S. Ambrose saith so and therefore it is true.
                     And although Ambrose & Augustine, being straungers and priuate men at Rome, would haue so done, yet it followeth not that if they hadde bene Citizens & ministers there, that they would haue done it, & if they had done so to, yet it followeth not but ye they wold haue spokē against that appoinment of dayes & 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         of fasting, wherof Eusebius saith that Montanus was the first author. I speake of ye which they ought to haue done, for otherwise I know they both thought corruptly

of fasting (when as the one sayth) it was remedie or rewarde to fast other dayes, but in Lent,August d
                              〈1 line〉
                            temp. ser. 62 Amb. 10. li▪ epist▪
                         not to faste, was synne. And the other asketh, what saluation we can obtayne if we blot not our synnes by fastyng, seyng that the Scripture sayth, that fastyng and almes doth delyuer from sinne, and therefore calleth them new teachers, that shut out the merite of fasting, which I therefore recyte bicause you would seeme by Augustine and Ambrose iudgements to alowe of the wekely and commaunded fastes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue sufficiently proued that the Scripture hathe not expressed all things that may be vsed in the Church touching ceremonies, order, and such matters, for that is the question we haue nowe in handling, and for further proofe and confirmation of the same, I doe not disdaine the authoritie of any man, especially of Augustine, a manAugustine deliuered from vntrue surmises. (for his excellent learning and sound iudgement in most poynts of Religion) estéemed of all that haue any shewe of learnyng, or sparkle of modestie: his opinicn of the sufficiencie of the Scripture in matters of saluation, of the authoritie of it in iudgeing matters of controuersie is perfecte, and sounde, as may be séene Lib. 2. aduersus Cresco. gramma. Lib. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . contra Maximi: Lib. de vnitate ecclesiae. Lib. 2 de doct. Christ▪ Chap. 16. &. 20. Euang. Iohannis. Epist. 112. and in a number of places else: he speaketh also of Ceremonyes and traditions, as moderately, as diuinely and as warely as any man dothe, as it appeareth euidently in these places that I haue in my answere alleaged. And therfore he is not wyth suche contempte to be reiected, nor yet defaced wyth vntrue surmises.
                        That which commeth from so good and learned a man is the rather to be beléeued, so long as it is not repugnant to the worde of God. And althoughe the best earth bringeth forth some weedes, yet the good fruite muste not for the wéedes sake be refused. This is a very meane reason: good men sometimes erre and be deceiued, therefore they must neuer in any thing be beléeued.
                        But to come to the purpose: you say, that this fyrst place of Saint Augustine is nothing agaynst any thing that you holde. &c. Surely and it maketh wholly for that which I holde: for it proueth directly that there be some things wherein the Scripture hath not determyned any certaintie, but lefte them to the disposition of others: for he sayth In bis rebus de quibus nibil certi statu
                                 〈1 line〉
                               scriptura diuina▪ &c. and that these things be not suche as be repugnant or against the worde of God; but accordyng to the rule of Saint Paule. 1. Cor. 14. (if you were not of purpose disposed agaynst your owne conscience and knowledge to abuse the reader) you myghte easily vnderstande by my expressed words, vttered in this portion of my answere, and in all other places where I haue occasion to speake of the like matters.
                        I woulde wishe you to deale sineerely: the question that we haue nowe in▪
                           The suttle dealing of T. C. in altering ye state of the controuersie. hande is, VVhether the Scripture hath expressed all externall things touchyng the orders, Ceremonyes and gouernment of the Churche. I proue it hath not, both by the Scripture it selfe, and by manyfest examples, and by the iudgement of the beste learned: you not beyng able to answere, and yet desyrous to séeme to saye somewhat, to shifte of these examples and authorities, dallie at the matter, and would make your Reader beléeue that I woulde haue thyngs vsed in the Churche contrarye, or not accordyng to the Scriptures: from the whych opinion I am as farre of as you, and a greate waye farther, excepte you reuoke some poyntes of youre Booke. You shoulde therefore nowe haue kepte you to the improuyng of thys generall proposition: and if hereafter in speakyng of particular matters I had approued any thing against the word of God, you might haue spent▪ your wit and eloquence in confuting of that.
                        
                           You saye that thys place of Saynte Augustyne maketh muche agaynst me. &c. but you are greatly deceyued, for Saint Augustyne in that place doth not gyue a certayne rule to the whole Churche, but to particular men, for it is hys aunswere so Ca
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ulanus demaundyng of hym Vtrùm liceat sabbato ieiunare. A priuate man maye not take vpon hym to violate the particular orders of anye particular Churche, much lesse suche orders as be obserued of the whole Churche, excepte they be agaynst the Scriptures, for bothe in thys and suche other rules of Augustyne that is generally to be obserued whyche the same Augustyne, dothe adde in hys, 118. Epistle ad Ianuarium: quod nequè contra fidem nequè bonos mores iniungitur. &c. And that thysAugu. ep. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . rule In bis rebus de quibus nihil certi. &c. is gyuen to particular men to dryue them from schismes and contentions in the Churche, it is euident by that whyche the same Augustyne writeth, in the ende of that Epistle 
                              ad Casulanum, VVherefore ifIdem. you wyll willyngly content your selfe wyth my counsell (namely whych haue in this cause, being by you required and constrayned spoken peraduenture more than enough) doe not resiste your Byshoppe herein, and followe that whyche he dothe, wythout any scruple or doubte. Wherefore when Saint Augustyne sayth Mos populi Dei, &c. hys meanyng is that they are to be obserued as rules to kéepe priuate and particular men in order, and in quiet obedience to the Churche. Althoughe in deedeThe Church may not alter any order generally obserued, without iust cause. the Churche it selfe maye not wythoute iuste cause, chaunge. suche thyngs as haue beene generally obserued, not beyng 
                              contra fidem & bonos mores, agaynst faythe and good manners, as the Lordes daye, the daye of the Resurrection, Ascention, and suche lyke. And there maye be iuste causes, why thyngs once determyned by the Churche, shoulde not be chaunged afterwardes, thoughe before the same thyngs were arbitrarye, and myghte haue béene otherwyse, and in some other manner decréed as the Churche had thoughte moste conuenient: If no suche causes be, it maye alter anye vse, Ceremonye, or order, whiche it hathe before determyned, as Saynt Augustyne hym selfe declareth 
                              Epist. 118. ad Ianuarium. His
                              Idem. 
                              enim causis, id est, propter fidem, aut propter mores, vel emendari oportet quod perperam fiebat, vel institui quod non fiebat. Ipsa quippe mutatio consuetudinis etiam quae adiuu
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 t vtilitate, nouitate perturbat. For these causes, that is to saye, for faythe and good manners, eyther that muste be amended whiche was euyll done, or appoynted which was not done, for euen that chaunge of Custome, whych helpeth throughe profitte, doth trouble through noueltie.
                        
                        Nowe howe true thys collection of yours is: Augustyne prescribeth thys rule to Casulanus, that in those thyngs wherein the Scripture hathe determyned no cer
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              aynetie, he shoulde followe the Custome of the people of God, and the decrees of oure forefathers, that is, that he shoulde vse hymselfe in those thyngs▪ that be not agaynste faythe and good manners accordyng to the order of the Churches where he commeth, therefore these Customes vpon iuste cause maye not be altered by the Churche, let the learned Reader iudge. Ap
                              〈1 line〉
                           nate man (a
                              〈1 line〉
                            I sayde) may not breake the lawfull and good orders of the Churche, thoughe they be not expressed in the worde of God, yet maye suche: as God hathe gy
                              〈1 line〉
                            that authoritie vnto in hys Churche, alter and chaunge them as shall be moste 
                              〈◊〉
                            euen according to this r
                              〈1 line〉
                           le of Augustyne (bis 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 im 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  id est, aut propter fidem, aut prop
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ores, vel emendari oportet quod perpe
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 m fiebat, vel institui quod non f
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ebat. &c.) before by me recyted.
                        We must followe suche cu
                              〈1 line〉
                           omes of the Apostles and examples, as they haue vsedWhat examples and customes of the Apostles we must follow. and done for vs to followe, but suche customes or doyngs of the Apostles as 
                              〈◊〉
                            eyther peculiar vnto thems
                              〈1 line〉
                           lues, o
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            onely for such 
                              〈◊〉
                            they 
                              〈◊〉
                            in▪ we are not compelled to followe. For as in the Scriptures 
                              〈◊〉
                            be 
                              〈1 line〉
                           me preceptes generall, some onely 
                              〈1 line〉
                           rsonall, so are there in the sa
                              〈1 line〉
                            of examples and orders, some that for euer are to be obserued, and some for a 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            that there were suche customes, and orders among them shal be declared in seue
                              〈1 line〉
                           all places, as occasion is minis
                              〈1 line〉
                           red.
                        
                           Whether we haue receyued, or maye retayne customes. &c. of the Papistes or no, is partly to be discussed where I speake of apparell, and partly in other places, where more particular occasion is offered to speake of the same: and therefore I will passe it ouer vntill I come to those places. Whyther it were well done to fast in all places according to the custome of the place or no, is not the question.
                        I looke to Augustynes meanyng and purpose, not to euerye one of hys examples: howbeit I thinke that there is a greate difference, betwixte the manner of fastyng vsed then in the Churche, and the manner of fasting vsed nowe in some Churches. I thinke that in Augustynes tyme a man myghte haue obserued this rule of fastyng wythout anye offence to God. But I doe not thinke that he may doe so in lyke manner nowe, bycause it is certayne that in the Churche of Rome, there are manye wicked opinions, bothe of differences of meates, tymes, &c. and also of merite ioyned to theyr fastyng, and therefore are contra fidem & bonos mores, and so not wythin the compasse of thys rule, of S. Augustine.
                        
                        I perceyue no repugnancie at all betwixte Ambrose, Augustyne, Ignatius andThe Replyer setteth the fathers together by the eares without cause 
                           Tertullian, For the Sabboth daye mentioned by Ambrose and Augustyne, is not the Lordes daye, whych we call the Sundaye, and whereof both Ignatius and Tertullian speake: but it is the Saterday whych is called Sabbatum. And that this is true, you myghte haue read in the same Epistle of Augustyne to Casulanus, where he saith thus: VVhereas you aske of me, whyther it be lawfull to faste on the Sabboth daye: IIbidem. aunswere, if it were by no meanes lawfull, truely neyther Moyses, nor Helias, nor oure Lorde him selfe woulde haue fasted fortie dayes together. But by thys reason it is concluded, that the faste on the Lordes daye is lawfull also: notwythstandyng, whosoeuer doth thynke that thys daye oughte to be dedicated vnto fastyng, as some doe obserue the Sabboth fasting, he shall gyue no small offence to the Churche. And after in the same Epistle: And truely of the Sabboth day the case is more easie, bycause the Church of Rome dothe faste, and some other also, althoughe but fewe eyther of those that be nexte, or farre from it. But to faste on the Lordes daye is a greate offence, especially since that detestable heresye of the Manicheis, which is muche repugnant to the Catholike fayth, and moste manifestly contrarye to the Scriptures of God, hath bene openly knowen: whych doe appoynte vnto their hearers thys daye as lawfull to be fasted, wherby it is come to passe, that the faste on the Lordes daye is accompted more horryble. You sée therefore howe you maye be deceyued for all the great reading you woulde séeme to be of: for these fathers agrée among them selues, and you haue faulted in opposyng them to Augustyne and Ambrose: so that for anye thing that is yet proued agaynst them, a man may well vse theyr authoritie in such matters wythout that inconuenience that you suppose: for I knowe howe farre they them selues would be beléeued, and wherevnto theyr authoritie extendeth.
                        It is lyke that bothe Ambrose and Augustine woulde haue done that themselues, which they moued other men vnto, and much more beyng Citizens, than beyng straungers: it is also like that if they had bene Ministers there, they woulde haue in time and place reproued suche things as were amisse; for it had bene their duetie so to doe: yet doe I lykewise thinke that they would haue had great respect to that aduertisement, that Augustine gaue to Casulanus in that Epistle in these wordes, 
                              vti
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  cauendis est ne tempestate contentionis, serenitas charitatis obnubiletur. Verily we muste take heede leastIbidem. in the storme of contention, the fairenesse of loue be darkened.
                        
                        The errors which Ambrose or Augustine had, must
                              〈1 line〉
                            not preiudice their authoritie in speaking truely. This is but a very simple kinde of answering, to denie the author where be speaketh truely, bycause in some other place he hath erred, and bene deceyued. I neither alledge Ambrose nor Augustine, to allowe or disalow weekely and commanded fastes but to proue the matter that I haue in hand, which is, that the scripture hath not expressed all things vsed in the Churche. Howbeit, I know nothing in this place affirmed either by Ambrose or Augustine touching fasting, which may not be obserued without iust offence.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chapter. 3. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 23. Sect. 2.
                     That whiche he writeth in his Epistle ad Ianuarium. 118 is a mostAug. Ep. 118. playne declaration of his iudgement in this matter: 
                           Illa autem quae non scripta sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto terrarum orbe obseruantur, dantur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenarijs concilijs, quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrima authoritas, commendata at
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               statuta retineri, sicuti quod domini passio, & resurrectio, & ascensio in coelum, & aduentus de coelo spiritus sancti anniuersaria solennitate celebrantur, & si quid aliud tale occurrerit, quod seruatur ab vniuersa quacun
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              se diffundit ecclesia. Those things vvhiche be not vvritten, but kept by tradition, vvhich are obserued through the vvhole vvorld, are to be vnderstanded, either to be deliuered vnto vs, from the Apostles them selues, or else decreed by generall Councels, vvhose authoritie is greate in the Churche, as that vve yerely vvith solemnitie celebrate the passion of the Lorde, and his resurrection, his ascention into heauen, and the comming of the holy Ghost, and if there be any other thing that is obserued of the vvhole Churche.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 18. Lin. 1. & Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4.
                     What you meane to cite this place ad Ianuarium. 118. I can not tell. You charge the authors of the Admonition to be conspired with the Papistes: I will not charge you so, but will thinke better of you, vntill the contrarie do more appeare.
                     But I appeale to the iudgement of all men, if this be not Nor one whit, but the contrarie shall be proued. to bring in poperie agayne, to allowe of S. Augustines saying, wherein he sayth, that the celebrating of the day of the passion. &c. is either of some generall Councell, or of the Apostles commaunded and decreed: whereby a gate is open vnto the Papistes, to bring in, vnder the colour of traditions, all their beggerie whatsoeuer. For you playnely confirme, that there is some thing necessarie to be obserued, whiche is not contayned any wayes in the Scripture. For to keepe those holydayes, is not contayned in the Scripture, neither can be concluded of any parte thereof, and yet they are necessarie to be kepte, if they be commaunded of the Apostles. Therefore in your opinion, some thing is necessarie to be kepte, whiche is not contayned in the Scriptures, nor can not be concluded of them. And if you say, that S. Augustine leaueth it in doubt, whether it were the Apostles tradition and statute, or a generall Councels, then you bring vs yet to a worse poynte, that we can not be assured of that whiche is necessarie for vs to knowe, that is, whether the Apostles did ordayne that these dayes shoulde be kepte, as holydayes, or the Councels. And that it is S. Augustines meaning to fatherSermo. 7. de baptis. cont. Donatist. lib. 5. ca. 23. suche like things of Apostles, it may appeare by that which he writeth, saying: There are many things whiche the whole Churche holdeth, and therefore are well beleeued to be commaunded of the Apostles, althoughe they be not founde written. A pretie and sound collecti
                              〈1 line〉
                           . If this iudgement of S. Augustine be a good iudgement, and a sounde, then there be some things commaunded of God, whiche are not in the scriptures, and therefore there is no sufficient doctrine contayned in the scriptures, wherby we may be saued. A great vntruthe and absurditie. For all the commaundements of God, and of the Apostles, are needefull for our saluation.
                     And Nay, marke how your affections moue yo
                              〈1 line〉
                            to speake vntruely. marke I pray you, whither your affections carie you: before you sayde, that the Lordes day, whiche was vsed for the day of rest in the Apostles time, may be changed, as the place and houre of prayer, and the day of the passion and resurrection. &c. you either thrust vpon vs as the decree of the Apostles, or at least put vpon vs a necessitie of keeping of them, least happily in breaking of them, we might breake the Apostles decree, for you make it to lye betweene the Councels and the Apostles, whiche of them decreed this.
                     And do you not perceyue howe you still reason agaynst your selfe? For if the Church haue had so great regarde to that whiche the Apostles did in the
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        es, that they kepte those things which are not written, and therefore are doubtfull whether euer they vsed them or no, howe much 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ore shoulde we holde our selues to these things whiche are written that they did, and of the which we are assured?
                     As touching the obseruation of these holydayes, I will referre the Reader vnto an other place, where occasion is giuen agayne to speake of them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte,
                        My meaning therein I haue set downe in my answere. It is to let you vnderstandeThe rule of S. Augustine doth not establishe, but ouerthrow p
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              perie. S. Augustines iudgement in the matter we haue in hande. The rule is true and good, and so farre from establishing any péece of Poperie, that if rather quite ouerthroweth the same.
                        By it we may proue the supremacie whiche the Bishop of Rome claymeth ouer

all Churches, neither to be written in the worde, nor yet to be appoynted by the Apostles, nor yet determined by auncient generall Councels: for neither hath he bin alwayes, nor in all places taken to be the head of the Church. And it is manyfest that Phocas the traytor and murderer, gaue first vnto him and his Churche that prerogatiue, and therfore not lefte vnto him by the Apostles, nor giuen him by the generall Councels. The like may be sayde of all other thinges vsed in the Churche agaynst the worde of God. For it is certayne, that they haue not béene generally obserued in all places, and at all times: and if some of them haue bëene so obserued, yet not in that maner and forme, that the Churche of Rome dothe nowe obserue them. So that you finde fault with this rule, before you haue cause. Master Zuinglius (who woulde haue béene lothe one whit to strengthen the Papistes) speaking of the lyke place of S. Augustine, in his booke de baptismo, sayth thus: But leauing those thinges,Zuingl. de baptis. of the rule of Aug. let vs returne to the wordes of Augustine, who among other thinges addeth this: Quanquàm quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia nec concitijs institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissimè creditur. &c. Let these words (sayth he) preuayle with other mē as they may, yet no mā can denie, but that there lieth great waight of authoritie in them. For if there be nothing in Councels concluded of the baptising of Infants: and yet the same was vniuersally of the whole Churche obserued in Angustines time, what other thing can be gathered, but that it hathe alwayes beene vsed without contradiction. Master Caluine also 
                              Lib. Insti. Cap. 13. Sect. 21. vseth this rule of Augustine to the same purpose, where he speaking of Popishe traditions, for the whiche they abuse the authoritie of Augustine, saythe thus: 
                              Ego verò non aliundè quam ex ipsius Augustini verbis solutionem afferam. Quae toto inquit terrarum orbe seruantur, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel concilijs generalibus, quorum est in ecclesia saluberrimā authoritas, statuta esse intelligere licet. Verily I will fetche a solution from no other place, than from the very wordes of Augustine. Those thinges (sayth he) which are obserued throughout the whole world, are vnderstode to haue bin instituted, either of the Apostles themselues, or of generall Councels. &c. As it is in the answere to the Admonition.
                        I knowe no reason why the Apostles maye not be sayde to be the authors of celebrating the day of the Passion. &c. Neither yet doe I vnder stande anye cause why the Churche maye not still obserue the same: sure I am, that they were not the authors of the superstitions and errours vsed in them by the Papistes, neyther dothe Augustine saye so: for this is no good argument to saye, the Apostles appoynted these dayes to be celebrated: Ergo, they appoynted the manner of celebrating vsed by the Papistes. The dayes maye be wyth more godlynesse, and profite to the Churche obserued (béeing clensed from super stition and erroneous doctrine) than abrogated. Neyther is thys to open a gate to Papisticall traditions, but to shutte it close vp, as I haue sayde before. For let the Papistes (if they can) name anye wycked thing vsed in their Churche, whiche eyther bathe béene generally obserued, or wherof I am not able to shewe the first author and inuentor.
                        Neyther Aug
                              〈1 line〉
                           in this place, nor I in any place haue sayde, or con
                              〈1 line〉
                            it 
                              〈◊〉
                            thing not cōntayned in the Scripture, to bee so necessarie to bee obserued, that (vpon inst consideration) it may not be. altered by suche as haue authoritie. And 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           all that you doe say, haue sayd, or shall say 
                              〈◊〉
                            that effecte, is forged, and vntrue, deuised onely by you as a shifte to flye vnto, when otherwise you are to seeke for answere.
                        To these your wordes, they are necessarie to be kept, if they be commanded by the Apostles▪ (meaning suche things as Augustine speaketh of) I answere with master Caluin, who as I tolde you before, writing vpon these wordes. 1. Cor11: Quemadmodum tradidi vobis, &c. dothe graunt that there were some traditions of the Apostles not written, but he denieth them to be taken aspartes of doctrine, o
                                 〈1 line〉
                               necessarie to saluation, saying, that they be onely suche as pertayne to order and pollicie.
                        
                        The rest of this section of yours is nothing but: Petitio Principij. For neither doe I moue any such doubt in Augustines words, neither, is it materiall whether I do, or no: nether yet is it true that there is any thing commaunded of. God, or of the Apostles, as necessarie to saluation, whiche is not contayned in the worde of God: neyther

are these and suche like traditions partes of doctrine, and of saluation (as M. Caluin truely sayth) but of order and pollicie.
                        Who woulde thinke that any man (excepte he had hardened his face, withoutA grosse error of T. C. blushing to affirme vntruthes) would haue fallen into suche grosse absurdities, and vttered suche straunge assertions voyde of all truthe. Haue you euer read in Scripture, or in the writinges of any learned man, or can you by reason proue this Paradox, that all the commaundements of God and of the Apostles are needefull for our saluation?
                        What is to lay an intollerable yoke and burthen vpon the neckes of men, if this be not? or whereby could you more directly bring vs into the bondage of the lawe, from the whiche we are made free, than by this assertion? for if all the commaundementsGal. 5. of God. &c. are needefull for our saluation, then must we be bounde vpon necessitie of saluation, to obserue the whole Ceremoniall law, which was the commaundement of God. What? was the commaundement vnto Abraham, to offer his sonne Isahac:Genes. 22. vnto the Israelites to robbe the Egyptians: vnto Moses to put off his shoes: vntoExod. 11. Saule to kill Amalech, and infinite other, needefull for our saluation? is the commaundementExod. 3. of the Apostles to abstayne from bloud, and that whiche is strangled: or of1 Sam. 15. Paule vnto Timothie, to drinke wine. &c. needefull for our saluation? What a tormentAct. 15. is this doctrine able to bring vnto a weake conscience, whiche hathe not obserued1. Tim. 5. any one of these? You muste therefore vnderstande, that there are diuers kindes of commaundementes of God, and of the Apostles, some generall, and giuen to all: otherDiuerskinds of commaundements. personall, and pertayne onely to one singular person, or to one nation and kinde of people. &c. Agayn there are some which are perpetual, & not to be omitted or altered: other which are temporall, and may be omitted or altered, as the circūstance of time, place, & persons doth require. Wherby it may appeare, howe grossely you haue erred, in affirming, that all the commaundements of God, and of the Apostles, are needefull for oure saluation. I might in more ample maner prosecute this matter, but this that hathe bin spoken may suffice.
                        What I haue sayde of chaunging the Lordes day, and howe you haue satisfied my wordes, is declared before: and so is the answere made likewise vnto this your féeble conclusion, grounded vpon a falie principle.
                        Which of vs two is caried furthest by his affections, let the indifferēt reader iudge, by these and suche other like dealings of yours.
                        I haue tolde you before howe muche this and the other places of S. Augustine maketh for my purpose, whiche you can not but vnderstande, if you soughte not corners to creepe into, for the auoyding of suche reasons and authorities as be moste apte for my purpose.
                        Things whiche the Apostles haue done, for vs to followe, without any exception may not be violated, but the question is, whether these things whiche they haue done and written, be sufficient for the ordering and gouernment of all Churches, in all times and states, or no. And whether in all things that they haue done, we may or oughte to follow them, both which you haue hitherto very slenderly touched.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 24. Sect. 1. 2. 3. & Pag. 25. Sect. 1.
                     And agayne, 
                           Quod ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               contra fidem, ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               contra bonos mores iniungitur, indifferenter est habendum, & pro eorum inter quos viuitur societate seruandum est, That vvhich is enioyned, being neither agaynst fayth, nor good maners, is to be counted indifferent, and to be obserued, as the societie of those vvith vvhome vve lyne requiteth.
                     
                     In the same Epistle answering this question (whether vpon the

Thursday before Easter, the Lordes supper shoulde be celebrated in the morning, or at nighte, because Christe dyd institute this Sacrament, and deliuer the same to hys Disciples after supper, he gyueth these three rules worthy to be noted, the first is this: If the holy Scripture prescribe any thing to be done, there is no doubte but that muste be obserued, as it is there prescribed. The seconde is this: That if any thing be vniuersally obserued of the vvhole Churche (not repugnant to the Scriptures) (for so he meaneth) not to keepe that, or to reason of that is madnesse. The thirde: If it be not vniuersally obserued, but diuersly in diuers Churches: Faciat quis
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               quod in ea ecclesia in quā venit inuenerit: Let euery man do as he findeth in that Churche into the vvhiche he commeth, modònon sit contra fidem aut contra mores, So that it be not agaynst faythe or good maners, for so he addeth.
                     In the same Epistle agayne he sayth, that the Lorde hath not in Scripture declared in what order and maner his Supper shoulde be celebrated, but lefte that to his Disciples. And in his hundreth and nintenth 
                           ad Ianuar. In those things (sayth he) that be diuersly obserued in diuers places, this rule as moste profitable is to be kepte, that those things vvhich be not agaynst faythe, neither good maners, and make something to exhorte vnto a better life, vvheresoeuer they are instituted, vve ought not onely not to disallovve them, but to prayse them, and to follovv them. By all these places of this learned father it is euident, that it hathe beene receyued from time to time as a certayne truthe, that the Church of Christ hath authoritie to ordayne and constitute, as shall be necessarie, in those things before of me rehearsed.
                     For a further proofe heereof, I coulde alleage that auncient and learned father Iustinus Martyr, in his seconde Apologie 
                           pro
                           Iustinus Martyr. 
                           Christianis,
                         and in his booke of questions. Tertullian in his booke 
                           Decorona militis. Basill also in his. 63. Epistle writtē to the ministers of 
                           Neocaesaria.
                           Tertul. Eusebius Lib. 5. Ecclesiasti. histor. Cap. 25. &. 26.
                         and diuers other, but I omitBasil. them for breuitie sake, neither doe I alleage those learned fathers,Euseb. because I thinke their authoritie any thing at all preuayleth with the authors of the Libell, but for the wyse, discrete, humble, and learned, whose humilitie and wysdome wyll not suffer them to despise the iudgements of so learned and godly fathers.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 18. Sect. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. & Pag. 19. Sect. 1.
                     As for that rule that he giueth when he say the, what so euer is not. &c. and for the last of the three rules, I receyue them with his owne interpretation, whiche he hathe afterwarde in 119. Epist. ad Ianuarium, whiche is, that it be also profitable.
                     And as for those three rules, which you say, are worthy to be noted, I can see nothing, that they helpe your cause one whitte, for I knowe no man that euer denied, but that the Church may in suche thinges as are not specified and precisely determined, make orders, so they be grounded of those generall rules which I haue before alleaged out of S. Paule.
                     And as for the seconde of the three rules, I can not at any hande allowe it, for when all Christianitie was ouerrunne with poperie, thinges were vniuersally obserued, whiche to keepe were meere wickednesse, and this strengtheneth the Papistes vniuersalitie.
                     Concerning your Glose (if it be not repugnant to the scripture) besides that it is not inough, because it muste be grounded by the Scripture, and that it is wicked to giue suche authoritie to any decree of men, that a man shoulde not enquire of it, or reason of it, I haue shewed that he mente nothing lesse. For affirming that suche thinges are the Apostles commaundementes, his meaning was, that they shoulde be without all exception receyued, and absolutely. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
muche better is it that wee take heede to the words of the Apostle, than eyther to S. Augustines or yours, whiche sayth, that if he, or an Angell from heauen, shoulde preache any other M Doctor speaketh not of preaching another Gospell, but of appoynting other rites and orders Gospel, than that whiche he had preached, that they shoulde holde him accursed: he saythe not any contrarie or repugnant doctrine, but any other Gospell.
                     But tell me, whyBicause it nothing pertaineth to my purpose. S. Aug. mangled and not truely reported. passed you by that in Augustine which he writeth to Ianuarie likewise, that those thinges whiche are not contayned in the Scripture, nor decreed of Councels, nor confirmed by generall customes, but are varied by the maners of Regions, and of men, vpon occasion offered, oughte to be cutte off, althoughe they seeme not to be agaynst faythe, because they presse with seru
                           〈1 line〉
                        e burdens, the religion whiche Christe woulde haue free. This sentence belyke was to hotte for you, you could not carie it. Therest whose names you recite (whiche you say you leaue off for breuitie sake) I leaue to the iudgement of the Reader to consider, wherefore they bee lefte out, seeing that Augustine, in whome you put so great trust, answereth so little to your expectation. This is certayne, that bre
                           〈1 line〉
                        tie (whiche you pretende) was in small commendations wyth you, Wordes of pleasure. whiche make so often repetitions, stuffe in diuers sentences of doctours and wryters, to proue thinges that no man denieth, translate whole leaues to so small purpose, Tu
                              〈1 line〉
                           pe est doctori. &c. vpon so lighte occasions make so often digressions, sometymes agaynst the vnlearnednesse, sometymes agaynst the malice, sometymes agaynst the intemperancie of speeche of the authors of the Admonition, and euery hande whyle pulling oute the sworde vpon them, and throughout the whole booke sporting your selfe with the quotations in the margent: so that if all these were taken oute of your booke, as winde out of a bladder, we shoulde haue had it in a narrowe roome, whiche is thus swelled into suche a volume, and in steade of a booke of two shillings, we should haue had a pamflet of two pence.
                     And whereas you say, that you haue not alleaged these learned fathers for the authors of the Libell, but for the wyse, discrete, humble, and learned: to them also I leaue it to consider, vpon that whiche is alleaged by me. First, howe lyke a diuine it is, to seeke for rules in the Doctours, to measure the making of ceremonies by, whiche you mighte haue had in the Scriptures: there at the riuers, heere at the fountayne: vncertayne there, whiche heere are certayne, there 
                           〈1 line〉
                        parte false, whiche are heere altogither true: then to howe little purpose they serue you, and laste of all, howe they make agaynst you.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I take that whiche you graunte: bothe the first rule, whiche is, Quod ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               contra fidem. &c. and the laste of the thrée, with what interpretation soeuer you admitte them, serue my turne very well, and fully proue my present purpose. Wherefore in graunting of them, you haue graunted as muche to me as hitherto I haue desired. Of the rules out of S. Paule, I haue spoken before: so haue I likewyse of the endes whiche the Churche must haue a respect vnto in hir decrées of orders, ceremonies, and gouernment, wherof also I shall haue occasion to speake hereafter.
                        The seconde of the three rules you can not at any hande allowe, but there is no cause why you should mislike it. For Augustine did giue it as a rule méete for his tyme, not for all tymes, althoughe it may serue also for all times, if his meaning be ioyned wyth it, that is, If that which is vniuersally obserued of the whole Churche, be not repugnant to the worde of God, and so it strengtheneth not one whit the Papistes pretended vniuersalitie.
                        In mattrrs of order, ceremonies, and gouernment, it is sufficient if they be not repugnant to the scripture. Neither do I thinke any great difference to be betwixt not repugnant to the worde of God, and according to the worde.
                        
                        That whiche is generally obserued, and of that kinde that the rule meaneth, isDecrees that perteyne to order & comelinesse, are not only humane. not onely mans tradition and decree, but Gods also. M. Caluin teacheth you in his Institutions, Cap. 13. Sect. 31. that suche kinde of decrees, as pertayne to order and comelynesse, are not onely humane, but diuine. And he bringeth in for an example knéeling at publike prayers.
                        S. Augustines meaning is, that he would haue no factions or contentions in the Church, or any man to trouble the peace thereof, by setting him selfe agaynst lawfull orders and customes of the same: otherwise I thinke that he neither forbiddeth to enquire, or reason of any such matter. But you think that Augustine was so adicted to such decrées of the Apostles, that his meaning was to haue them receyued without all exception. Surely I thinke that he was so persuaded in déede of such decrées, as he meaneth and speaketh of in that place. But for as muche as in suche rules he hath sundrie times made suche exceptions, Quod ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               cóntra fidem. &c. therfore this rule also is to be receyued of vs, according to his meaning in all suche like rules.
                        
                           God forbid that I should not take heede to those words of the Apostle, & hold him accursed which shall preache any other Gospell, than that which he had preached. For I take him that preacheth any other Gospell, to preache contrarie and repugnant doctrine to the Apostle: and vndoubtedly he that teacheth any thing to be necessary to saluation, which is not comprehended in the scripture, teacheth a false doctrine, and cleane contrarie to the doctrine of the Scripture. But you do not vse this place (I am sure) agaynst any thing that is héere sayde. Our question is not of matters pertayning to saluation, but of ceremonies, of externall orders, and discipline. Whereof S. Paule speaketh nothing in that place. I make them not matters of saluation, neither are they.
                        I will tell you why I passed by that whych S. Augustine writeth to Ianuary, 
                              Epist. 119. and is nowe recited by you, because it nothing pertayneth to my purpose, and yet it is rather with me, than agaynst me.
                        But let me nowe aske you an other question, why do you not truly report S. AugustinesS. Augustine mangled and vntruely reported by T. C. words, but mayme them both before, behinde, and in the middest, for Augustine in the wordes that immediatly go before, sayth: That he was muche gréeued, because that many things which were more profitably commaunded in the worde of God were neglected, by reason of so many presumptuous obseruations of outwarde ceremonies: the omitting whereof was more greeuously punished, than the breaking of Gods commaundements. And vpon this occasion he concludeth thus: 
                              Omnia ita
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  talia quae ne
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  sanctorum. &c. All suche ceremonies (scilicet,
                            as be impediments to the obseruing of the commaundement of God, and are preferred before Gods commaundementes) beeing neither contayned in the holy Scriptures, nor founde decreed in the Councels of Bishops, nor cōfirmed by the custome of the whole Church, but are varied innumerably by the diuers maners of diuers Regions: so that scarcely, or neuer the causes can be found out, whiche men followed in appoynting of them: when occasion is offered I thinke they ought to he cut off without any doubt. Hitherto Augustine.
                        Therefore in reciting the wordes of S. Augustine in this place, first you haue omitted the wordes going before, that expresse his mynde, and declare that he meaneth suche ceremonies as be impedimentes to the obseruing of Gods commaundementes: for hauing spoken of suche before in manyfest wordes, he concludeth (as I haue sayde) on this sort, 
                              Omnia ita
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  talia. &c. All suche ceremonies. &c. whiche words you haue fraudulently kept backe.
                        Secondly, where S. Augustine speaketh of the vnreasonable multitude of ceremonies, vsing these wordes: innumerabiliter variantur, are varied innumerably, you haue likwyse lefte out this word, innumerably, which also expresseth Augustines meaning.
                        Laste of all you haue concealed a sentence in the middest, whiche is very materiall to the declaring of Augustine his minde. The sentence is this: 
                              Ita vt vix aut omninò nunquàm inueniri possint causae, quas in eis instituendis homines secuti sunt: So that scarcely or neuer the causes can be founde oute, whiche men followed in appoynting of them. Whereby it is playne, that he also meaneth suche ceremonies as bée appoynted without reason or cause. And yet in the latter ende he addeth: But the Churche of God beeing placed betwixte muche chaffe and darnell, dothe tollerate many thinges. &c. But I am so farre from defending the multitude, or burdensomnesse of ceremonies, that I consent in all poyntes with that saying of Augustine, wherefore this sentence is nothing to hotte for me, but pleaseth me righte well: And it had bin more for your commendation if you had not medled withall.
                        They whose names I héere recite (thoughe I haue not written their wordes) yet in the places whiche I haue qnoted doe affirme as muche as I recite them for, whiche you might haue founde, if you had taken paynes to searche for the same, as I thinke verily you haue done, and founde little for your purpose, and therfore are content to passe them ouer in silence.
                        If I make so ofte repetitinons, I doe but as I am occasioned by them whome I answere, and as you do your selfe in this Replie, though it pleaseth you not to be acknowne

of it. The sentences of Doctors and writers that I stuffe in, argue that I haue red them, and that I am not ashamed to lay them open, to the ende my playne dealing may be séene, in alledging of them. But what? did you before fynde faulte with my Dumbe doctors, and can you not nowe abyde them speaking? surely I intend not to be directed by so vnconstant a guyde.
                        If I proue things that no man denyeth, you hadde the lesse laboure in replying: If I translate whole leaues to so small purpose, they be the sooner answered: if vpon so lighte occasions, I haue made so often digressions, you will take héede (I am well assured) that you offende not in the lyke: which truly you haue forgotten in this place, for here is a digression without all reason. But I will let your reuerende and modeste speaches passe, and not recompence them with the lyke: for it neither sauoureth the spirite of God, neither yet any modest and good nature, but a stomack swelling rather against the person, than against the cause.
                        My purpose is not in this place to seke for rules to measure Ceremonies by, but to proue that in Ceremonies and other externall things, muche is lefte to the discretion of the Churche, whiche is not to be founde in Scriptures: and yet I know none of these rules vnméete for a diuine to search for, or to vnderstand, vnlesse it be suche a one, as contemneth all other mens learning but his owne. But how happeneth it that you haue answered nothing to the last place that I haue alleaged out of Augustine. Or why say you nothing to my conclusion, whiche is, that by all those places of this learned father, it is euident. &c.
                        In all this your replie you haue greatly faulted in ignorantia Elenchi, for you haue not reasoned, nor answered ad idem, but spoken altogether from the purpose.T. C fauire
                                 〈1 line〉
                               in ignorantia Elenchi▪
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The opinion of M. Caluin of things indifferent.
               
                  Chap. 4.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 25. Sect.. 2. 3. &. Pag. 26. 27. 28. & Pag. 29. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4.
                     But I trust M. Caluines iudgement will weigh something with them, who in his Institutions Cap. 13. Sect. 31. &. 32. speaking of traditions, sayth in this sort.
                     Bicause the Lorde hath both faithfully and plainly comprehended, and declared in the holie scriptures, the whole summe of true righteousnesse, & all the parts of the true worshipping of him, and what so euer is necessarie vnto saluation, therfore in those things he is only to be heard, as a maister, or teacher: But bicause in externall discipline & ceremonies he would not particularly prescribe, vvhat we ought to folow, bicause he foresavv that this depended vpon the state and condition of the time, neyther did iudge one form or maner to be agreable to al ages, here we must haue a respect to those general rules which he gaue, that according to thē might be examined such things, as the necessitie of the Church requireth to be cōmanded for order & decencie. Finally, bicause in these things he hath expressed nothing (for that they are neither necessarie to saluation, and may be diuersly applied to the edifying of the Church, according to the maner and custome of euery countrey and age) Therfore as the cōmoditie of the Church requireth, & as shal be thought conuenient, both the old may be abrogated & nevve appointed. I graunt that we must not rashely nor often, nor for euery lighte cause make innouations. But vvhat hurteth, and vvhat edifieth charitie wil best iudge, which if vve vvil suffer to be the moderatrix, al shalbe safe & wel. Now it is the office of Christian people vvith a free cōscience, vvithout susuperstition,

with a godlie minde and readie and willing to obey, to obserue those things which are appointed according to this rule, not to contemne them, nor negligently to omit them, so farre off ought they to be from breaking them openly thorough disdaine and contumacie.
                     But thou wilte say, vvhat libertie of conscience can there be in so precise and straight obseruing of them? truely the libertie of conscience may well stand vvich it, if we shall consider that these lavves and decrees to the which we are bounde, be not perpetuall, or suche as are not to be abrogated: but only externall rudiments of mans infirmities: wherof notvvithstanding we all stande not in neede, yet vvee all vse them, bicause one of vs is mutually bound to an other, to nourishe loue and charitie among our selues.
                     This we may lerne in the examples vsed before. VVhat? doth religion cō
                        sist in a womans vaile, that by no meanes she may goe abrode bare headed? or is the cōmaundement touching hir silence suche, as it may not be broken without wickednesse? or is there any mysterie in kneeling, or in burying the dead, that may not be omitted without great offence? No truly: for if such hast be required of a vvoman to help hir neighboure, that she can haue no ley sure to couer hir head, she doth not offende, though she runne out bare headed. And there is a tyme & place when and vvhere it is as mete for hir to speak, as it is elsewhere to hold hir peace. Him also to pray standing, which being letted vvith some disease, can not kneele, there is nothing forbiddeth. To be short, it is better in tyme to burie the dead, than to tarie for a winding sheete, or some to carie him, vntil he stinke aboue the ground. But there is somewhat euen in thosethings, vvhich the custome of Religion, lavves, and decrees, humanitie it self, and the rule of modestie willeth vs to do, & to take heed of, wherin if we shal through ignorāce & forgetfulnes offēd, ther is no sin cōmitted: But if through cōtempt or contumacie, it is to be reproued. In like maner it skilleth not what days be appointed, what houres, what maner of places touching the building, what Psalms are to be song this day or that day: And yet there must certain dayes be appointed, & certain houres, and a place mete to receiue al, if we haue any respect to keepe vnitie & peace. For what cōfusion were it, & of how great cōtentions & braulings the seed, and cause, if euery man as he listeth, might alter and chaunge those things which pertein to the cōmon state: Seing that it would neuer be broughte to passe, that one thing could please all men, if such matters were left indifferent, and cōmitted to euery mans arbitrement? Now if any man repine or grudge, & vvill here seme wiser than it behoueth him, let him cōsider by what reason he can excuse his waywardnesse in the Lorde. Notvvithstanding that saying of S. Paule must 
                           •
                        atisfie vs: we haue no custome to contend, neither the1. Cor. 11. Churches of God. Thus farre Caluine.
                     In whiche wordes we haue these things to consider: Firste thatCollections out of Caluine. God hath in the Scripture fully and plainly comprehended all those things that be necessarie to saluation.
                     Secondly, that in Ceremonies and externall discipline, he hath not in Scripture particularly determined any thing, but lefte the same to his Churche, to make or abrogate, to alter, or continue, to adde, or take away, as shall bee thoughte from tyme to tyme, moste conueniente, for the presente state of the Churche, so that nothyng be doone, agayust that generall rule of Sainct Paule. 1. Corin. 14.
                        
                        Let all things be done decently and in order.
                     
                     Thirdly, that it is the dutie of a Christian man without superstition willingly to obey such constitutions, not to contemne them, not to neglect them, muche lesse stubbornely and arrogantly to breake them.
                     Fourthly, that the obseruing of them taketh not libertie from the couscience, bicause they be not made to be perpetual and inuiolable, but to be altered, as tyme, occasion and necessitie requireth.
                     Fifthly, that all ought to obey suche ordinances, for charitie sake, though all stande not in neede of them.
                     Sixthly, that if a man doe violate them by ignorance or forgetfulnesse, he doth not offende, if by contempt or stubbornesse he doth greately offende.
                     Seuenthly, that confusion (whiche is to suffer euery man to doe what he list) is the seede of contention and brawling.
                     Last of all, that the true ministers of God be not contentious, neither yet the Churches of God.
                     These things among other I thought good to note oute of M. Caluines wordes, whiche if they were diligentely considered, suche contentions might soone be ended.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 19. Sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. &. Pag. 20. Sect. 1.
                     Why should you trust that M. Caluins iudgemēt wil weigh with them, if they be Anabaptists (as you accuse them) if they be Donatistes, if Catharists, if conspired with the Papistes, how can you thinke yt they wil so easily rest in M. Caluines iudgemēt, which hated and confuted all Anabaptisme, Donatisme, Catharisme, & Papisme? but it is true which the prouerb sayth, memorē. &c. he yt wil speake an vntruth, had need haue a good memorie: & this is the force of the truth, in the conscience of man, that although he suppresse it, & pretend the contrary, yet at vnwares it stealeth out. For what greater testimonie could you haue giuen of them, that they hate a
                           〈1 line〉
                         those heresies, whiche you lay to their charge, than to say, yt you trust M. Caluins iudgement wil weigh 
                           〈1 line〉
                         thē? Now in deed that you be not deceiued, we receiue M. Caluin, & weigh of him, as of the notablest instrumēt yt the Lord hath stirred vp, for ye purging of his Churches, & of the restoring of the plaine & sincere interpretation of the scriptures, which hath ben since the Apostles times. And yet we do not so read his works, ye we beleue any thing to be true, bicause he saith it, but so far as we cā esteme, that ye which he saith, doth agree with the canonicall scriptures. But what gather you out of M. Caluine?
                     
                     First that all necessarie things to saluation, are conteined in the scripture: who denyeth it?
                     In the second collection, where you wold giue to vnderstand ye ceremonies & externall discipline are not prescribed particularly by the word of God, & therfore left to the order of the Churche: you must vnderstād, that al external discipline is not left to the order of ye Church, being particularly pr
                           〈1 line〉
                         scribed in ye scriptures, no more than You say afte
                              〈1 line〉
                            that there are but these two. al ceremonies are left to the order of ye Church, as the sacra ments of Baptisin, & the supper o
                           〈1 line〉
                         the Lord: whereas, vpon the indefinite speaking of M. Caluine, saying Ceremonies & externall discipline, without adding all, or some, you go about Vntruth, for I haue reported his wordes to no other ende than he hathe written them. subtilly to make mē beleue yt 
                        Caluin had placed the whole external discipline in ye power & arbitrement of the Church. For i
                           〈1 line〉
                         al external discipline were arbitrarie, & in the choise of the Church, excōmunication also (which is a part of it) might be cast away, which I think you wil not say. But if yt 
                        M. Caluine were aliue to heare his sentēces You shoulde haue shewed wherein his wordes ar
                              〈1 line〉
                            ra
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ked and wryth
                              〈1 line〉
                           . racked and writhen, to establish those things, which he stroue so mightily to ouerthrowe, and to ouerthrow those things that he laboured so sore to establishe, what might he saye? & the iniurie whyche is done to him is nothyng lesse bycause he is dead.
                     Concerning all the rest of your collections, I haue not lightly knowne a man, whiche ta
                           〈1 line〉
                        eth so much paine wt so small gain, & which soweth his seed in the sea, wherof ther wil neuer rise encrease. For I know none that euer deined those things, vnlesse peraduenture you would make the reader beleeue, ye a
                           〈1 line〉
                         those be contētious, which moue any controuersie of things which they iudge to be amisse, & then it is answered before, & now I answere further, that they that moue to reformation of things, are no more to be blamed as authors of contētion, than the Physitiō, which giueth a purgatiō, is to be blamed for the rumbling & stirre in ye beliy, & other disquietnesse of ye body, which should not haue be 
                           〈◊〉
                         ye 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         humors & naughty disposition of it, had not caused or procured this purgation.
                     Wheras you conclude, that these contētions would be spon ended, if M Caluins words were no
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        ed, here we wil ioyn with you, & wil not refuse ye 
                        In any place that maketh with you, but not otherwise. iudgemēt of M. Caluin in any matter that we haue in controuers
                           〈1 line〉
                        e with you, which I speake not therfore, bicause I woulde call the decision of controuersies to men and theyr words (whych pertayn only to God and to his word) but bicause I know his iudgement in these, thyngs to be cleane against you, and especially for that you would beate men in hand, that M. Caluin is on your syde, and agaynst vs.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you your selfe will of necessitie inforce these qualities and conditions of Anabaptistes (whiche I in the beginning rehersed) vpon the authors of the admonition, who can let you? The moste that I haue sayde, is that I suspecte them, bycause they so agree with them in certaine qualities and practices. But if they were bent that waye, yet doth it not folow that they woulde by and by séeme to contemne M. Caluines or any other famous and learned mannes iudgemente. For you knowe that the chiefe captaines of the Anabaptistes, did not forthwith vtter eyther al their contempt of learned men, or all their pestiferous opinions at the fyrst, but vsed therin some policie, suche as might most preuayle to winne credite vnto theyr faction. You remember that Zuinglius in his booke called Ecclesiast. sayth of the Anabaptists,Zuinglius aducrs. Anab. 
                           that though they protested, and by othe denyed that they ment to take any authoritie from the magistrate, yet shortly after it would appeare, that they would haue bin disobedient to all lawes of Magistrates. &c. as I haue before rehersed: the practise wherof is to be séene in Sleidan and other stories.
                        And although in the beginning it was pretended that the contention was but in matters of no great importance, as cap, surplesse, tippet. &c. yet in the additions to the first admonition fol. 9. it is protested, that the strife is for greater matters, as for a true ministerie, and gouernmente of the Churche, and nowe you say, that certain mattersFol. 5. sect. vlt. Fo. 14. lin. 5. Fol. 6. sect. 4. whiche be in controuersie, are matters of lyfe and death, of saluation and damnation. fol. 5. & 14. Besides all thys the additions that you make to the protestation of your obediēcs to the ciuile Magistrate fol. 6. &c. is verie suspicious, so is your doctrine touching the authoritie of the ciuill magistrate also, as I haue in an other place declared. Wherfore how farre both they and you will as yet procéede, is not certainly knowne. In the meane tyme, if by allowing suche as M. Caluine is, some credite were not maintained, wise and learned men would the sooner espie their dooings.
                        When I say, that I trust M. Caluines iudgemente will weigh some thing with them. I speake it but in comparison, to the authoritie of suche as I haue before alleaged. For I know they make small acc
                              〈1 line〉
                           mpt of any author that writeth against them, but least of all of the olde auncient fathers, whom some of them are not ashamed to call pillorie Doctours. They may therfore beare a countenance to suche as hate and confute Anabaptisme, Papisme. &c. and yet both ioyne with the Papists and the Anabaptists &c. in disturbing the Churche.
                        As the woordes of M. Caluine be directely to my purpose, and my collections truly gathered out of them, so is your answere thervnto verie weake, and in déed nothing. The woordes of M. Caluine wher vpon my seconde collection is gathered, be these: But bicause in externall discipline and ceremonies he woulde not particularly prescribe what we ought to followe, bycause he foresaw that this depended vpon the state and condition of the tyme, neyther did iudge one forme or maner to be agreeable to all ages: Here we must haue respect. &c. Conferre these woordes with my collection, and you shall sée them agrée in all poyntes. And surely M. Caluine sayeth that fully and plainely in this place, whiche I haue taken in hande to proue. M. Caluine neyther addeth all, nor some, and therfore neyther haue I added them, least I mighte séeme to be a corrupter of his woordes.
                        Your obiection of the Supper of the Lorde, and of Baptisme, is altogether friuolous: for they be substantiall Ceremonies: and not ceremonies onely, but Sacramentes also, and therfore must haue of necessitie an expresse commaundement in the worde of God.
                        Touching excōmunication, I shal speake hereafter, it is the matter that the Anabaptists so greatly vrged, and for the not vsing of the whiche, they separated themselues from the Churches, where the Gospell was preached, as appeareth in the bookes bothe of Caluine, Bullinger, and others, against them. I knowe that touchyng Excommunication, whether the vse of it bée at all 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ymes so necessarye or no,

that it maye not bée altered, learned men doe varie in iudgementes, whose opinions in that matter I will deferre, vntill I come where I haue farther occasion to speake of it.
                        If M. Caluine were alyue, and vnderstode the state of our Churche and controuersie truly, I verily beléeue that he would vtterly condemne your doings: and I am the rather induced to thinke so, bicause I vnderstande him to haue allowed many things in the Englishe Church being at Geneua, which you altogither misselyke, as Funeral sermons. &c. And therfore he would not thinke his wordes racked one whit, to establishe any thing that he would haue had ouerthrowne.
                        The rest of my collections are most agréeable to M Caluines woords, moste necessary for this present time, and moste apte for my purpose: and youre passing them ouer so slightly, doth argue your lacke of abilitie to answere them. In deede they flatly determine this controuersie, and in effect ouerthrowe your whole booke.
                        Those that make contention in the Churche for suche matters as you doe, and in suche sorte and maner, can not auoyde the iuste accusations of being contentious persons: and if the Physition giueth a purgation where there is no néede, or a more vehement purgation than is conuenient for the disease, or minister it out of time, or giue one purgation for an other. &c. what rumbling and stirre soeuer follow in the bodye, he may be iustly sayde to be the author and cause of them. Do you not knowe what Zuinglius sayeth in his Ecclesiast. speaking of Anabaptistes: If they were sente of God,Zuinglius i
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  Ecclesi
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 st. Id
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 m de bapti
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 mo. and endued with the spirite of loue, they would haue construed in the beste parte, those externall things. &c. And againe, Christe neuer made any contention for externall thinges, and in his booke de Baptismo, They go aboute innouations of their owne priuate authoritie. &c.
                        
                        I vse M. Caluines iudgement, as I vse the iudgement of other learned men, neyther will I refuse any learned mans opinion in these controuersies, that truly and wholly vnderstandeth the state of this Church, and the grounde of all thinges vsed in it. But I doubt how you will hereafter stand to this offer.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The opinion of Bucer of things indifferent.
               
                  Chap. 5.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag 29. Sect. 5. &. 6.
                     Of the same iudgement in this matter is M. Bucer, as it appearethBucer of things indifferent. in his Epistle to M. Alasco, these be his wordes: If you vvill not admit such libertie, and vse of vesture to this pure and holie Church, bycause they haue no commaundement of the Lord, nor example of it: I doo not see hovv you can graunt to any Church, that it may celebrate the Lordes Supper in the morning, and in an open Churche, especially consecrated to the Lorde: that the Sacrament may be distributed to men kneeling or standing, yea to vvomen as vvell as to men. For vvee haue receiued of these things neither commaundement of the Lorde, nor any example, yea rather the Lorde gaue a contrarie example. For in the euening, and in a priuate house he did make his Supper, and distributed the Sacramentes, and that to men only, and sitting at the table. Haec Bucerus.
                        
                     
                     But to ende this matter, is it not as lawfull for a godlie Prince, with the aduise and consent of godlie and lerned Bishops, and other of the wysest, to make orders in the Church, and lawes Ecclesiasticall, as it is for euery priuate man, to vse what maner and forme of seruice he list, and other order aud discipline in his own parish, which these men seeke and striue to doe.
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Page. 20. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. &. Pag. 21. Sect. 1.
                     And as for Peter Martyr and Bucer, and Musculus, and Bullinger, Gualter, and Hemingius, and the rest of the late writers, by citing of whome, you woulde gyue to vnderstande, that they are agaynste vs in these matters, there is set downe in the latter ende of this booke, their seuerall iudgements, of the moste of these thinges whiche are in controuersie: whereby it maye appeare, that if they haue spoken one woorde agaynste vs, they haueYou do learned mē great iniury, in accusing thē of contrarietie. spoken two for vs. And whereas they haue written (as it is said) and alieadged in their priuate letters to their friends, agaynst some of these causes, it may appeare, that they haue in their works published to the whole world, that they confirme the same causes. So that if they wrote any such things, they shall be found not so much to haue dissented from vs, as from themselues: and therefore we appeale from themselues, vnto themselues: and from their priuate notes and letters to their publike writings, as more autenticall. You laboure still in the fire that is vnprofitable, to bring M. Bucer his Epistle to proue, that the Church may order thinges, whereof there is no particular and expressed commaundement, for there is none denieth it, neyther is this saying, that all things are to be done in the Church according to the rule of the word of God, any thing repugnant vnto this, that the Church may ordeyne certayne things, according to the word of God.
                     But if this Epistle, and others of M. Bucers with his notes vpon the booke of common prayer, which are so often cited, and certaine Epistles of M. Peter Martyr were neuer printed (as You cannot but vnderstand that they are printed. I cannot vnderstand they were) then besides that you do vs iniury, which go about to preiudice our cause by the testimonies of them, whiche we can neyther heare nor see, being kepte close in your study: you also do your cause much more iniurie, whilest you betray the pouertie and nakednesse of it, being fame to ransacke, and ruffle vp euery darke corner, to find something to couer it with.
                     Therefore it were good before you tooke any benefyte of them, to let them come foorthe, and speake their owne testimonies, in their owne language and full out. For now you giue men occasion to thinke, that there are some other thinges in their Epistles whiche you would be loth the world should know, for feare of fall of that, which you would gladly keepe.
                     There is What say you than to the. 14. reason of the Admonition, then ministers were not so tyed to any forme of prayers. &c. no man that sayth that it ought to be permitted to euery person in the Churche where he is minister, to haue such order or discipline, or to vse such seruice, as he listeth, no man seeketh for it. But to haue the order which God hathe left in those things which the word precisely appoynteth, and in other things to vse that, which shall be according to the rules of S. Paule before recited, agreed by the Church, aud confirmed by the prince.
                     And wheras you haue euer hitherto giuen the ordering of these things to the Church, how come you now to An vn truth, for I gyue it not to the Byshops only, but to a godly Prince with the aduice and consent of godly and learned Byshops, and other of the wisest. ascribe it to the Byshops? you meane I am sure the Byshops, as we call Byshops here in England, whereby you fall into the opinion of the Papists vnawares, whiche when they haue spoken many things of the Churche inagnifically, at the last they bring it now to the doctours of the Church, now to Byshops.
                     As for me, although I doubt not but there be many good men of the Byshops, and very learned also, and therefore very meete to be admitted into that consultation, whereinit shall be considered, what things are good in the Church: yet in respect of that office and calling of a Byshop, which they now exercise, I thinke that euery godly learned minister and pastour of the Churche, hath more interest and righte, in respect of his office, to be at that consultation: then any Byshop or Archbishop in the Realme, for as much as he hath an ordinarie calling of God, and function appoynted in the scriptures which he exerciseth, and the other hath not.
                     But how this authoritie perteyning to the whole Church, of making of such orders, may and ought to be called to a certayne number, that confusion may be auoyded, and with the consent also of the Churches to auoyde tyrannie, it shall appeare in a more proper place where we shall haue occasion to speake of the eldership or gouernment in euery Church, and of the communion and societie or participation, & intercommuning of the Churches togyther, by councels, and assemblies prouinciall or nationall.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Diuers of those learned men here named, being rightly enformed of the state ofThe occasion of mens writings must be considered. this controuersie, with all the circumstances perteyning therevnto, haue set downe their opinions in writing, and therefore if it should so come to passe, (which as yet is not proued, neyther as I thinke will be) that in their publike writings, they should séeme to affirme any thing contrary to their priuate letters, it is bycause they speaking generally of all, and hauing respect to the time and place, wherein and when such things were abused, haue generally spoken of them otherwise then they do, as they be now vsed in this Church of England. And surely in my opinion these their epistles, wherein of purpose (being required) they gyue their sentence of suche matters, oughte to be more credited, than their generall writings, wherein they maye séeme otherwise to speake vppon other occasions. But I thinke that in the ende it will fall out, that they haue written nothyng publikely againste any thing that is written by them priuately: and of some of them I am sure that their publike and priuate writings of these matters doe fully agrée. But where

haue you learned to answere on this sorte to the authoritie of learned men? to accuse them of contrarietie before you haue manifestly proued it, is to doe vnto them great iniurie.
                        The place of M. Bucer maketh directly for my purpose, and therefore in giuyng place vnto it, you graunte as muche as I hitherto haue required. For M. Bucer vsed the example of apparell whiche is one thing in controuersie betwixte vs, and sayeth playnly, that the Church hath authoritie to appoint such things, as haue neyther cō
                           maundement nor example in the Scripture.
                        These Epistles of M. Bucer, and of M. Martyr, with the Epistles of other learned men be printed and published wholly and fully, and it can not bée that the same should be vnknown vnto you, the bookes being so cōmon: your pleading of ignorance in this thing is but a colour.
                        When euery Minister must be chiefe of the seigniorie, and haue with some other of the parishe the whole authoritie Ecclesiasticall: when they must not bee soFirst admo
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              ▪ the. 14. reason. tyed to any forme of prayers, but as the spirite moueth them, so to poure out supplications: when the Prince is secluded from authoritie in appoynting of ceremonies, and orders of discipline, that is, when in Ecclesiasticall matters you giue to the Ciuill magistrate no more than the Papistes do, to wit potestatem facti, and not potestatem iuris, as will afterwardes more plainly appeare: what is it else but for euery minister to be Pope in his owne parishe, and to vse suche order, discipline, and seruice as he himselfe listeth.
                        If you had bin disposed to speake the truthe, and to report my wordes as they be written, you woulde haue eased your booke of these lynes whiche followe. For where doe I giue this authoritie to the Bishops? or in what words do I restrayne the Churche to them? my wordes be these: Is it not as lawfull for a godly Prince, with the aduise and consente of godlie and learned Bishops, and other of the wysest, to make orders in the Church. &c. You sée that I ioyne the Prince, the Bishops, and other of the wisest together in making of orders. &c. and whensoeuer I meane the Churche in suche a case, I meane not the confused multitude of the Church, but suche as God hath called to gouerne his Church in the externall gouernment: whome I take to be in this Churche, the Prince, the Bishops, the Councell, and suche other, as by the order of this Churche, haue to do in suche like matters.
                        Your falsifying hurteth not me, but discrediteth your selfe, and your cause.
                        The Bishops haue muche to thanke you, that it would please you to admitte them into that consultation of yours, if they woulde giue ouer that office and callyng. But (thanks be vnto God) you haue as yet no suche authoritie committed vnto you. Wherfore this and suche lyke kynde of speaches, doe but declare howe magnifically you thynke of your selfe. &c.
                        If it pertayne to the whole Churche, that is (as I thinke you vnderstande it) to the whole multitude of the Churche, to make suche orders, howe can you restraine it to a certaine number? or why not as well to some one, if the multitude thynke it so conuenient, but of this matter, when you come to youre seigniorie and kinde of gouernment.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 30. Sect. 1.
                     
                        An examination of the places. &c.
                        TO proue that nothing in this mortall lyfe is more diligently to be sought for, and carefully to be looked vnto than the restitution of true Religion, and reformation of Gods Churche, there is noted. 2. Reg. 23. 2. Chro. 17. 2. Chro. 29. 30. 31. Psalm.. 132 Math 21. Ioh. 2. In the firste place it is declared howe Iosiah after he had founde the

booke of the lawe, reformed the Churche. In the seconde place Iehosaphat tooke away the high places and groues out of Iuda &c. In the 29. 30. 31. of the. 2. Chron. is described the doings of Ezechias, in repairing the temple and reforming religion. &c. In the. 132. Psalme it is declared with what care Dauid went about to build the temple of God, after that he was once established in his kingdome. In the. 12. of Math. Iesus went into the temple, and cast out all them that bought and sold in the temple. &c. The like he did in the seconde of Iohn. All this is confessed to be true and no man denieth it. And I pray God make vs thankfull for the Queenes maiestie, who hathe not bin slacke in this point, but hath like a vertuous, religious, and godly prince, in the very entring into hir raigne, notwithstanding the multitude of hir aduersaries, bothe at home and abrode, abolished all superstition, and restored the simplicitie of the Gospell. But these men alleadge these places to the discredite of this reformation, and of the whole gouernmente of this Churche. How aptly and how truly, let godly, wise, and learned meniudge.
                     
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        All this is passed ouer with silence, and nothing said vnto it, good or bad.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The exposition of the places. Deu. 4. &. 12. quoted by the Admonition.
               
                  Cap. 6. The first Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag. 30. Sect. 2.
                     TO proue that these things only are to be placed in gods Church,The places in the. 4. and. 12. o
                              〈1 line〉
                            Deutero. expounded. whiche God himselfe in his word commaundeth, is noted the fourth and the twelfth of Deut. Ye shall put nothing to thevvord that I commaund you, neither shall you take any thing therefrom. &c. And in the other place: VVhatsoeuer I cōmaund you take heed you do it, thou shalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. God in the old law to his people, prescribed perfect and absolute lawes, not only morall and iudiciall, but ceremoniall also: neither was there the lest thing to be done in the Church omitted in the law. And therefore for them at that time, and during that state, it was not lawfull to adde any thing, nor to take any thing away no not in ceremonies and other ciuill lawes: now in the time of the Gospell God hath left vnto his Church expressed in his word a perfect rule of faith and manners, and sufficient to saluation, and cursed is he that shal adde any thing to it, or take any thing from it in that behalfe, for therein it is perfec te and absolute. But as he hath lefte the iudiciall lawe to the discretion of the magistrate, to adde there vnto or take therefrom, or al
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        er and change the same, so that no law be made against the rule of faith and good manners expressed in the word of God. &c.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 21. Sect 
                           〈1 line〉
                        2.
                     Unto the places of Deuteronome, which proue that nothing ought to be done in the Church, but that which God commaundeth, and that nothing should be added or diminished. First you answere that that was a precepte giuen to the Iewes for that time, whiche had all thinges euen the

least prescribed vnto them. I see it is true which is said, that one absurditie graunted, a hundred follow. For to A 
                              〈◊〉
                            peruerting of ma ni
                              〈1 line〉
                           ell and playn
                              〈1 line〉
                            words. make good, that things ought to be done besides the scripture and word of God, you are driuen to runne into part of the errour of the Manichees, which say, that the old testament perteyneth not vnto vs, nor bindeth not vs. For what is it else, than to say that these two places serued for the Iewes time, and vnder the law? for surely if these two places agree not vnto vs in tune of the Gospell, I knowe none in all the old testament, whiche do agree. And I praye you what is here saide which S. Iohn in the Apocalipse saith not, where he shutteth vp the new testament on this sort: I protest vnto euery man which heareth the prophecie of this booke, that whosoeuerApoca. 22. addeth any thing to it, the Lord shall adde vnto him the plagues whiche are written in it: And whosoeuer taketh away any thing from it, the Lorde shall take away his portion out of the booke of life, and out of the things that are written in it? whiche admonition if you say perteyneth to that booke of the Apocalipse only, yet you must remember that the same may be as truly said of any other booke of the scripture.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        My first answer to that place of Deuteronomie is true, neyther can you disproueThe first answer iustifyed it by any sound reason or good authoritie: for if you will haue this precept now to be vnderstanded of all the selfesame ordinances, and lawes, of the whiche, and for the which, it was at that time giuen, then must we of necessitie kéepe the ceremoniall and iudiciall precepts of the Law being at that time in force. The which thing as I suppose, no learned man will once imagine, but yet as this precepte was then gyuen to them, that they should adde nothing to the lawes of God then in force, or take any thing from them, so is it perpetuall for vs also, that we shoulde adde nothing to the law of faith and manners, which is likewise perfectly prescribed vnto vs in the booke of God.
                        And thus you sée how farre I am from the erroure of the Manichees, and from thinking that the old testament doth not apperteine vnto vs: and yet I am not so Iewish, toHow farre that precept in Deut. is extended. thinke that we are bound either to the ceremoniall or iudiciall law: and therefore I say that that precepte applyed vnto vs, dothe not extende any further, than to suche thinges as God hathe commauuded or forbidden vs that be Christians to do in hys word. How vniustly therefore you charge me to say, that these two places agree not vnto vs vnder the Gospell, when as I haue plainly declared how they agrée to them vnder the law, and to vs vnder the Gospell, let any man iudge.
                        The words in the last of the Apocal. although they be properly and namely spoken of that booke, yet I am fully perswaded that they may also be affirmed of the whole testament. And I am so farre from allowing either addition or detraction, to, or from the word of God, that I vtterly cōdemne as false that which you haue setdown before in your booke Fol. 13. That many things are both commaunded and forbidden, of which there is no expresse mention in the worde, which are as necessarily to be followed or auoyded, asFol. 13. Sect. 2. those whereof expresse mention is made.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the second Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 21. Sect. 3.
                     Then you are driuen to say, that the Iewes vnder the law, had a more certaine direction, and consequently a readier w
                           〈1 line〉
                        y, than we haue in the time of the Gospell, of the whiche time the ProphetIet. 31. v. 34 saith, that then a man should not teach his neighboure, they shall be so taught of God: as if he should say, that they that liue vnder the Gospell, should be all, in comparison of that whiche were vnder the lawe doctours. And Esay saith, that in the days of the Gospell, the people shall not standIsay. 56. in the outward courts, but he will bring them into the sanctuarie, that is to say, that they should be all, for their knowledge as learned as the Leuites and priests, which only had entrance into it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In matters of ceremonies and iudicials they had moe particular rules prescribedWherein the Jewes had a more certaine direction than we. vnto them, and a more certaine direction. For we haue very litle in these matters particularly written in the new testament: but the morall lawe we haue as perfect as they had, and in the law of faith, which is the law of the Gospell and the rule of saluation, we do farre exceede them. Other meaning than this there cannot (with all the violence that you haue) be wrong out of my words.
                        
                           Your places alleadged out of the Prophete Ieremy and Esay improue nothing that I haue spoken, for the Prophet Ieremy speaketh of the elect of God, whome heIerem. 3. doth teach and illuminate not only with the outward preaching of his word, but by the maruellous operation of his spirit also. The words of the Prophet Esay (if youEsay. 56. meane the 7. ver. of the. 56. Chap. for else ther is no such words there) do signify that God will gather the Gentiles and straungers into his Church, and make no distinction betwixt them and the Iewes in the time of the Gospell: but how you shoulde gather of that place that the people should be as learned as the Priests and Leuites, I cannot coniecture. Neither truly do I know to what purpose this texte is alleadged, except it be alittle by the way, to flatter the people and to claw them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 21. Sect. 4. 5.
                     Now if the Iewes had precepts of euery the least action, which told them precisely how they should walke: how is not their case in that poynt better than ours, which bycause we haue in many things but generall rules, are to seeke often times, what is the will of God which we should followe? But let vs examine their lawes, and compare them with ours in the matters perteyning to the Church: for whereas the question is of the gouernmente of the Churche, it is very impertinent, that you speake of the iudicialls, as though you had not yet learned, to distinguish betweene the Church and common welth.
                     To the ordering and gouerning of the Church, they had only the morall, and ceremoniall lawe: we haue the same morall that they had: what speciall direction therefore they inioy by the benefyte of that, we haue.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Iewes as it is confessed by learned men, had their lawes more particularlyWhy the Iewes had their ceremonies particularly prescribed prescribed vnto them, and especially touching Ceremonies, not onely bycause they were prone to Idolatrie, but also oftentimes in subiection to Idolatrous princes, where they had occasion offered vnto them to worship their false Gods. Therefore a learned interpreter saith, 
                              Fateor in multis ceremonijs diuinitùs mandatis fuisse occupatos, ne alias appeterent. I confesse that they were occupied in many ceremonies commaunded ofCal. in barmo. in pentateuc. God, least they should desire other. This then was one, though not the only cause of their ceremoniall lawes: and in this respecte their case was not better, but indéede much more seruile and worse than ours, who are deliuered from that yoke of ceremonies, and bound only to two, as Aug. Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. saithe most easily to be obserued,Aug. epist. 118 and most excellent in signification, that is, the supper of the Lord and Baptisme. So that you are much deceiued if you thinke vs to be in worse case, than they were, bycause we haue not so many particular rules for ceremonies, as they had: for we are deliuered from the bondage of Ceremonies, as the Apostle declareth to the Galat. 5.Galat. 5. and therefore M. Caluine in his booke against the Anabap. answering this reason of theirs (There is more perfection required in the Church of Christ, than there was amongCal. adue. ana. the Iewes, and therefore Christians may not vse the sword or be magistrates) saith on thys sort. 
                              Hoc quidem verum est, quod ad Ceremonias attinet. This is true as touching ceremonies, meaning that we are not now bound to so many lawes of ceremonies, but haue fréedome and libertie therein. I speake of accidentall ceremonies as well as of Sacramentes.
                        You say that whereas the question is of the gouernment of the Church. &c. wherein antiquum obtines. For our present question is whither all things to be vsed in the Church are prescribed in the scripture? And that which I speake of the iudiciall lawe I speake it by occasion of the interpretation of these places of Deuteronomie. Howbeit I sée no such distance betwixt the Church and the common wealth, but the lawes of the one doth and oughte to perteine to the other, excepte you will do as the Papistes did, that is, seclude the ciuill magistrate altogither from medling in any ecclesiasticall

matter. And I am well assured that not onely the ceremoniall and morall lawe but the iudiciall also perteyned to the gouernmente of the Churche of theThe iudiciall law perteyned to the gouernment of the Church. Israelites, and that these preceptes of not adding too or taking from, perteyned to that lawe also. M. Musculus in his common places. Cap. de legibus, deuideth the iudiciall lawe into two partes, into ecclesiasticall and ciuill: his wordes be these. VVherefore these preceptes may not vnfitly (he meaneth, iudiciall) be deuidedMuscul. into two kyndes, whereof some are ecclesiasticall and other ciuill. M. Beza in lykeBeza. manner in his booke de haereticis a magist: puniend. saith, that the iudiciall law doth partly consist in the externall manner of worshipping God, partly in the ciuill affaires of this lyfe. And M. Caluine. in his Harmo: vpon the fyue bookes of Moses, expounding thisCaluine. verse in the. 23. of Exod. Thou shalt vtterly ouerthrow them and breake in peeces their images. Calleth it a politike lawe, and yet notwithstanding an apendix to the firste precepte, and added to confirme that which he had spoken before against Idolatrie. Therefore to the ordering and gouerning of the Churche, the Iewes had not only the morall and ceremoniall, but the iudiciall law also.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 21. Sect. vlt.
                     We haue no ceremonies but two, the ceremonies or sacramentes of Baptisme, and of the Lords supper, and we haue as certayne a direction, to celebrate them, as they had to celebrate their ceremonies, and fewer and lesse difficulties can rise of ours, than of theirs: and we haue more playne and expresse doctrine to decide our controuersies than they had for theirs. What houre had they for their ordinarie and dayly sacrifices? was it not left to the order of the Church? what places were appoynted in their seuerall dwellings to heare the worde of God preached continually, when they came not to Ierusalem? the word was commaunded to be preached, but no mention made, what manner of place they should haue: where was pulpits commaunded or chaires? and yet they had both. Where any forme of buriall in the law? and yet it is a thing perteyning to the Chnrch, that the dead be after a comely sort buried: where, any order or forme of mariage? and yet it is knowne, they had. It was (which is more) in the discretion of that Church, vpon occasion of dearth, or warre, plagues, or any other common calamitie, to proclayme a fast.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        We haue no ceremonies which he sacraments, but two, and in them, and for al thingsHow we haue but two Ceremonies. perteyning to their substance, we haue as certeyne direction as they had for any of theyr sacraments. But yet is not euery circumstance to be vsed about the celebrating of them, so particularly, nor so certainely prescribed vnto vs, as was to them in theyr ceremonies, sacramentes, and sacrifices: for they had euery particular circumstance to be vsed about their sacrifices, sacramentes and ceremonies set downe vnto them, as it is euident Exod. 12. 25. 26. &c. and in Leuiticus. We are not bound to any suche prescript forme of outward ceremonies and circumstances, but haue frée libertie, not only to appoynte, but also to alter and chaunge the same, as shall be thoughte most conuenient: so that nothing be done against the word of God, and that the generall1. Cor. 14. rule be obserued. 1. Cor. 14. that all things be done decently and in order. All thys therefore that you speake of houre, place, and of the forme of buriall, and of mariage. &c. infirmeth nothing that I haue sayd, for these be circumstances not vsed in the seruice of God, but in other actions: and I speake of suche ceremonies and circumstances, as are vsed in the Church, about the seruice and worshipping of God, whiche were to the Iewes particularly prescribed (as appeareth in the places before alleadged) but be not so to vs.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 6. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 22. Sect. 1. 2.
                     I will not be long, whereas you say, that they had nothing but was determined by the law: and

we haue many things vndetermined and left to the order of the Church. I will offer for one that you shall bring that we haue left to the order of the Churche, to shewe you that they had twentie,A large offer but not so soone per formed. which were vndecided of, by the expresse word of God. For as their ceremonies and Sacraments are multiplied aboue ours, so grew the number of those cases, which were not determined by any expresse word, and therefore I will concludeMarke these words. that for somuch as we haue the same 
                           〈◊〉
                         to direct vs in the seruice of God, which they had, besides that, a noble addition of the new testament, to make things more manif
                           〈1 line〉
                        st, and to bring greater light vnto the old testament, we haue also precise direction of our religion as they had, and therefore those places of Deut. stande in as greate force now touching the gouernmente of the Church, as they did then.
                     And as for the iudiciall law, for as muche as there are some of them made in regard of the region where they were giuen, and of the people to whome they were giuen, the Prince and Magistrate keeping the substance and equitie of them (as it were the marrow) may chaunge the circumstances of them, as the times and places, and manners of the people shall require. But to say that any magistrate can saue the life of blasphemers, conteniptuous and stubborne Idol
                           〈1 line〉
                        ters, murderers, adulterers, incestuous persons, and such like, which God by his iudiciall law hath commaunded to be put to death, I do vtterly deni
                           〈1 line〉
                        , and am ready to proue, if that perteyned to this question. And therefore although the iudiciall lawes are permitted to the discretion of the Prince and Magistrate, yet not so generally, as you seeme to affirme, and as I haue often times said, that not only it must not be done, against the word, but according to the word, and by it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely if you can shew me twenty things to be done of them, in the seruice of God or discipline of the Church, left to the order of the Church, and vndetermined in the law, for one that I can shew left to the order of our Church, you can do more than any man that I know, hath either spoken or written. Musculus Lo. co.
                            after that he hath made a particularMusc. loc. com. tit. de. legib. recitall of the ceremoniall lawes, saithe that God did therefore appoint vnto thē such a number of Ceremonies, bicause they should not inuēt any other, seing they had Ceremonies inow wherby they might be exercised, and as it were by a certain kind of schooling might be instructed in the spirituall sense. To our discretion is left as I haue said, the most of the circumstances perteyning to both the sacraments, most of all externall rites, ceremonies, and other things that perteyne to comelinesse and order yea and the disposition of many things also which apperteine to the externall discipline, and gouernmente of the Church: which are to be varied according to time, persons, and place, as shall hereafter be proued. If you be able to shewe that the same libertie was lefte vnto them, in so many thinges you shall do more than I can conceyue.
                        But admttte all this to be true, that you say, there can be nothing spoken more directlyThe assertion of T. C. directly 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              eth the Answere. for the iustifying of my cause. For if the Israelites notwithstanding these places of Deutero. had libertie to order things in the Church not comaunded or prescribed vnto them in the word of God, then do the Authours of the Admonition vnaptly vse these places of Deuteronomie: to proue that those things only are to be vsed and placed in the Church, which God himselfe in his word hath commaunded. For if the Iewes (notwithstanding these precepts) did lawfully vse those things that were not in the word commaunded, withoute adding to the word, or taking from it, surely we may do so in like manner. And thus haue you taken muche paynes in iustifying that cause, which y
                              〈1 line〉
                           u would so gladly ouerthrow.
                        Wher you say, that we haue the same lawes to direct vs in the seruice of God, that they had,The assertion of T. C. tendeth to Iudaisme. if you meane the same morall lawes you say truly, but nothing to the purpose: if you meane the same ceremoniall lawes (which properly are said to be lawes directing them in the seruice of God) then do you 
                              Iudaizare play the Iew. And certainely I maruell what you meane by this saying, séeing that you knowe our externall manner and kind of worshipping of God to be farre distante from theirs: and our sacramentes (though spiritually the same) yet both in number, forme, matter, obseruation, and kind of signification, much differing from them, and especially seing that their ceremoniall law is vtterly abolished. Neyther do I well vnderstand what your meaning is when you adde, Besides that a noble addition of the newe testamente, to make things more manifest, and to bring a greater light vnto the old testament. For if you meane that the newe testamente is added to the ceremoniall lawe, that cannot be so, for it is the ende of

the Ceremoniall lawe, and dothe vtterly abrogate it. 
                              Nam 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 inis legis Christus. &c. Christe is the ende of the lawe. For as well the figures as the promises conteyned inRom. 10. the lawe and the Prophetes, are fulfilled in the newe Testament by the commingLuke. 24. of Christe, as he him selfe saythe, Luke. 24. If you meane that it is added to the morall lawe, that is also vntrue, for it onely explaneth it, it addeth nothing vnto it. In déede it bringeth a great lighte to the olde Testament, bicause all thinges are there fulfilled whiche were prophe
                              〈1 line〉
                           ied of, and prefigured in the olde Testament. M. CaluinCaluin. inst. 
                              Institu. Cap. 3. Sect. 9. saythe, that to thinke Christ to haue added any thing to the law is moste pernicious.
                        
                        I muste craue pardon of the Reader, for making suche excursions out of the way,Whether the Magistrate be bounde to obserue the Iudiciall law of Moses. for I am compelled to followe you, whiche interlace your booke with suche by▪ matters, and those so suspicious and daungerous, that I can not safely passe them ouer with silence. And euen nowe agayne do you enter into a straunge and dangerous opinion in my iudgement: for you would haue the ciuill Magistrate bounde to obserue all the Iudiciall lawes of Moses, excepte suche as were made in respect of the re
                              〈1 line〉
                           gion where they were giuen, and of the people to whome they were giuen. Of the whiche lawes the Magistrate you say, may onely chaunge the circumstances, as the times, and places, and manners of the people shall require. But you vtterly deni
                              〈1 line〉
                           , and are ready to proue, if that perteyned to th
                              〈1 line〉
                           s question, that any Magistrate can saue the lyfe of blasphemers, contemptuous and stubbo
                              〈1 line〉
                           ne Idolaters, murderers, adulterous persons, and suche like, whiche God by his Iudiciall lawe hathe commaunded to be put to death.
                        Howesoeuer you passe this matter ouer as impertinent to this question, yet for asThe 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               with the asser tion of T. C. muche as you haue héere set it downe (and I am fully persuaded that it is vntrue) I minde to touche it something, and to vtter the reasons of my persuasions. I leaue it to the consideration of those that knowe the lawes, and state of the Realne, and especially suche as haue the chiefe gouernment and care of the same, what lieth hidde vnder this your opinion. First, all the lawes of this land, that be contrarie to these Iudiciall lawes of Moses, must be abrogated: The Prince must be abridged of that prerogatiue which she hath in pardoning suche as by the lawe be condemned to dye: the punishments of death for fellonie must be mitigated according to Moses law, whiche doth by other meanes punish the same, Exod. 22. To be short, al things must be transformed:Exod. 22. Lawyers must cast away their huge volumes, and multitude of cases, and content them selues with the bookes of Moses: we of the Cleargie would be the best Iudges, and they must require the lawe at our handes. Deutero. 17. verse. 8. And soDeut. 17. while we make them beléeue that we séeke for equalitie among our selues, we séeke in déede regall dominion ouer them. Looke Deuter. 17. verse. 12. But to omit all these considerations, whiche I leaue to those to whom they do especially perteyne, I wyll shew as briefly as I can, how farre this opinion is from true diuinitie.
                        First, besides all those places of Scripture, whiche make generally for the abrogationThe Iudiciall lawe abrogat
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . of the whole lawe: we haue especiall places for the Iudiciall lawe, and namely those where Christ maketh lawes of deuorcement for adultrie. Math. 5. and. 19. whichMat. 5. &. 19. were altogither néedlesse, if she that is takē in adultrie should of necessitie be stoned to death, according to ye law of Moses. Aug. 
                              ad Pollentiū de adult. coniug. li. 2. cap. 6. 7. 8. &. 14.
                           Augustine. proueth by that whiche is written of Christ. Iohn. 8. touching the woman deprehendedIohn. 8. in adultrie, and brought vnto him by the Scribes & Pharisies: that the wife, taken in adultrie ought not to be punished with death, but suffred to liue that she mighte be reconciled to hir husbande, or at the least repent. Cyril also vpon the. 11. of Leuit. saith, that though the punishment of death was according to the law of Moses appoynted for adultrie,Cyrill. and certayne other crimes, yet among Christians there is no suche commaundement in force. Musculus in his common places, tit. de legib. speaking of the law, sayth thus:Muscul. 
                           They aske the question whether the whole lawe be abrogated: we answere, if whole Moses gaue place to Christ, then hathe his whole lawe giuen place to the lawe of Christe. And a little after: The commaundementes of the lawe are Morall, Iudiciall, Ceremoniall. That the Ceremoniall commaundementes haue ceassed it is euident, forsomuche as the Priesthoode of the lawe, to the which the ceremonies were annexed is abrogated by the Priesthoode of Christ, according to the order of Melchizedech: and that the Iudicials also are
                           
                           ceassed it dothe herein appeare, for that the whole order of gouernment of Israell, which was requisite vnto the inhabiting of the lande of promise, hath from that time ceassed, wh
                                 〈1 line〉
                               as they beeing expelled, began to dwell amongst the Gentiles without a king, without gouernours, without a Priest, and without a lawe.
                        
                        Hemingius in his Encber: is of the same iudgement: his words be these. There is alsoHemingius. the Iudiciall law, which expired with the common wealth of Moses: so that it dothe not binde any man of necessitie, but so farre onely, as some portion of it dothe perteyne to the law of nature (as the law agaynst incestuous mariages. Leuit. 18.) and so much of it lykewise, as the ciuill Magistrate shall admit for pollicie.
                        
                           I omit that place of M. Caluin, which is written in his Harmonie vpō the. 5. bookesCaluin. of Moses, where he speaking of these lawes. Exod. 23. Deut. 12. Num. 3
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . which were giuen for the breaking of Images, destroying of places where idolatrie was cōmitted &c. saith, that they were but temporall exercises, to kéepe the people in obedience. &c. And in the same booke, speaking of the. 7▪ of Deut. The grauē Images of their Gods shallDeut. 7. ye burne with fire, and couet not the siluer and golde that is on them, &c. saith, Althoughe this was a politike lawe, and giuen onely to the auncient people for a time, yet hereby we may gather how detestable Idolatrie is. &c. But of all other places that is moste euident which he hathe in his Institu. Cap.
                            20. Sect. 13. 14. 15. and therfore I wil rehearse it more at large. Sunt qui rectè compositam rempub. negent. &c.
                            There are certaine which denie thatCaluinus. common welth to be well ordered, which omitting the politike lawes of Moses, is ruled by the common lawes of the Gentiles. The which opinion how dangerous and seditious it is,☞ let other men cōsider, it is inough for me to haue declared, that it is both false & foolish. But that vsuall diuision is to be obserued, which deuideth the whole law of God deliuered by Moses, into maners, ceremonies, & iudgements, and euery part therof is diligently to be considered, that we may vnderstande what perteyneth vnto vs thereof, and what dothe not. In the meane time, let no man be troubled with this, that both the Iudicials & ceremonies did apperteyne vnto maners: for the ancient fathers, the inuentors of this diuisiō, although they were not ignorant, that these two latter parts were occupied about maners, yet (bycause they might be altered and abrogated without any preiudice vnto maners) they called them not morall. They called that first part properly by that name moral, without the which the true holynesse of maners, and the immutable rule of liuing could not well consist. And agayne. The law of God forbiddeth to steale: what punishment was appoynted for thefte in the pollicie of the Iewes, appeareth▪ in Exod. The moste auncient lawes of other nationsExod. 22. punished theft with double: they which followed afterwarde made a difference betwixte open theft, and that which was secret: others condemned the theeues with exile & banishment: others adiudged them to be whipped: and last of all, others, to be put to death. False witnesse amongst the Iewes was punished with equal payne in respect of the hurt: in other places onely with infamie: in other places with hanging. &c. All lawes ioyntly do reuenge murder with bloud, but yet with diuers kindes of death. In some places there are greeuouser paynes appoynted for adulterers, in other places those which are more easie: yet we see how they al by this diuersitie of punishment, tende to one ende, for they al with one consent, do giue sentence of punishment agaynst those offences, which are condemned by the eternall law of God: to wit, murder, theft, ad
                              〈1 line〉
                           ltrie, false witnesse, but they agree not all in the maner of the punishment. Neyther truly is it necessarie or expedient that they shoulde agree herein.☞ There is a countrey which should out of hande be destroyed with theeues and slaughter, if it did not with horrible example deale very sharpely with murderers. There is a
                              〈1 line〉
                           so some time which requireth the augmentation of the sharpnesse of punishment, and some people very prone vnto some certayne sinne, except they be with great rigour kepte in awe. He is then very euill affected, and enuieth the publike commoditie, that is offended with thys diuersitie, which is most meete to reteyne the obseruatiō of the law of God. For that which some men obiect, that by this meanes iniurie is done to the lawe of God, whiles it beeing abrogated, other lawes are preferred before it, is most vaine. For other lawes are not preferred before it, but allowed, not by any simple comparison in respect of Gods law, but according to the condition of time, place, and nation: neither can that be sayde to be abrogated,☞ which was neuer prescribed vnto vs, for God deliuered it by the handes of Moses, not for

all natiōs, but particularly for the Iewes. &c. M. Beza likewise in his booke de haer 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  Magist. puniend. of this matter writeth thus: VVe acknowledge those politike lawes to be prescribed,Beza. onely to the countrey of the Iewes: neither are we so vnskilfull that we woulde haue Moses common wealth or gouernment called backe agayne, as though it were not lawfull for euery Magistrate within his owne dominion to make lawes in ciuill matters. And a little after. The Iudiciall lawes were framed only for one nation. Therefore seeing they were neuer written for vs, they can not be sayd to be abrogated. And agayne. Onely the Israelites were bound to the Iudiciall lawes, that is, those that dwell in Iurie, bicause they were made fit for that common wealth onely. And after that he hath shewed by an example of the lawe for theft, that that maner & kinde of punishment, did onely binde the Israelites, & that other Magistrates in their countreys for good causes maye appoynt a sharper kinde of punishment for the same, he cōcludeth thus: Lex enim illa Mosis
                           
                           Idem. 
                           quatenùs poenae modū praescribit, alijs gentibus ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               vnquā fuit posita, ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               nūc est propriè abrogata. That lawe of Moses in so muche as it prescribeth the maner of punishment, was neyther☜ at any time giuen to other nations, neither is it now properly abrogated. So that now they that be disposed may perceyue, howe this doctrine of yours not onely tendeth to the ouerthrowing of states of cōmon wealthes, but is contrarie also to the truth, and opinion of learned men, and those especially of whome you your selfe make greatest accompt. Therefore it is true that I haue sayde in my answere to the Admonition, that is, The Iudicial law to be left to the discretion of the Magistrate to adde to it, or to take from it, or to alter and chaunge it, as shall be thought most fit for the time, manner of the countrey, and condition of the people, as M. Caluin also very aptly noteth in the very ende of that. 15. section before rehearsed.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 31. Lin. 21▪
                     
                     So hath he lefte authoritie vnto his Churche to make lawes, and appoynt orders & ceremonies, as shall from time to time be thought most expedient and profitable for the same, so that nothing be done contrarie to his worde, or repugnant to the same. And this authoritie hath the Churche vsed, euen from the Apostles time, as it is manifest, both by the scriptures. Act. 6. Act. 15. 1. Cor. 11. & other ecclesiasticall stories and auncient fathers, as is before by me proued.
                     
                        Iohn. Whitgifte.
                        To this nothing is answered.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 31. Sect. 1.
                     But to come to the wordes of Deuteronomie them selues, what is it to adde to the worde of God, or to take from it? Truely to thinke otherwise, or teache otherwise of God than he hathe in his worde reuealed: Those take from the worde, that beleeue lesse than in the worde is expressed: those adde to the worde, fyrste, whiche teache or decree any thing eyther in matters of faythe or ceremonies, contrarie to the worde. Secondly, those that make any thing necessarie vnto saluation, not conteyned in the worde. Thirdly, such as make any religion, or opiniō of merite in any thing that they themselues haue inuented besides the worde of God. Last of all they adde to the word, which forbid that for a thing of it selfe

vnlawfull, which Gods worde doth not forbid, and make that sinne which Gods word doth not make sinne. But such as truly & sincerely imbrace the worde of God, and admit nothing contrarie vnto it, if in gouernment & ceremonies without any wicked & superstitious opinion they appoynt or retayne such as they know not to be agaynst the worde of God, and profitable for the present state of the Church, can not truly be sayd to adde any thing to the worde of God, or take any thing from it, though the same be not expressed in the worde.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 22. Sect. 3.
                     After you define what it is to take from, and put to the word of God, wherin not to speake of your wonderfull There is no great dexteritie required to performe this. dexteritie in defining, which can define two thinges, and those contrarie (putting to, and taking fro) with one difference, which Zeno him self could neuer do, you leaue out that which Moses especially ment to comprehende, which is, not to do more, nor to do lesse than he hathe commanded. And as for your diuision, it hath as euill successe here, as in other places, for when it is a great fault in diuiding to haue either too muche or too little, you fault in bothe, for where as you say, they adde, which teache or decree. &c. Besides that you leaue out, whiche Moses mente, you forget also that, whiche your selfe had sayde, whiche had placed adding too, not onely in teaching and decreeing, but in thinking or beleeuing.
                     And wheras you make foure parts of your diuision, the three last are found to be all vnder the first member, which is to make things of fayth and ceremonies, contrarie to the worde, and so your diuision is not onely faultie, but no diuision at all. All this is spoken in contempt of the person, not in defense of the cause. The which thing I could haue easily forgiuen you, and passed by as a thing not very commendable to trauell to shew the pouertie of those things, which do sufficiently of themselues (as it were) proclayme their owne shame: but that it grieued me to see a booke lengthened with first, seconde, thirde, last, as though euery one of them conteyned some notable newe matter, which needed an Oyes before it, to stirre vp the attention of the reader, when there is nothing but a many of words without matter, as it were a sort of fayre emptie apothecaries boxes, without any stuffe in them. And for that you are so harde with other men for their Logike, I will desire the reader to pardon me, if I pursue these things more narrowlier than some peraduenture will like of, or I my selfe delight in. And so for any definition or diuision that I can perceiue, it standeth fast, that nothing is to be done in the Church of God, but by his cōmandement and word directing the s
                           〈1 line〉
                        me. It is true in deede, if they be not agaynst the worde of God, and profitable for the Churche, they are to be receyued, as those things which God by the Churche dothe commaunde, and as grounded of the worde of God. But there is the question, and therefore you taking this as a thing graunted alwayes, do alwayes fall into that whiche you charge other with, of the failacion of Petitio principij.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is neither definition nor diuision here that can please you: but what remedy? when you iestes be vttered, and you a little sported your selfe, & the matter commeth to trial, there appeareth very slēder corrections: I haue after my rude & simple maner declared what it is to adde to the word of God, or to take from it, and haueTwo contraties may be defined with one differēce. not sought for any exacte definition. But yet (by your leaue) two contraries may be defined by one generall difference, when we talke of those things which be common to them bothe, and do not séeke to separate them from among them selues, but from all other thinges, that be not of the same kinde. So is vertue and vyce, by this difference sensìm acquiri, & sensìm amitti, separated from al other that be not sub habitu: As Homo and brutum by this difference sensibile, be separated from all other creatures that be not vnder Animal. It is a common rule, that the definition of that whiche is called genus, doth agrée to euery part & member vnder it, which we call species, be they contrarie, repugnant, or otherwise disagréeing the one from the other, howsoeuer. Therfore declaring generally what it is to adde to the worde, or to take from the worde, I say it is to thinke otherwise, or to teache otherwise of God, than he hath in his worde reuealed. Whiche in genere dothe aptly expounde them bothe. For as well he that addeth to the worde, as he that taketh from the worde, doth thinke or teach of God otherwise than he hath in his worde reuealed. So you sée that a man of small dexteritie, in defining may do that, whiche you thought Zeno himselfe could not performe.
                        But what néeded all this pastime of yours? do I not immediatly after seuerally declare both what it is to adde to the worde, & what also to take from it? are you able to proue that the expositions whiche I set downe be not true? can you better

them? Will you still more and more declare your quarell to be rather agaynst the person, than the cause? You saye I leaue oute that whiche Moyses especially mente to comprehende, which is, not to doe more, nor to doe lesse than hee hathe commaunded. Surely if you were disposed to deale modestly and sincerely as it behoueth you in so weightie a matter, you woulde not thus wittingly and willingly séeke occasion of quarelling: whether that whiche you saye is lefte oute, muste not of recessitie be included in those words that I haue spoken of adding to the worde, and taking from it, or no, I leaue to the indifferent reader to consider.
                        Touching my diuision, I say as I did of the definition. I am not curious in diuiding, but I playnely and after my rude manner tell howe many wayes a man may adde to the worde of God. Neyther dothe he alwayes diuide, that sheweth howe many wayes a thing maye be done, and yet is there nothing lefte oute necessarie to be expressed. For this that you speake of thinking and beleeuing, is included in the third kinde of adding to the worde. The three laste kyndes are not founde to be vnder the fyrst▪ for it is not all one to teache or decree any thing contrarie to the worde: to make anye thyng necessarie to saluation not contayned in the worde: to put any religion or opinion of merite in any thing that men them selues haue inuented besides the worde: and to forbyd that as vnlawfull which God doth not forbid.
                        In the firste kinde is inuocation of Sainctes, worshipping of Images. &c. whiche be directly contrarie to the expresse worde of God. In the seconde is that decrée of Pope Boniface, whiche maketh it necessarie to saluation to be subiecte to the Byshop of Rome, and suche lyke, whereof there is no mention in the Scriptures. In the thirde kinde are all outwarde Ceremonies inuented by man, wherein any opinion of worshipping or merite is put: as holy breade, holy water, and other Ceremonies of that sorte. In the laste parte is the decrée of Pope Nicholas, Dist. 22. omnes,
                            where it is decréed, that he whiche infringeth the priuiledges of the Churche of Rome, is an heretike. And in this sorte doe those adde also to the worde, which condemne the vse of things indifferent as vnlawful, for in so doing they make that sinne, which the word of God dothe not make sinne.
                        Agayne that there is a great difference in the partes of my diuision, and that they are not confounded, you might haue perceyued if it hadde pleased you with better aduyse to haue weighed them: for things may be decréed contrarie to the worde, and yet not made necessarie vnto saluation. Things may be made as necessarie to saluation, which of them selues are not contrarie to the word, and yet not conteyned in the worde: Men may haue an opinion of Religion and merite in suche thinges as they thinke not to be of necessitie to saluation. To be shorte, men may make that sinne, whych the worde of God maketh not sinne, as all those doe whiche forbid the vse of indifferent things, and make the same vnlawfull as I haue sayde before. You sée nowe that there is no one parte of this diuision (as you call it) which dothe not include something not conteyned in the other partes: and therfore all those vnséemely and immodest tauntes and words mighte haue bin forborne.
                        I aske no forgiuenesse of you for any thing that I haue wrytten: But I beséeche God forgyue you your outrageous contemptes, and vnchristian floutes and iestes, where with your booke is more pestered, than any of Hardinges is, where he sheweth him selfe moste scurrilous. But I will omit them all, and onely desire the Reader to consider of what spirite they come, and in bothe our writings to respecte the matter, not the person.
                        Touching the exposition of the places of Deut. let the learned Reader compare it with the expositions of the learned Interpreters, and then iudge of my vnskilfullThe Replier hath spēt many wordes in confuting that which he him selfe cōfesseth. diuiding and defyning.
                        Here now I wold gladly know what T. C. hath proued agaynst the thing yt I haue here writtē, or how he hath iustified ye propositiō of ye Admonition which I haue refelled: for the sūme of al is this. The authors of the Admonitiō say, that those things onely

are to be placed in the Churche, which God him selfe in his worde commaundeth. This I confesse to be true in matters of saluation and damnation. But I saye it is vntrue in matters of ceremonies, rites, orders, discipline, and kinde of gouernmente: which béeing externall matters, and alterable, are to be altered and chaūged, appoynted and abrogated, according to time, place, and person, so that nothing be done agaynst the worde of God. And T. C. confesseth page. 15. thatPag. 15. Sect. 5. certayne things are lefte to the order of the Churche, bicause they are of that nature, which are varied by tymes, places, persons, and other circumstances, and so could not at once be set downe and established for euer, and yet so lefte to the order of the Churche, as that it doe nothing agaynst the rules aforesayde. The same dothe he affirme in effecte in this place. Nowe I pray you tell me, what difference is there in our wordes? he saythe: that certayne thinges are lefte to the order of the Churche. &c. so that nothing bee done agaynst the rules aforesayde: And I saye, that the Church hath authoritie to appoynt orders, rites, ceremonies. &c. so that nothing be done agaynst the worde of God. In déede he goeth muche further in this matter than I doe, for where I saye, The Scripture expresseth all things necessarie to saluation, he affirmeth, that many things are bothe commaunded and forbidden. &c. as I haue before noted, and is toPag. 13. Sect. 2. be séene page. 13. of his booke.
                        But to ende this matter, I haue iustified my assertion by the scriptures. 1. Cor. 14. Act. 6. and. 15. 1. Cor. 11. Also by the testimonies of Iustinus Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Basill, Augustine, &c. Likewise by the practises of Councels, the reporte of Historiographers, as Socrates and Sozomenus. Finally by the iudgement of late writers, M. Caluin and Bucer. Now will I also adde a fewe wordes for the further confirmation of the same, and so ende this question.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The opinion of other late wryters of things indifferent.
               
                  The. 7. Chapter.
                  Zuinglius in his booke de baptis. after that he had declared howe the Scripture contaynethZuinglius. all thinges necessarie vnto saluation, he sheweth, That in externall things and matters of ceremonies, many things are to be vsed in the Churche, whiche be not contayned in the Scriptures. And speaking of this place. Philip. 3. (If any think otherwise, God will also reueale the same vnto you: neuerthelesse, in that wherevnto we are come, let vs proceede by one rule, or agree among our selues) saythe, That the Apostle there speaketh of nothing else, than of externall ceremonies and rites, the vse and administration whereof, the same Apostle in that place affyrmeth, to be in our vvill and povver, so that vve doe nothing repugnant to the commaundement of God. Neyther trouble the publyke peace (whereof we oughte to haue especiall regarde) for externall thinges. These be the very wordes of Zuinglius, in the which there is first to be noted, the interpretation of the words of the Apostle, Philip. 3. Secondly, that he vsethCollections out of Zuinglius. this exception, So that we doe nothing repugnant to the commaundement of God, which T. C. so muche misliketh. The same Zuinglius in the same booke, verifieth in playne wordes that whiche I before haue, touching a negatiue argument from the authoritie of the Scriptures.
                  
                  Peter Martyr vpon the. 1. Corinth. 1. wryteth, That there be three kindes of traditions,P. Martyr. one expressed in the Scriptures: an other playne repugnant to the worde of God: The thirde neither contrarie to the worde of God, nor yet necessarily ioyned to the same: in the vvhich vve muste obey the Churche, These three cautions beeing obserued: First, that they be not obtruded as worship of God, or peculiar holynesse, but as pertayning to order, and the ciuill commoditie of the Churche, and to comelynesse in diuine actions: for all thinges be sufficiently contayned in Scriptures that pertayne to the worshipping of God, and holynesse. Secondly, that they be not counted so necessarie, but that they may be altered, if time require. Let the Churche keepe hir interest and

authoritie in these indifferent things, to appoynt vvhat shall be thoughte most necessarie and meete to edifying. Last of all, that the people of God be not burdened with to great a multitude of them. Thus farre Martyr.
                  Gualter in his preface to the first Epistle to the Corinth. after that he hath declaredGualter. the diuersitie of rites vsed in diuerse Churches, concludeth on this sort. VVherefore S. Augustine writing to Ianuarius, after that he had layde forth diuerse ceremonyes of Churches obserued in his time, dyd very well thinke that this shoulde be the most safe rule vnto Christian men, if they did frame them selues, vnto those Churches, wherevnto they should come, in those things which might be done without any preiudice vnto fayth and godlynesse, his wordes are these: There is in these things (meaning customes and rytes) no better rule or instruction for a graue and wise Christian, than that he do after that manner the which he seeth vsed of the Church vnto the which he shall peraduenture come. &c. The which moderation if all men woulde vse at this day, there would be lesse contention in the Church, neither shoulde Christian libertie be abridged by the superstitious traditions of men. But why doe they condemne whole Churches, for indifferent things, whiche if they woulde obey S. Paule, ought to apply them selues to the weakenesse of euery one.
                  Beza in an Epistle of his, prefixed before the confession of the Churches in Heluetia
                     
                     Beza. 
                     sayth, That all rytes and ceremonyes are not to be receiued without exception, which the Apostolike Church it selfe hath vsed, eyther as profitable or necessarie for their tymes: and in his booke called confessio Christ. fidei. cap.
                      5. he writeth That one cause of Councels andIdem. Synodes was, to make rules of ecclesiasticall discipline, and to appoint the gouernment of the Church, according to the diuersitie of time, place and persons: For it is necessarie that in the house of the Lorde all things shoulde be done in order: of the vvhich order there is one generall reason in the vvorde of God 1. Cor. 14. But not one and the same forme, agreeing to all circumstances. And againe in the same Chapter he sayth, The rules or canons (of rytes andIdem. orders in the Church) haue respect to comelynesse in externall things, and therefore they be neither generall for the most parte, nor perpetuall: for that which is profitable in some place, in other some places would rather hurt: and moreouer the diuerse respectes of the time are such, that the same thing which for good considerations was ordained, must of necessitie sometime be abrogated: whereof it comes to passe, that there is not onely so great varietie in the olde canons, but contrarietie also. Againe in the same Chapter. VVe mustIdem. not alwayes looke what the Apostles did in politia ecclesiastica, in the gouernmente of the Church, seyng there be most diuerse circumstances, and therfore absque 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      without☜ preposterous zeale, all things can not in all places and times be reduced to one, and the same forme. &c.
                  
                     In the confessiō of the Churches in Heluetia. &c. it is thus written: Men shall easilyConfess. ecclesiarum Heluet. gather this also, that we doe not by any wicked schisme, seuer or cut off oure selues, from Christes holy Churches of Germanie, Fraunce, England, and other Christian nations, but that we well agree with all and euery one of them, in the truth of Christe, which here we haue acknowledged. For albeit there is some varietie in diuerse Churches, aboute the vttering and setting forth of their doctrine, and aboute rytes and ceremonyes, which they receiue as a meane to edifie their Churches, yet that varietie neuer semed to minister cause of dissention and schisme in the Church: for in such matters the Churches of Christ haue alvvayes vsed their libertie, as we may reade in the Ecclesiasticall history.
                  I omit here the confession of the Church of VVirtenberge, and the testimonyes of sundry other notable learned men. I knowe no learned writer, that doth denye the Church to haue authoritie in appoynting rytes, ceremonyes, discipline, and kinde of gouernment according to the place, time, persons, and other circumstances, thoughe the same be not expressed in the word of God, so that it doe nothing repugnante to the same.
                  But what néede I labour so much in a matter confessed by him, that would séeme to ouerthrowe it: for if the Iewes had twentie things left to their order in the Churche for ourPag. 21. Sect. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                     
                     
one (as T. C. hath affirmed) and yet this commaundement not broken 
                        Deu. 4. &. 12. Nihil addes verbo. &c
                      then may the Church of Christ vse hir libertie in like maner, wythout any breache of the same. Wherefore to conclude. I nowe referre it to the iudgement of the Reader, whether if be true or not, that I haue affyrmed against the Authors of the Admonition: to wit that those things onely are not to be brought in, or vsed in the Church, which the Lord himselfe in his word hath commaunded, but that of necessitie in externall things, and outward gouernment, the Churche hath authoritie to determine according to time, place, person. &c. though the same be not commaunded or expressed in Scripture, so that it be not repugnant to the word.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 32. Sect. 1. 2. &. Pag. 33. Sect. 1.
                     The other places noted in this margent, as Psal. 37. Rom. 12. 1. Cor.Scriptures vnchristianly abused by the Admonition. 2. and the rest are not alleaged to proue any thing in cōtrouersie, but onely withoute iudgement placed in the margent to make a shewe: how aptly they be applyed I leaue to the consideration of the diligent Reader.
                     This one thing I can not but maruell at, that these fellowes so please themselues in the platforme of their Church, and attribute so much thervnto, that they exhorte, nay rather charge the courte of Parliament, with perfecte hatred to detest the present state of the Churche, & with singular loue to embrace that which they prescribe in this Booke: and to moue them rather to this perfect hatred of vs, and singular loue of themselues, they vse the authoritie of the. 31. and 139. Psalme. In the one, Dauid sayth that he hath hated them that gyue themselues to deceitfull vanities, bicause he trusteth in the Lorde. In the other speaking of the contemners of God, of wicked and bloudie men,Marke this spirite. and of such as blaspheme God, and be his enemyes, he sayth, I hate them vvith an vnfained hatred. &c.
                     
                     As thoughe all suche as like or alowe of the presente state of the Churche of this Realme of England, gaue them selues to deceitfull vanities, were contemners of God, wicked and bloudy men, blasphemers of God, and his enimyes. I will not aggrauate this blasphemie of theirs: let Prince, Nobles, and all other louers of God & his worde, consider diligently this spirite, and in time preuent the burning malice of the same: no Turke, no Iewe, no Papist coulde possibly haue spoken more spitefully of this Church and state: but such is the spirite of arrogancie. To the lyke effecte they alleage the. 15. of Iohn. 1. Timo. 3. Math. 7. &. 11. as thoughe they onely had the word of God, and were of the Churche, and we contemners and reiecters of the same. O where is humilitie? Truely if these men be not by discipline brideled, they wil worke more harme to this Church than euer the Papist dyd.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To this there is not one word spoken.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     May it therefore please your wisedomes to vnderstande, we in Englande are so farre off, from hauing a Church rightly reformed, according to the prescript of Gods word, that as yet we are not

come to the outwarde face of the same. For to speake of that wherein all consent, and wherevpon all writers accorde. The outwarde markes wherby a true Christian Church is knowne, are preaching of the worde purely, ministring of the Sacramentes sincerely, and Ecclesiasticall discipline, which consisteth in admonition and correcting of faultes seuerely. Touching the first, namely the ministerie of the worde, althougher must be confessed, that the substance of doctrine by many deliuered is sounde and good, yet herein it fayleth, that neither the Ministers thereof are accordyng to Gods worde proued, elected, called or ordained: nor the function in such sorte so narrowly loked vnto, as of right it ought, and is of necessitie required.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 34. &. 35.
                        The proposition that these libellers woulde proue is, that we in Englande are so farre from hauyng a Churche rightly reformed accordyng to the prescripte of Gods worde, that as yet we are not come to the outwarde face of the same. For proofe hereof they vse this argnment: There be three out warde markes whereby a true Christian Churche is knowen: preaching of the worde purely, ministryng of the Sacramentes sincerely: and ecclesiasticall discipline, whiche consisteth in Admonition and correction of faultes seuerely. But thys Church of Englande (for so in effecte they saye) is voyde of all these, Ergo it hath not so much as the externall face of a Church. To proue that the worde of God is not preached truely, they reason on thys sort: The Ministers of the worde are not according to gods worde, proued, elected, called or ordeyned, nor the function in suche sort so narrowly loked vnto, as of right it ought, & is of necessitie required: And therfore the word of God not truely preached. HereAll pointes of doctrine pure in this church. (thankes be to God) they alleage not one article of Faith, or poynte of doctrine, nor one peece of any substance, to be otherwise taughte and allowed of in thys Churche (for not euery mannes folly is to be ascribed to the whole Churche) than by the prescripte worde of God may be iustified, neyther can they. Nowe howe this conclusion followeth (though the antecedent were true) let those iudge that be learned. The Ministers are not rightly proued and elected. &c.An vnapt r
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              son. 
                           Ergo the worde of God is not truely preached: howe wicked so euer the man is, howsoeuer he intrude hymselfe into the ministerie, yet maye he preache the true worde of God. For the truthe of the doctrine dothe not in anye respecte depende vpon the goodnesse or euilnesse of the man: I praye you howe were you, and some other of your adherentes called, elected, &c? But to come to the purpose: They woulde proue that the Ministers of the worde in this Church of Englande, are not accordyng to gods worde proued, elected, called or ordeyned.
                        What force and pithe is in their argumentes, shall appeare in the seuerall answeres to euery one of them. This one thing I muste let you vnderstande, that these men seeke to deface thys Churche of Englande, by the selfe same groundes that the Papistes doe: althoughe by another kynde of proofe. For what haue the Papistes else to saye, but that we haue no Ministers, bycause they be not rightly called, and so consequently no worde, no Sacramentes, no discipline, no Churche. And certainely if it were well examyned, I beleeue it woulde fall oute, that the Authors of this Booke haue

conspired with the Papistes to ouerthrowe (if they coulde) the state both of this Churche and Realme, howsoeuer subtilly they seeme to detest Papistrie.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page 23. Sect. 1, 2, 3.
                     
                        Where do I 
                              〈◊〉
                            that they say so? Where in effecte doe they saye, that the Churche of Englande is voyde of preachyng▪ and ministring of the Sacramentes? is it all one to saye, that the worde in the Churche of Englande is not purely preached, and the Sacramentes sincerely, and discipline seuerely administred, wyth thys, that the Churche of Englande is voyde of all these? Agayne, where doe they reason thus, that the worde of GOD is not truely preached, bycause the Ministers are not ryghtly proued, and elected, when as they haue not one worde of true preachyng? Is it all one to saye it is not purely preached, and to saye, it is not truely preached? Saynte Paule to theA cauill. Philipp. is gladde that the Gospell be preached, althoughe it be not purely, but he woulde neuer haue been gladde, that it should haue been preached falsely or not truely. Againe he inueygheth not agaynst the false Apostles, in the Churche of Corinthe, bycause they preached the worde vntruely, but bycause they vsyng paynted words and affected eloquence, and makyng a great shewe of learnyng, and tounges, dyd not preache the Gospell sincerely: so that you see that it is one thyng, not to preache truely, and an other thing not to preache purely: and so you see their reason is not so euill, for the want of a good calling maye gyue occasion to saye, that the worde of God is not sincerely taughte, bycause there is not a lawfull and ordinarie calling. For althoughe for the substaunce of doctrine, and the manner of handlyng of it, they that Sainte Paule speaketh to, of the Philipp. dyd not faulte, yet Saynt Paule sayth that they dyd not preache purely, bycause they dyd it of contention, or of enuie, whyche was no faulte in the doctrine, but in hym that taughte. Therefore let men iudge howe iuste your wayghtes are, that expounde not purely not truely, and whyther thys be to confute other mens argumentes, rather than to skirmishe wyth your owne shadowes.
                     I knowe no Papistes reason thus, that bycause we haue no Ministers, therefore no worde, no Sacrament, no discipline, no Churche, For they denie that we haue the worde or Sacramentes, bycause we holde not their worde and sacrifice: but if there be that so reason, yet these men that you charge, haue neither any such antecedent, or such a consequent. For they neuer sayde that there is no Ministerie in England, nor yet do euer conclude, that there is no word, no sacraments, no discipline, nor Churche.
                     For in saying that the face of the Churche dothe not so muche appeare (for so the whole proces of their booke dothe declare that they meane, when they say that we haue not scarce the face of the Churche) they graunte that we haue the Churche of God: but that for wante of those ornamentes, whiche it shoulde haue, and throughe certayne the deformed ragges of Poperie, whiche it shoulde not haue, the Churche dothe not appeare in hir natiue colours, and so beautifull, as it is meete she shoulde be prepared, to so glorious a husbande as is the sonne of God. Say you certaynely, and do you beleeue that the authors of this booke, are conspired with the Papistes, to ouerthrowe this Churche and Realme? Nowe certaynely I will neuer doe that iniurie vnto them, as once to goe about to purge them of so manyfest slaunders, nor neuer be broughte by the outrage of your speeches to proue that nooneday is not mydnight: and therefore as for you, I will set your conscience and you togither. The reader I will desire, not to thinke it a straunge thing: for it is no other than hath happened to the seruaunts of God, euen from those which haue professed the same religion, whiche they dyd, as it appeareth in the. 37. of Ieremie, whiche was accused of certayne of the Israelites, that he had conspired with the Babilonians, their mortall enimyes, and layd to his charge that he was goyng to them, when he was going to Beniamin.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte,
                        Who is so blynde as he that will not sée? Doe they not in plaine wordes saye That the outwarde markes whereby a true Christian Churche is knowen, are preaching of the worde purely: ministring the Sacramentes sincerely, and Ecclesiasticall discipline. &c? Is not their whole drifte in the Admonition to proue, That neither the worde is preached purely, nor the Sacramentes sincerely ministred. &c. in this Chnrche of Englande? and what doeT. C. willuigly peruerteth the words of ye Answere. I otherwyse reporte of them? be not my wordes playne? where doe I affirme that they shoulde saye that the Churche of Englande is voyde of preaching and ministring the Sacramentes? But let the Reader consider my wordes, and accordingly iudge of your plaine dealing. Where I write yt they in effect say the Church of England is voyde of these, I am sure you will referre, these, to that whiche went before, that is, preaching of the worde purely, ministring of the Sacramentes sincerely, and ecclesiasticall discipline, &c. neither can you otherwise doe thoughe you woulde wrest my wordes neuer so violently: and therefore that which I reporte of them, is, that they say this Church of England neither hath the worde purely preached, nor the sacramentes sincerely ministred. &c.
                        
                           I make no greate difference betwixte purely, and truely, neyther dothe it followePurely and truely. that the worde of God is truely preached alwayes when the truth is preached. For as a man maye doe Iusta, not 
                              Iustè, lust thyngs and yet not iustly: so maye the truthe be preached, and yet not truely. A man maye doe that whiche is iuste vnwittingly, or for gayne, or for pleasure, or for malice, but then he dothe it not iustly, Quid non ex babitu & animo: Euen so a man maye preache the true worde of God, of affection, of contention, ambition, for profite. &c. but then he dothe not preache it truely. So that your distinction betwixt purely and truely is to no purpose.
                        Neyther dothe Saint Paule helpe you anye thyng at all, but is cleane centrarye1. Phi. vers. 18. vnto you, for in the▪ 18. verse of the firste Chapter to the Philip. these be hys wordes. 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                           ▪ &c. whych in the Bible Printed at Geneua is thus translated: VVhat then? yet Christe is preached all manner wayes, whether it be vnder a pretence, or sincerely. So you sée that there is no difference made betwixte sincerely and truely, for the Greeke worde signifyeth truely. And Maister Beza in hys notes vpon the same Chapter and. 16. verse expoundyng 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           not purely, saythe thus 
                              Non pu
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 o scilicet animo, quùm alio qui pura
                              Beza. 
                              esset doctrina, to weete, not wyth a pure mynde, seeyng that otherwyse the doctrine is pure. so that these aduerbes purely and truely in this place are referred not to the doctrine, but to mynde of hym that teacheth▪ I woulde wyshe that bothe you and others woulde cease from drawyng the Scriptures to youre phantasyes and affections.
                        That this is one reason of the Papistes to proue that we are not the Churche, bycause we haue no true ministerie, I maruell you can be ignorant, séeyng there is nothing oft
                              〈1 line〉
                           er in their mouthes.
                        Whether the authors of the Admonition reason in lyke manner or no, tell me, when you haue well consydered these wordes of theirs in the Epistle to the Reader. Eyther must we haue a right-ministery of God, and a ryghte gouernment of hys Churche accordyng to the Scriptures set vp (both which we lacke) or eise there can be no ryghte Religion. Likewise when you haue wythoute parcialitie viewed the reste of their booke: Truely I thinke him to be more than blynde, that séeth not thys to be theyr kynde of reasoning. Their meanyng is playne, and the seconde Admonition maketh it plainer, howsoeuer you woulde séeme to colour, and cloake the matter, for what other meanyng can it haue to saye that we haue no ryghte▪ Religion, and to speake so bitterly agaynst the whole forme of the Churche, and the moste of suche things as be in the same?
                        I doe beléeue certaynely that there is some Papisticall practitioners among you, neyther is it straunge, for so conspired they wyth the Anabaptistes also as I haue declared, and the Anabaptistes hated them, as muche as you, and pretended the sunplicitie of the worde of God as muche as you: and bothe in pretence of zeale, of puritie of lyfe, and other qualities, for the moste parte were equall vnto you. And thoughe the Prophete Ieremie were vniustly accused, yet doth not that improue any thing that I haue sayde: for they are not the Prophete Ieremye, neither in person, office, or cause, neither yet haue I accused them vniustly in any thing.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Of the election of Ministers. Tract. 3.
            
               Of the triall of Ministers both in learnyng and conuersation.
               
                  Chap. 1. the first diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The first is this. For whereas in the olde Church atrial was hadActs. 1. 11. Acts. 6. 3. 1. Tim. 3. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 7. 8. Tit. 1, 6. both of their abilitie to enstruct, and of their godly conuersation also: nowe by the letters commendatorie of some one man, noble or other, tag and rag, learned and vnlearned, of the basest1. Re. 12. 31. sorte of the people (to the slaunder of the Gospell in theRom. 2. 14. mouthes of the aduersaries) are freely receiued.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 36.
                        It it true that in the olde Church tryall was had of their abilitie to instruct, and of their godly conuersation. But the place in the margent alleaged out of the firste Chapter of the Actes of the Apostles maketh nothing for that purpose: beyng therein no mention at all of any tryall made eyther of learning or maners, but onely of presenting two, and of praying and casting of lottes: And M. Clauine in his Institutions sayth plainely, that out of this place of the Actes and example, there can be no certaine rule gathered of electing and chosing Ministers, for as that ministerie was extraordinarie, so was the calling also. Reade M. Caluine and you shall soone see how little this place, so ofte in the margent quoted, maketh for that purpose for the which it is quoted.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 23. Sect. 4. 5. & Pag. 24. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4.
                     It maketh for the purpose which is alleaged out of the firste of the Actes, to proue, that there ought to be tryall of those which are chofen to the ministerie: for when S. Peter sayth, that such a one must be chosen as hath bene continually conuersant with our sauiour Christ, and from the beginning of his preaching vntill the day wherin he ascended into heauen, he ment nothingSurelye that was not so much ment, as that he might be a fitte witnesse of the doyngs of Christ and of his resurrection. else, but that such a one should be chosen, which was sufficiently instructed, and had bene continually a scholler of our sauiour Christ, and therefore fit to teache and to witnesse that, which they had seene, and whose godly conuersation was notorionsly knowne.
                     Besides that, albeit those two Mathias and Barsabas were therfore set vp in the middest, that the Church in the prayer that was made for their election, might by seing them, pray the earnestlyer for them: yet it was also as much to say, that if any coulde obiect any thing against them, that he should preferre his obiection.
                     And whether they were examined or 
                           〈1 line〉
                        s, the matter is not great, neyther when it is sayd that a tryall shoulde be had, it is ment, that when the parties are famously knowne to those which haue the right of election, that there shoulde be alwayes necessarily an apposing and examining, so that the sufficiencie of doctrine and holynesse of life (for the which cause the tryall and examination is commaunded) be knowne and agreed vpon by them, that chose, it is enough.
                     And so these two beyng notoriously knowen and consented of by the Churche, to be fitte men, myght happely not be examyned, but yet the wordes of Saynt Peter declare plainely, that in the choyse of them, there was regarde had to both, their abilitie to teache, and honestie of conuersation.
                     And althoughe there be certaine things extraordinarie in thys election,If all these be extraordinarie, what haue you left in that election, as ordinary
                              〈1 line〉
                            or how proue you the other to be ordinarie more than some of these. as that suche a one must be chosen which had been conuersant wyth our sauiour Christ, and that there were two put vp for one place, and that it was permitted to lottes, to cast the Apostleship vpon one of them two, as if the Lorde shoulde by the lottes from heauen, tell, who shoulde haue it: yet it followeth not to saye, that the reste of the things that are there vsed, should not be practised in ordinarie callings, for as much they will well agree with them.
                     And Maister Caluine in the place you alleage saythe, that the ordinarie callings somewhat differ from the calling of the Apostles, and after sheweth wherein: that is, in that they were appoynted immediatly of God, and by hys mouthe: whereby it appeareth, that for the residue of those things whych are there mentioned, he holdeth that they may well stande wyth the ordinarye elections.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This Replie standeth all by coniectures: it is certayne that there was no triall had of them, bicause they were sufficiently knowne, and therefore the texte without discretion alleaged, to proue that there oughte to be a tryall of theyr abilitie to instruct &c. If it had bene quoted to proue that suche as were admitted into the function, were méete for the same, bothe sor their lyfe and doctrine, it had bene to some purpose. I thynke it necessarye that suche as bée admitted into the ministerie (vnlesse they bée verye well knowne) shoulde be tryed, bothe in learning, and lyfe, but this place maketh nothing at all for that purpose, but rather contrarie, for it speaketh of suche two as were well knowne, and therefore néeded no tryall: so that if wée conclude any thyng of that place, it muste bée this, that none oughte to bée admitted into the ministerie, but suche as be well knowne, and néede no tryall.
                        There was no other cause of presentyng them, than that whyche is expressed in the texte, and it is presumption to make the Scripture serue to maynteyn oure contentions, agaynste the expresse woords and playn meaning.
                        If thys be a rule to be followed, it muste be followed wholly: for where haue you learned to adde, or take from any lawe or rule prescribed in Gods woorde? or howe doe ye knowe that this example must be followed in one thing, and not in an other? what speciall reuelation haue you to make any suche dismembring of this action? No doubte thys example is extraordinarie, and not of necessitie to bée followed.
                        
                           The woordes of M. Caluine are playne, that there can be no certaine rule gathered of this example, for the electing of ministers, bicause the calling of the Apostles doth something differ from the calling of other ministers.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the second Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 36.
                     In the sixt of the Actes mention is made of Deacons only, whom you will not allowe to be ministers of the worde, and therfore this place serueth not your tourne, neyther is there any thing spoken of any tryall, but only they are willed to looke out among them, seauen men of honest report, and full of the holie Ghost, and wisdome to be appoynted Deacons.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 24. Sect. 5.
                     And where you saye that the sixte of the Actes, bycause it speaketh of Deacons is nothyng to the mater, me thynke you shoulde haue easily vnderstanded, that if a tryall bee necessarie in Deacons (whiche is an vnder office in the Churche, and hathe regarde but to one parte of the Churche, whyche is the poore, and is occupied in the distribution of money) muche more it ought to be in an office of greater charge, whiche hath respect to the whole Churche, and is occupied in the dispensyug of the holy worde of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        That there shoulde be a tryall of suche as are to be admitted to the ministerie, I thinke it moste conuenient (as I tolde you before) excepte the parties be sufficiently known to such as haue authoritie to admit them: but I say that this place of the Acts dothe not proue it, both bicause the office of a Deacon (by their opinion) is altogether distinct from the office of a minister of the woord, the one perteyning to the body, the other to the soule, the one occupied aboute moneye, the other in the woorde, and also,

for that there is in that place no mention made of any triall. That place rather proueth that whyche before was noted A
                              〈1 line〉
                           t. 1. that suche onely shoulde be appoynted to that office, as bée knowne by good experience to be fitte for suche a function.
                        Tell me one worde in that texte that signifieth any such tryall as the Admonition speaketh of. Therfore I say againe as I sayd before, that suche as be well knowne, néede no farther tryall: as both that example Act. 1. and this also Act. 6. manifestly declareth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the third Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 36. Sect. 1.
                     The rule of Saincte Paule in the. 1. Timo. 3. and Tit. 1. is to beeThe booke of ordering ministers iustified concerning examination. folowed. And the booke of ordring ministers and deacons, set forth and allowed by this Church of England requireth, that whosoeuer is to be admitted into the order of the ministerie, should so be tried, examined, and proued both for learning and life, as S. Paule there requireth. Reade the booke with indifferencie and iudgement, and thou canst not but greatly commend it. If any man neglect his dutie in that point, his fault must not be ascribed to the rule appointed, neither yet to the whole Church. Is the law euill, bicause some lawyersWickednes of men causeth not lawes to be euill. in their office swarue frō it? This is fallation à nō causa ad causā.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 24 Sect. 6.
                     But in the ende you agree that they should be tryed, so that nowe the question standeth only howe and by what meanes: wherin you for your part say, that the booke of ordering ministers is a sufficient and good rule. I haue read it, and yet I can not commende it greately. But you will say not with indgement, or iudifferencie. I will promise you with this indifferencie, that I wished, that all that is there, were good and conuenient, and such as I might saye vnto, so bee it. With what iudgement I doe disallowe it, I leaue it to all men to esteeme vpon these reasons.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The question is not whether you allowe, or disallowe that booke, neither is it materiall whether you doe or not. Your reasons vsed against it, I will seuerally, for memorie sake examine.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 24. Sect. 7. 8. 9.
                     Fyrst, that the examination of hys doctrine, wholly, and partely of hys lyfe, is permitted toThe reasons of T. C. against the booke of ordering ministers. one man. For consyderyng of the one parte the greatnesse of the charge that is committed vnto the ministers, and the horrible pe
                           〈1 line〉
                        ill that commeth vnto the Church by the want of those things that are required in them, and of the other parte weighyng the weaknesse of the nature of man, whyche although he seeth many things, yet is he blynd also in many, and that euen in those things whiche he seeth, he suffereth himselfe to be caryed away by his affection of loue, or of enuie. &c. I saye, consydering these things, it is verye daungerous to committe that to the vewe and search of one man, whyche maye with lesse danger and more safetie be referred vnto dyuers. For hereinManie eye
                              〈1 line〉
                            see more 
                              〈◊〉
                            one. the prouerbe is true, Plus vident oculi quam oculus.
                     
                     And almoste there is no office of charge in this realme whych lyeth in election, committed so 
                           〈◊〉
                         to any, as that vpon one mannes reporte of hys habilitie, all the rest whych haue interest in the election, will giue their voyces, so that if we were destitute of authoritie of the scripture, the verie lyghte of reason woulde shewe vs a more safe and waryer way.
                     But there is greater authoritie, for S. Luke in the fyrst of the Actes sheweth that Sainc
                           〈1 line〉
                        e Peter woulde not take vpon him to presente two, as fitte for the place whiche was voyde, but sayth, they did present or set vp: wherby appeareth, that the examinatiō of their abilitie was comitted to many. The same apeareth also in the. 6. of the Acts, when as the Apostles will ye Church wherin there wer
                           〈1 line〉
                         so excellent personages, to loke out seuen full of the holy ghost & wisedome. &c.

They doe not there permitte the discernyng of theyr wysedome and other gyftes to one, but to manye.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte
                        Youre fyrste reason is partely grounded 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ppon bare coniectures, or ratherThe first 
                                 〈◊〉
                               son of T. C. hath either a weake, or a false ground. common suppositions, that maye be supposed in the moste perfecte gouernment, partely vppon the place Acto. 1. eyther not vnderstoode, or wyllingly miscon
                              〈1 line〉
                           rued, nothyng perteyning to the purpose. But fyrste it is vntrue, that the exa
                              〈1 line〉
                           ination, eyther of doctrine, or lyfe, is in thys Churche wholly committed to one man: For the Booke committeth the examination of suche as are to bée admitted into the ministerie, not onely to the Byshop, but to the Archedeacon also: to the Bishoppe in the begynnyng of the Beoke by playne and expresse woordes: to the Arched
                              〈1 line〉
                           acon, bycause he muste presente them vnto the Bishoppe of hys knowledge, whiche he ran not doe truely, withoute diligente examination. But admitte it bée so, that the examination is committed to one man onely: what then? For soothe consyderyng on the one parte the greatnesse of the charge. &c. and of the other parte the weakenesse of the nature of man. &c. it is more daungerous to committe that to the vewe of one man. &c. If you respecte the greatenesse of the charge that is committed to ministsrs.The Byshop most meete to haue the examination. &c. Who is better able to consyder thereof than the Byshoppe, whyche bothe knoweth what suche a charge meaneth, and hathe hadde hymselfe long experience thereof: To whome also dyuerse seuerall charges doe, apperteyn, for the whyche it behoueth hym to foresée, that there bée méete ministers? If you speake of blynde affections, as loue, enuie. &c. who maye bée supposed to bée more voyde of them, than hée that is called to suche an hyghe office in the Churche, that is so well instructed in the Scriptures, of so long tyme knowne bothe for hys lyfe, learnyng, Religion, and wysedome, méete to haue that credite commytted vnto hym? Surely if anye one man, or moe, bée voyde of suche affections, and bée thoughte méete to haue suche matters commytted vnto hym, it is the Byshoppe: And if hée bée méete and woorthye for that place and offyce, then maye he also bée safely credyted, wyth all thynges incidente vnto the same.
                        But what haue you here sayde agaynste one man, in thys case, that may
                              〈1 line〉
                            not bée lykewyse sayde of an other man, in all other lyke cases? agaynste one Kyng, one Iudge: yea agaynste manie, euen the whole multitude, in whome not onely lacke of knoweledge and discretion in suche matters, but greate abundaunce of affections, of wrathe, of hatred, of loue, of feare, of contention, &c. for the moste parte reygneth, as experience of all tymes and places declareth? But of thys matter occasion will be ministred to speake more hereafter.
                        The prouerbe, 
                              Plus vident oculi quam oculus, Manie eyes see more than one, is not alwayes, nor in all cases true: one man of wysedome, experience, learnyng, and discretion, maye sée more, knowe more, and iudge better in those thynges that hée can skyll of, than ten thousande other that bée ignorant, or that in such matters bée farre inferiour vnto him.
                        You saye, that almoste the
                              〈1 line〉
                            is no office of charge in thys Realme. &c. whyche is not so, for the offices of greatest importaunce and charge in the whole Realme, both
                              〈1 line〉
                            in the Ecclesiasticall and ciuill state, are in the onely Election of the Prince, and they bée beste bestowed and vppon the méetest and woorthyest persones. Those offices that bée commytted to the v
                              〈1 line〉
                           yces of manie, eyther are bestowed of custome, or at the entreatie of some in authoritie, or by extreame suite and laboure made by some parties, or else is there greate contention stirred vp aboute them by some busie bodies. And in déede when are there more vnwoorthye men chosen to offices, when is there more stryfe and contention aboute elections, when doe partiall and sinister affections more vtter themselues, than when an election is committed to manie?
                        
                           And where as you say, that vpon one mannes reporte all the rest whyche haue interest in the election, woulde not gyue theyr voyces so sieyghtly to any: Experience teacheth you cleane contrarie: for doe you not sée that in all suche Elections, for the moste parte, some one man ruleth the reste? Moreouer, where is the requeste of suche as bée in authoritie for any denyed in suche elections? I coulde bring you a number of examples.
                        If the Election of the minister shoulde bée commytted to euery seuerall Parish, doe you thynke that they woulde choose the méetest? shoulde not the Lorde of the towne or some other among them of countenaunce leade them as he liste? woulde they haue no respecte to theyr neyghboures chyldren, thoughe not the méetest? wōulde there be no contention among them? would they not haue lyke people, lyke Pastoure? But of thys also more muste bée spoken in an other place.
                        That in the fyrste of the Actes, is nothyng for youre purpose, for there is no order of Election prescribed, but an extraordinarie callyng to an extraordinarie office, as I haue sayde before. Neyther dydde the multitude presente them, but onely the Apostles, as M. Beza sayeth, 
                              Lib. conf. cap. 5. titu. 35. Neyther were they examyned, as is also declared: and therefore that place altogether impertinent.
                        To that in the sixte of the Actes I haue answered sufficientely: it proueth not examination. And M. Beza in the aforenamed booke and Chapter sayeth plainly, that Luke hathe not sette downe what the Churche did obserue in the election of Deacons: and shortely after concludeth thus: 
                              Certam igitur regulam, non est quòd nimiùm curiosè quisquam hic praescribae, sed si recta fuerit conscientia facilè fuerit pro temporum
                              Beza lib. eonf. cap. 5. 
                              & locorum circumstantia definire quid expediat, Therefore there is no cause why anye man shoulde here ouer-curiously prescribe anye certayne rule: But if the conscience be vpryght, it may be easy to determine, what is conuenient for the circumstance of tyme and place. And these woordes he speaketh of that place of the Actes. But IThe elections Act. 1. & Act. 6. do nothing agree. praye you answere mée this one question: if you will make these two places Act. 1 & Act. 6. rules whiche wée muste of necessitie follow in electing of ministers: howe will you ioyne them together béeyng in nothyng lyke? for Acto. 1. the Apostles presented two to the people, Acto. 6. The whole multitude did present seuen to the Apostles: Acto. 1. they caste lottes, Acto. 6. they layde on handes: Acto. 1. they prayed to God to shewe whether of the two he had chosen, Acto. 6. there is no suche thyng: Acto. 1. of two that were presented one was chosen, Acto. 6. all were chosen that were presented: so that there is great difference in the two places, and therefore no prescript rules for vs to follow.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the fy fte Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 24. Sect. vlt.
                     Secondaryly, I can not commende it, for that, that one man is the Archedeacon, whiche muste examine the Pastors, and iudge of their sufficiencie. For what is the Archdeacon? is he not a Deacon? for he beyng the chiefe Deacon, muste needes be also a Deacon himself. And therfore although the chiefe Deacon, yet inferiour to any of the Pastours: and the *gyfts whych are1. Tim. 3. requyred in him, inferioure to those whiche are required in the Pastour, and so to make hym iudge of the aptnesse and ablenes of the Pastor, is to make the inferiour in giftes, iudge of the superiour: he that hathe by his calling lesse gyftes, iudge of his which hath by his calling greate
                           〈1 line〉
                         gifts, which is nothyng else, than to appoynte hym that hath but one eye, to ouersee his syght, that hath two.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You will not stand in this reason I think, when you haue somthing better remē
                           bredT. C. reasoneth against himselfe. your self: wil you not haue the Archdeacon, bicause he is but a deacon, examine the Pastors, and iudge of thier sufficiencie? do you think yt bicause he is inferior to ye pastors, & the gifts

requyred in hym inferioure to those whyche are required of the Pastours▪ therefore hée is not méete to examine the Pastor, and to iudge of his aptnesse? What greater argument can be vsed agaynst your selfe? for if this be true, how can the people examine the pastors, or iudge of their aptnesse, being farre inferiour to Deacons, in respecte of their office, and in giftes not lyke vnto them? or howe can you admitte your Seniors to the examination or allowing of them, not onely béeing inferiour in office and calling, but in giftes also? yea the moste of them rude and ignorant, for suche Seniors you must of necessitie haue, if you wil haue any. Surely I maruel that you haue so much forgotten your selfe. A Deacon is superiour to the people, yea to youre Seniors (though you denie it) and mo giftes required in him than in both the other. 1. Tim. 3. Wherefore if he be not méete to examine pastors, and iudge of their sufficiencie, bicause that were to make the inferior in giftes to iudge of the superior. &c. much lesse are the people and your Seniors able to be examiners and iudges in that matter.
                        Furthermore, if none must examine and iudge of the Pastor, but suche as be superior, or at the least equall vnto him, and suche in whom moe or as many giftes are required, then truly I sée not to whom this office may more orderly or safely be committed than to the Bishop, who is superiour to the Pastour, bothe in office and also in giftes.
                        It is not true that the booke committeth the examination of ministers onely to the Archdeacons, or especially: it is otherwise in the beginning of the booke in plaine words. Your reason wherby you would proue an Archdeacon to be only a deacon, is no reason at all: for what sequele is there in this argument, an Archdeacon is the chief deacon, Ergo he is only a Deacon? as thoughe you were ignorant of the state of oure Church, and knew not that Archdeacons may be also ministers of the worde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the sixt Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 25. Sect. 1.
                     Thirdly, I mislyke the booke, bicause it permitteth, ye the Bishop may admit the minister vpon the credit & report of the Archdeacon, and vpon his examination, if ther be no opposition of the people: which appereth by these words in the booke, wheras to the Archdeacon saying thus: Reuerend father in God, I present vnto you these persons to be admitted to be Priests. &c. The bishop answereth. Take heed that ye persons whom you present vnto vs, be apt & meet for their godly cōuersation to exercise their ministerie duly to the honor of God & edifying of his church. And thervpō I think it commeth that the Archdeacon is called the eye of the bishop. But why doth not he himselfe take heed vnto it? with what conscience can he admit a minister, of whose fitnesse he knoweth not, but vpon the credite of an other, although he were otherwise very fitte? where can he haue that ful persuasion that he doth well, vpon the report of others, when the reporte of his lyfe and learnyng▪ is made but of one. And therefore 1. Timo. 3.Sainct Paule ordeyned, that the same shoulde be the ordeyners, and the examiners, and not to hang vpon the fayth or report of an other man, in thyngs that are so weyghtie, and wherof he may himselfe take notice.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This reason thoughe it differ in some circumstances, yet in effecte it is all one wyth the seconde, for it is agaynste the examination of the Archedacon, and so was that. But youre argumente is not sounde: for dothe the Bishoppe therefore admitte Ministers onely vppon the credite, and at the reporte of the Archedeacon, bycause the Archedeacon presenteth them vnto hym? you knowe that none is admitted to anye degrée here in Cambridge, but the same is first presented to the Uicechancelor, & to the Uniuersitie, by some one of that facultie, who giueth his fidelitie for them: doth the Uniuersitie therfore admitte them onely vppon the credite and reporte of that one man? You knowe the contrarie: euen so it is here: The Archdeacon presenteth to the Bishoppe, the Bishoppe dothe inquyre if hée hath diligently examyned them. &c. dothe he therfore thinke you, not examine them

him selfe? I haue knowne Bishops reiecte those whome their Archdeacons haue allowed.
                        If any Bishop doe giue that credite to his Archdeacon, he dothe more than I woulde wishe he shoulde doe, and otherwyse than the booke requireth of him: neyther muste his example doone without the booke, preiudice that whiche is well appoynted in the booke.
                        Paule. 1. Ti. 3. declareth what qualities and conditions a 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ishop ought to haue: but can you gather of any thing there written, that the same should be the ordeyners and examiners? it is moste meete it should so be I graunte, but yet woulde I not haue the Scriptures made ship menn
                              〈1 line〉
                           s hose, to serue our tournes as it pleaseth vs to tourne them, least wée fall into that faulte oure selues, whiche wée iustly reproue in the Papistes.
                        But stil you are contrarie to your self, for if the same must be the ordeyners & the examiners,T. C. contrary to himselfe. then muste the Bishops of necessitie be the examiners, for you can not denie but that the Bishoppes muste be the ordeyners. And if you will haue. 1. Ti. 3. to serue your purpose, then must you of force confesse it, for there Saincte Paule writeth to Timothie béeing a Bishop, and but one man, so that this reason is directely agay
                              〈1 line〉
                           st the firste.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the seuenth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 25. Sect. 2.
                     Fourthly, for that albei
                           〈1 line〉
                         the Churche is demaunded whether they haue any thing to obiecte, yet that Churche whereof he is to be Pastor, and whiche it skilleth especially that he bee fitte, is not demaunded, and whiche woulde (bycause it standeth them vpon) inquire diligently of him.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And howe would you haue that Churche wherof he is to be Pastor demaunded whetherThe absurditi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              s that of necessitie follow the assertion of T. C. they haue any thing to obiect against him? would you haue euery one that is to be minister, first goe and dwell among them, that they might haue triall of him? In déed so did Mathias, and Barsabas among the Apostles, and the seuen among them, by whome they were chosen Deacons. But howe long shall he then remayne among them? for it had néede be a good tyme, else shall they not throughly knowe him, nor then neyther, for he maye playe the hypocrite. But who shall in the meane tyme beare his charges there and fynde him? for a number of parishes in Englande be not able sufficiently to fynd one, muche lesse moe: Or howe shall they haue any tryall of his doctrine, learning and habilitie to preache, séeing that he maye not publikely eyther teach or exhorte, bicause he is not yet called to the ministerie?
                        Surely I vnderstand not how your deuise coulde be well brought to passe, except you will make in euery parishe an vniuersitie, or some schoole of Diuinitie, or Colledge of learning, as in déede they had in moste great Cities of the old Church, where the election of ministers was committed to manye: or excepte you imagine, that some suche maye be dwelling, and continuing in euery Parishe, as by inspiration or some other extraordinarie meanes may be made able to be their Pastor, when the place shall be voyde.
                        But tell me this one thing: woulde you haue him that is to bée chos
                              〈1 line〉
                           n their Pastor, remayne among them, they hauing yet a Pastor? or come vnto them after the death or departure of their Pastor, as the seconde Admonition woulde haue it 
                              Folio. 14? if the fyrste: then muste the Parishe bée double burdened, that is, they muste finde bothe him that is, and him also that shall be their pastor: moreouer it is vncertaine how long he must remaine with them, expecting the death or departure of the other: Likewise how he shall in the meane time occupy himselfe. &c. If the second: then must they of long time be destitute of a Pastor, for they cannot haue sufficient triall of him, excepte also sufficient time be graunted vnto them to

trie him in, which cannot be lesse than one whole yeare at the least.
                        But admitte all these impossibilities and great absurdities, to be possible and conuenient: yet are there further doubtes, what if the parish be wholly or the most parte simple, ignorant, and vnlearned men not able to iudge? what if they be all or the most part corrupt in religion? what if they be such, as can be better content with one that will winke at their faultes, than with him that will reproue them? what if they be such, as wil be ouerruled with some one, whome they dare not displease? To be short, what if they cannot agrée among themselues, vpon some one, but be diuided i
                              〈1 line〉
                           to factions. &c? All these things being considered, you shall find it the fittest, and best way, that the Byshop, euen according to the forme prescribed in the booke, haue authoritie to admitte and allow of suche as are to be ministers. Would you haue him that is brought vp in the vniuersitie, and well knowne in all respects to be meete for the ministerie, to whome also a cure in some place of Westmerland is to be committed, to be kept from the same, bycause he is vnknowne vnto them? Let other men thinke of your de
                              〈1 line〉
                           ises as they list, in my iudgement they be méere phansies & fond dreames, grounded neither vpon the word of God, neyther yet of any other good consideration. Sure I am that they are contrary to the practise of reformed Churches, and namely the Churches of Berne and Tygure. As M. Musculus reporteth in his common places titu. de ministris verbi. And M. Bullinger. 1. Tim. 4.
                        Touching this supposition of yours, that none should be admitted into the ministerie exceptTra
                                 〈1 line〉
                              t. 4. c
                                 〈1 line〉
                              p. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            the same haue some certayne cure committed vnto him, occasion will be giuen to speake in another place.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 25. Sect. 3. 4.
                     Agayne, they are demaunded, which can obiect nothing of his insufficiencie, whome for the most parte they neuer see nor heard of before, as one that came of one day vnto the towne, and goeth away the next.
                     Further, they haue no reasonable space giuen them, wherein they may inquire or hearken out of hys honest conuersation: and haue some experience of his soundnesse in teaching, and discretion and iudgement to rule his flocke. But if as soone as euer it be said, that those that are straungers to them shoulde obiect against them, no man stand foorth to oppose against them, foorthwith he is made a minister. And these are those things wherein I thinke the booke of ordering ministers faultie, touching the triall and examination of the ministers, which selfesame things, are likewise of the triall of the Deacon. And so you see, that besides the faultes of those that execute the law, that there be faultes in the lawes themselues, and therefore the cause is truly assigned, although you see it not.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is none that ought to be admitted by any Bishop, but such as haue dwelte and remained in his dioces a conuenient time: No time of admitting (except it be of some singular person whose habilitie is not doubted of) is appointed, but the same is before a sufficient time notifyed in the notablest places of the whole dioces, chiefly to this end and purpose, that there may be resorte thither by suche as haue any thing to obiect againste any that is to be admitted at that time into the ministerie: neyther ought any to be admitted except he bring a sufficient testimoniall of his good behauioure from that place, where he hath had his abode: and therefore if they come not, it is a token that they haue nothing to say: or if they haue to obiect, and do not, the fault is in themselues, they may if they will.
                        I told you before, that he may not teach before he be therevnto admitted, nor rule a flocke before he haue one committed vnto him, and therefore of necessitie he must at the least be admitted into the ministerie of the worde, before they can giue any iudgement of him. So that in déede though you haue vsed many words, yet haue you in effect said little or nothing: and the slendernesse of your reasons against the booke, togither with the inconueni
                              〈1 line〉
                           nces that must of necessitie follow, hath procured a great credite vnto it: and it still remayneth true, that I haue answered to the Admonition, that is, that the fau
                              〈1 line〉
                           ts that be, are in the persons, not in the law.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 37. Lin. 1.
                     Agayne, if some be admitted into the ministerie, either void of learning, or lewde in life, are all the rest for their sake to be condemned? Or is this a good argumente, some be admitted into the ministerie without triall, therefore none is lawfully admitted into the ministerie? or some ministers be vnlearned and euill, Ergo, there is none good? I thinke you wil not denie, but that there is now within this Church of England, as many learned, godly, graue, wise, and worthyWorthy ministers in England. ministers of the word, as there is in any one realme or particular Church in all Christendome, or euer hath bin heretofore.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 25. Sect. 5. 6. 7.
                     And what meane you, still to vse this fighting with your owne shadowe? for where are the words, or what be they that condemne all the ministers for some? that say all the ministers are vnlawfully admitted, for some? or that there is none good, bycause some are bad? If there be no suche words, as carrie with them any such sense, then you do wrong to your brethren. If there be words that declare the cleane contrary, then all men see what you be, which although you often faulte in, yet I am loth so often to name and charge you with it. When it is said, that learned and vnlearned are receiued, it is euident that they condemne not all.
                     The Lord blesse and increase an hundreth fold the godly, wise, learned, graue ministers of this Church, and bycause these words seeme to rocke vs asleepe, and to bring vs into forgetfulnesse of the great ruines and desolations of the Church, I must tell you that two thousand able and sufficient ministers, which preach and feede diligently and carefully the flocke of Christ, were hard to be found in this Church, which haue bin notwithstanding found in the Church of France, by the estimation of those which know the estate, euen vnder the time of the crosse, where there were no such helps of Magistrates, and appoynted stipends, as God be praysed we haue.
                     And agayne, you are to be put in mind, that a great number of those were bredde in king Edwards days, so that I feare me a man neede no great Arithmetike to count the numbers of suche able ministers, as the late yeares haue brought foorth. And yet I am well assured, that if the ministerie were reformed, and woorthy men were sought for, there are great numbers of zelous and learned men, that would lay their hands to serue this kind of building by the ministerie. For besides numbers that the vniuersities would yeld, which sighe for the repairing of the decays of the Churche, to helpe forwarde so greate a worke, the Innes of Court, and other the Gentrie of the Realme, Galene, and Iustinian, would bring their tenthes, and (as it were) pay their shotte in this reckening.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Their words be playne, for they say whereas in the old Churche a triall was had. &c. now by the letters commendatorie of some one man. &c. whereby they set this time as contrary vnto that, bycause some haue bin admitted without triall: and therefore make that fault generall, which is particular, and in very déede condemne all for some. If it were not so, why shoulde either they or you condemne the rule, and not the persons only? why should they say that we haue no right ministerie? why should the second Admonition from the beginning to the end, so raile vpon all the states and degrées of ministers and preachers in this Church, which do not consent with them in disturbing the Church, and opposing themselues against lawfull orders and lawes. Looke Fol. 32. of the. 2. Admonition especially, and so foorth, where they speake in most vnchristian maner. And though these mē in thys place say learned and vnlearned, yet doth it not follow that they condemne not all, of an vnlawfull calling, and of not being tried, and examined as well in life, as learning. But what néede you make such ado in cloking a matter to notorious? for what do either they or you, but deface euen the best learned, and wisest of such as withstand you: thinking none sufficiently learned, but yourselues and your adherents?
                        For the number of sufficient ministers in France, able to preach in the time of the crosse, I will not take vppon me to define any thing: yet haue I talked with some wise, godly, and learned preachers of that countrie, such as had good cause to know the state of that Church touching that matter: and truly for any thing that I can learne of them, you haue ouershot your selfe in reckening at the least. 14. hundreth. But I am not

curious in matters not apperteyning vnto me, and I write but of credible reporte. God be thanked for the number that they had, or haue, howe many or howe fewe soeuer they are.
                        Touching the number of preachers throughout England, I cannot write any certaintie, but of this Uniuersitie bycause I haue some experience, you shall giue me leaue to speake as earnestly in truly commending of it, as you haue done in vntruly and vnkindly defacing and slaundering it. The number of knowne preachers, which this vniuersitie hath bredde since the beginning of the Quéenes Maiesties reygne to this time of the yeare of our Lord Anno. 1573. are at the least. 450. besides those that haue bin called to that office after their departure from hēce, and are not yet knowne to me. The number of preachers that be now in this Uniuersitie remayning is. 102. and no doubt but God will encrease the number of them dayly more and more. AlthoughThe contentions in the Church is an hindrance to the profession of diumitie, in the vniuersities. it must be confessed, that the factions and tumults which you and some others haue made in the Churche, do discourage a great number from the ministerie, causeth many to contemne it, and thinke the calling to be vnlawfull, and therefore to absteyne from it. Moreouer I know by experience, that some of you deuise and practise by all meanes possible, to styrre vp contention in this Uniuersitie, to disswade men from the ministerie, to bring such as be sober, wise, learned and godly preachers into contempt, and to make a confusion, and diuide euery Colledge within itselfe. But howsoeuer hitherto you haue preuayled (as you haue preuayled to much) yet I trust you shall neuer throughly bring to passe that which you desire. And I doubt not, but that your vnduetifull, vnciuill, and vncharitable dealing in this your booke, your many errours and foule absurdities conteyned in the same, hath so detected you, that honest, discréete, quiet, and godly learned men will no more be withdrawen by you, and such as you are, to any such schisme or cōtention in the Church: but rather bend them selues against the common aduersarie, and séeke with hart and mouth to build vp the walles of Ierusalem, whiche you haue broken downe: and to fill vp the Mynes that you haue digged, by craft and subteltie to ouerthrow the same. And howsoeuer some will still be way wardly disposed, yet I doubt not, but that if such as be in authoritie will do their duties, they may by conuenient discipline, either be kept within the bonds of modestie, or else remoued from this place, wherein of all other places, they may do most harme.
                        For the Innes of Court what they would do I know not, howbeit I think very few haue gon from this place thither, whiche had euer any purpose in them, to enter into the ministerie. And surely from that place where I am, I haue not knowne any go to the Innes of Court, in whome there hathe appeared any kind of inclination to the ministerie. What store of fit preachers those Innes would yeld, if your Church were framed, I know not, but I thinke, that some of thē would not refuse the spoile of this. I doubt not but that there are many in the Innes of Courte well affected in religion: God continue them and encrease the number of them, and giue them grace to take héede that they be not seduced by ouermuch credulitie in themselues, and pretensed zeale in others.
                        What Galene and Iustinian would do, may be doubted, for, though both Galene and Iustinian haue forsaken our ministerie, yet do they kéepe such liuings as they had in the respect of the same, and are so farre from yelding of tenthes, that they can be well content to receiue tenthes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the tenth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 37. Sect. 1.
                     Touching letters commendatorie of some one mannoble or other,Letters commendatorie of wise and godly men. it may be that the parties which giue these letters be of that zeale, learning, and godlinesse, that their particular testimonie ought to be better credited, than some other subscribed with an hundred handes.

And I thinke there is both noble men and other, who may better be trusted in that point, than a great number of parishes in Englande, which consist of rude and ignorant men, easily moued to testify any thing: And in many places for the most part, or altogither, drowned in Papistrie. I know no reason to the cōtrary, and I see no scripture alledged, why one learned, godly and wise mans testimonie, may not be reteiued in such a case, and yet the booke expresseth no such thing,The b
                              〈1 line〉
                           oke 
                              〈1 line〉
                           quireth due examination of life and learning. but requireth due examination of learning, and sufficient testimonial of conuersation, and giueth libertie to any one particular man, to obiect any crime against any suche as are to be ordered, & willeth that the partie accused be kept from the ministerie vntill he haue cleared himselfe of the crimes obiected. If tag and rag be admitted, learned and vnlearned, it is the fault of some, not of all, nor of the law: And if they were called and elected according to your fantasie, there would some creepe in, as euill as any be now, and woorse too,
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 26. Lin. 8.
                     It is not denyed, but the testimonie that a noble man whiche professeth the truth dothe gyue, ought to be weighed according to his degree, and place which he hath in the common welth, but where you thinke, that the testimonie of one wise man, learned, and godly, is sufficient warrant to proceede to an election of a Minister, you considered not well the circumspection which S. Paule vsed, who when he admitted Timothie into his company, to be a companion in his iourney, to cut off all occasion of euill speach, receyued him not*but vpon commendation of the brethren, both in LystraAct. 1
                              〈1 line〉
                           . and Iconium.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I know that the testimonie of many godly and wise men, is of more weight, than the testimonie of one only, but this is no answer to that which I haue said. The place of Paule and Timothie Act. 16. declareth how well Timothie was thought of, and commended vnto Paule, but it followeth not, that Paule would not also haue receyued him, if he had bin commended vnto him but by some one. Howsoeuer it is, this your argument is nothing worth: nunquàm licet (saith Zuinglius) nequè in diuinis nequé in
                              Zainglius. 
                              profanis, à facto ad ius argumentari: it is neuer lawful, neither in diuine nor in prophane matters to argue (*) à facto ad ius.
                            Neyther is the text as you report it, for the words do notOf a deede or example to make a lawe. signify that Paule would not haue takē him with him, vnlesse they had al giuen such testimonie of him, neither can there be any such sense truly gathered out of that place. And it is manifest that the Apostles receiued Paule into their company, at the testimonie and commendation of Barnabas only.Act. 9.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 1. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere of the Admonition. Pag. 38. Sect. 1.
                     You say that there be admitted into the ministerie of the basest sort of the people: I know not what you mean by the basest sort: this I am sure of, that the ministerie is not now bound to any one tribe, as it was to the tribe of Leui, in Ieroboams time: now none is secluded from that function of any degree, state, or calling, so that those qualities be founde in him, whiche in that office are to be required.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 26. Lin 14.
                     You know they meant by the basest of the people, such as gaue but one leape out of the shop into the Church, as sodainly are changed out of a seruing mans coate, into a ministers cloake, making for the most part, the ministerie their last refuge. &c. And seeing that besides the words be playne, the dayly experience teacheth it, you neede not make it so straunge, as though you knew not what they meant.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I heare you say so, but why did they then quote the. 1. Reg. 1
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 3
                              〈1 line〉
                           . that manifestly proueth the same sense that I haue gathered of their words, and that text onely occasioned me so to do.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 38. Sect. 2. 3. 4.
                     I maruell to what purpose the twelfth chapiter of the first booke of kings is here quoted, for Ieroboam is there reproued bycause hee tooke the priesthoode from the tribe of Leui, to the which only it dyd apperteyne.
                     The Papists neuer tooke so great occasion of slaundring the Gospell,Offences gyuen to the Pa pists by their contentions. at the ignorance of the ministers (for they haue of themselues those that be as ignorant and more) as they do at your schismes and fond opinions, wherwith you disquiet the peace of the Churche, and lay stumbling blocks before the weake, for the which God will surely call you to accoumpt.
                     The second chapter to the Romaynes is here quoted only to painte the margent.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     All this is passed ouer in silence.
                  
               
            
            
               VVhether Idolatrous sacrificers, and Massemongers, may aftervvard be ministers of the Gospell.
               
                  Chapter second the first Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The seconde. In those days 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 5. 4. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ 44. 10. 12. 13. Ierem. 23. no Idolatrous sacrificers of Heathenish priests wer appointed to be Preachers of the Gospell: but we allow and like well of Popish massemongers, me
                           〈1 line〉
                         for all seasons, King Henries priestes, king Edwards Priests, Queene Maries Priests, who of a truth if Gods word were precisely followed, should from the same be vtterly remoued.
                     
                        Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag. 38. Sect. vlt.
                        The place in the fifth chapter of the Hebrues quoted in the margent, speaketh nothing of Idolatrous sacrificers or heathenishe Priestes, but onely by the example of Aaron proueth, that no man ought to intrude himselfe into the office of a Bishop or Priest, except he be called of God. Lord how dare these men thus wring the scriptures? In the 23. of the Prophet Ieremy there is much spokē against false prophets, but not one word (for any thing that I see) to proue that idolatrous sacrificers maye not be admitted to preache the Gospell.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     To this is nothing answered.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the second Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag. 39. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4. &. Pag. 40. Sect. 1.
                     The places of the 44. of Ezechiell haue some shew in them, for there the Lord commaundeth the Leuites which had committed Idolatrie

to be put from their dignitie, and not to be receiued into the priestes office, but to serue in inferioure ministeries.
                     I thinke you will not make this a generall rule to debarre suche from preaching of the Gospell, as haue through infirmitie fallen, & be now with hartie repentance retourned. We haue many examples to the contrary, Peter forswore his master Christ, which was as euillPeters forswearing. as sacrificing to Idolls, and yet he was not put from his Apostleship. We haue diuers examples in the Primitiue Church, of suche as by feare being compelled to sacrifice to strange gods, after repented, and kepte still the office of preaching the Gospell, and did moste constantly die in the same.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 26. Sect. 1.
                     What ought to be generall, if this ought not, to put the minister that hath bin an Idolater, from his ministerie? is it not a commaundemente of God, and giuen, not of one Leuite or two, but of all2. Cha. 23. those that went backe, not at one time, but at others also, when the like occasion was giuen, as appeareth in the booke of the kings, where all the priests of the Lord that had sacrificed in the high places, were not suffered to come to the altar in Ierusalem? Doth not S. Paule make smaller1. Tim. 3. causes of deposing from the ministerie than Idolatrie? For after he hath described what maner of men the ministers should be, and Deacons, he addeth: And being tried, S Paule his words and meaning falsisyed. let them execute theyr functions, as long as they remayne blamelesse: I thinke if so be a man had bin knowne to be an adulterer, although he repented him, yet none that is well aduised, would take him into the ministerie: for if S. Paule reiect him that had. ij. wiues at once (which was a thing that the Iewes and Gentiles thought lawfull, and that was common amongst them, and had preuayled throughout all the world) how much lesse would he suffer any to be admitted to the ministerie, which should be an adulterer, and haue another mans wife, which is condemned of all that professe the name of Christ, and which is not so general a mischiefe as that was, and suffer him to abide in the ministerie, which should committe such wickednesse during his function, and likewise of a murtherer, now the sinne of Idolatrie is greater and more detestable, than any of them, in as much as perteyning to the first table, it immediatly stayneth Gods honoure, and breaketh duetie to him, vnto whome we more owe it (without all comparison) than to any mortall man. And if S. Paule in the choise of the widowe to attend vpon the sicke of the Churche, which was the lowest office in the Churche, requireth not only such a one as is at the time of the choise, honest and holy, but suche a one as had led hir whole life in all good works, and with commendation, how much more is that to be obserued in the minister or byshop of the Church, that he be not only at the time of his choise, but all other times before such a one, as had lyued without any notable, and open offence of those, amongst whome he had hys conuersation.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is not such a commaundement as must of necessitie be perpetually kepte, andThe place 44. Ezechi. touching Idolatrous sacrificers is not perpetuall made a generall rule for euer: for it perteyneth to the iudiciall law which is not perpetuall Ira. 2. cap. 6. diuis. 5. Ezech. 44. as I haue before proued. Moreouer why should this precept rather be perpetuall, than that which goeth before, that no straunger vncircumcised in hart, and vncircumcised in flesh should enter into the sanctuarie? or than that which followeth, that the Priests when they enter in at the gates, must be elothed with white linnen. &c: Do not the circumstances of the place best declare the meaning of it? The like also is to be saide to that example. 2. Regum. 23.
                        
                        The place of S. Paule. 1. Tim. 3. is vntruly by you alleadged, and corruptly translated:The corrupte dealing of T. C. 1. Tim 3.
                            for the words of the Apostle be not as you report them: and being tried let them execute their functions, as long as they remayne blamelesse: But thus the Apostle saith and let them first be proued, then let them minister being blamelesse: the gréek word is 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , that is, if in triall they be founde blamelesse, then let them minister. For triall may be had whether they be blamelesse or no, but not whether they will so remayne. Moreouer the Apostle in that place speaketh of Deacōs, and not of ministers. I maruell what you meane so manifestly to falsify the words of the scripture, or to what purpose you haue inuented this new translation, except it be to iustify that erroure of the Anabaptists, that the vertue of the word, and of the Sacraments doth depende vpon the good life of the Minister. Certayne it is that you haue neither gréeke, latine, nor English text that doth so translate it. Neyther do
                              〈1 line〉
                           he 
                              〈◊〉
                            Apostle S. Paule there speake of deposing ministers, or deacons, but of electing 
                              〈◊〉
                           , as it is manifest. I doubt

not, but that a whoremonger after he hath repented him (if other things be correspendent) maye be admitted to the ministerie, euen as well, as Peter after his denyall, was admitted to be an Apostle, or Paule after that he had bene a persecutor. Saint Paule would not, that a Bishop should haue two wyues at once, but he doth not seclude him from beyng a Byshop that hath had two wiues: except you will establishe in this place the Papishe bigamie. In like maner he would not haue an whoremo
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ger, a drunkard, a couetous person to be chosen a Bishop: yet doth he not seclude from that function such, as haue bene guiltie of these crimes (and now of godly conuersation) for their former offences: for then shoulde he deale otherwise with them, than he himselfe was dealt with: neither haue you any example in the new testament of any deposed from their ministerie, though they were found in many things guiltie. Christ knewe that Iudas was a traitor, yet did he not depose him from his Apostleship: he knew that the Scribes and Phariseis were criminous in diuers pointes, yet dyd he wil them to be taken, and heard as gods ministers when he said 
                              in cat
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 edra Mosis sedent Scribae. &c. the Scribes and Phariseis sit in Moses seate. &c. Mat. 23. And S. Paule kneweMath. 23. ofdiuers wicked and vngodly preachers in the Church of Philippi, yet did he not will their ministerie to be taken from them, but shewed himselfe to be very glad for theirPhil. 1. labour and trauell taken in preaching the Gospell. Phi. 1.
                        True it is, that Idolatrie is an horrible and great sinne, yet doth repentance stretchRepentance stretcheth to Idolatrie. vnto it, which so altereth and changeth a man through the mercy of God, be he neuer so defiled, that it maketh him pure and cleane: and shall we seclude him from ministring vnto God, that is pure in the sight of God? or shall we not thinke him to be a méete minister in the visible Churche, that is a member of the vnuisible, and electe Church? In the olde law there were many things that defiled the body, and made the man for a time vncleane, but now all such things are cleane to those that be cleane. InTit. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . like maner there were then certaine crimes pertaining to the minde, which could not be expiated but by corporall punishment, but repentance is a medicine for all, and the greatest Idolater truely repenting, may become a more zealous preacher, thā he that in the sight of the world, neuer committed the least offence.
                        S. Paule in the choise of widdowes doth not require such a one as hath led hir whele lyfe in all good workes: for how could that be at that time, when they had but in one part of their life knowne Christ, and professed the Gospell, being therevnto conuerted by the Apostles: but his meaning is, that such be chosen, as were knowne to haue bene diligent in all good workes, that is, to haue béen liberall & beneficiall towardes the poore, for so doth M. Caluine interpret it: if you would haue none chosen to be ministers, but suche as haue all their lyfe time béen blamelesse, I thinke you are like to haue but a few, and more like to refuse such as be verie méete and fit for that functiō. But as the Apostle would not haue any admitted to the ministerie vpon a sudden tryall or conuersion, so doth he not appoynt for the same, the whole former time of mannes lyfe, but a reasonable and sufficient time, suche as may suffice for the tryall of a man in such matters.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 26. Sect. 2. 3 & Pag. 27. Sect. 1.
                     If I should stand with you, whether Peter his forswearing that he knew not Christ, were a greater fault then to goe from the Gospell to Idolatrie, and therin, for some long space to continue, as the Leuites did, I should trouble you. For if a man sodenly and at a pushe for feare, and to saue his lyfe, say and sweare he is no Christian, and the same day repent him of his fault, although it be a great and hainous crime, yet it seemeth not to be so great, as his is, which not onely denyeth Christ in wordes, but doth it also in decdes, and worshippeth Antichrist, and continueth in that worship, not a day, but monethes, and yeares.
                     But I will answere you, that euen as our sauiour Christ called S. Paule in the heate of hys persecution, and when he was a blasphemer vnto the Apostleship, so he hauing the lawe in his owne handes, and making no lawes for himselfe, but for vs, mighte call S. Peter also to that function, which had thrice denyed him.
                     
                        But as it is not lawfull for vs, to follow the example of Christ in calling of Paule, by admitting those which are new conuerted, hauing a contrary precepte giuen, that no (*) new plant, or greene1. Tim. 3. Christian, should be taken to ye Ministerie: So is it not lawfull also, to follow that example of our Sauiour Christ, the contrarie beyng commaunded, as I haue before alleaged. For albeit the examples of our Sauiour Christ be to be followed of vs, yet if there be commaundtmentes generall to the contrarie, then we must know, that it is our partes to walke in the broade and beaten way, as it were the common caussie of the commaundement, rather than an outpath of the example.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Peter hauing before bragged of his constancie, lately admonished by his Maister Christ, almost euē in ye presence of his master, wittingly & willingly denyed, not once, but thrice, yea bitterly forswore him: which fault no doubt was as gréeuous as any kind of Idolatrie: and therfore if you stand with me in that matter neuer so long, you can not greatly trouble me. for the circumstances beyng considered, there is nothing to exeuse Peters denyall.
                        As Christ in the heate of Paules persecution, dyd choose him to be an Apostle, and called Peter also to that function, after he had thrice denyed him, euen so doth he still continue his mercie, neither is it one whit streightened: and these examples hath he set before vs that we should at no time dispaire of his mercy and goodnesse: so saith S. Paule 1. Tim. 1. 
                              Verùm ideò misericordiam consecutus sum. &c. Notwithstanding, for this cause was I1. Tim. 1. receiued to mercie, that Iesus Christ should first shewe on me al long suffering, vnto the example of them, which shall in time to come beleeue in him vnto eternall lyfe.
                        
                        Although these examples of our sauiour Christ are not at all times, & in al poyntes to be followed, yet doe they sufficiently declare, that no man for any crime is to be secluded from any lawfull vocation, if he repent him and become a new man. And there be no generall commaundements contrarie herevnto, but this doctrine is consonant to the whole course of the Gospell.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 27. Sect. 2.
                     I know Ambrose was taken newly from Paganisine, to be Bishop of Millaine, for the greateT. C. picketh a quarrell to de praue Ambrose out of place, and vniustly. estimation and credite he had amongst the people, but besides that I haue shewed, that such things are vnlawfull being forbidden, the errors & corrupt expounding of scriptures, which are found in his works, declare that it had bene more safe for the Church, if by studie of the scriptures, he had firste bene a scholer of diuinitie, or euer he had bene made Doctor.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You néeded not to haue wyped away the example of Ambrose, with so much disgracing of him, being so worthy a man, and so learned a father: for thoughe he were not christened when he was chosen Bishop, yet had he long before that time professed the name of Christ, and was soundly grounded in Religion: for in those dayes many did long differre the time of Baptisme after the time of their conuersion. And S. Paule 1. Tim. 3. by his greene Christian as you terme him, doth vnderstande such as be newly conuerted. Ambrose was a man of notable learning, and singularly commended in all histories that make any mention of him: his errors be not so many, nor his expositions so simple, that you should so contemptuously write of him.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 27. Sect. 2.
                     
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        here maye be more examples shewed out of that which you call the Primitiue Church, to the 
                           〈◊〉
                         of that which you say. For whē they vsed oftentimes against those that had so faine, such

seueritie (in deede extreme and excessiue) that they were neuer after, vntill their deathes admitted to the Lords table: I leaue to you to thinke whether they woulde then suffer any suche to execute the function of the ministerie. Besides that S. Cyprian hathe also a speciall treatise of this, that those that haue sacrificed to Idols should not be permitted any more to minister in the Church, in the first booke of his Epist. Epistle. vij.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It appeareth in that. 7. Epistle of Cyprian, that he ment of such as after they had sacrificed to Idols, toke their ministerie againe vpon them, without any signification or shewe of repentance, but rather iustifying, or at the least excusing their former facte. And that this was Cypriās meaning, it may be gathered by these words in the sameCypri. lib. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Epist. 7. Epistle, which he speaketh to the people to whom he writ, touching Fortunatianus, who hauing sacrificed to Idols would haue againe resumed his ministerie: 
                              Ergo contumaces, & deum non timentes, & ab ecclesia in totum recedentes, nemo comitetur. Quòd si quis impatiens fuerit ad deprecandum dominum, qui offensus est, & nobis obtemperare noluerit, sed desperatos & perditos secutus fuerit, sibi imputabit cum iudicij dies venerit. VVherfore let no man kepe companie with those which are stubborne, not fearing God, & wholy depart from the Church: But if any will not aske forgiuenesse at the Lord, which is offended, and will not obey vs, but will needes followe them which are disperate and paste hope, he shall laye the blame on none but on him selfe at the day of iudgement. Wherby it is plaine, that Cypriā ment such, as had wholy departed from the Church, and were desperate in wickednesse. It is manifest that in Cyprians time, those that did offend in such crimes & afterwardes repented, were appointed a time of publique repentance, according to the qualitie of the fault committed, and vntill that time was expired, they were not admitted vnto the Lordes table, except onely at the poynt of death.
                        But I graunt that there was extreme seueritie in Cyprians time shewed to suche, as had fallen in the time of pesecution, and that it euidently appeareth in other of his Epistles, that such were no more admitted to the ministerie. But this law was made by Cyprian and others as it is euident 
                              Lib. 2. Epist. 1. in that Councell of Carthage where it was also concluded that such as were baptized of heretikes should be rebaptized, and therfore of the lesse force, séeing that that whole Councell is for inst causes reiected.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the sixte Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 39. Sect. 2. 3.
                     I pray you what say you to M. Luther, Bucer, Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, &c. were not al these sometimes Massemongers, and yet singular and notable instrumentes of promoting the Gospell and preaching the same? wherof many haue giuen testimonie by sheding their bloud.
                     And by whose Ministerie especially hathe the Gospell bene published, and is as yet in this Churche of England, but by such as haue bene Massemongers, and now zealous, godly, & learned preachers.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 27. Sect. 2. 3.
                     But you aske what they saye to M. Luther, Bucer, Cranmer, Latimer, Rid
                           〈1 line〉
                        ey? I praye you when did these excellent personages, euer slide from the Gospel vnto Idolatrie? which of them did euer say Masse, after God had opened them the truth? what hath soEuen the A
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           monition which I confu
                              〈1 line〉
                           e, for it speaketh generally and maketh no such distinct
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         blinded you, that you can not distinguishe & put a difference, betwene one that hauing bene noussed from hys youth vp in Idolatrie, commeth afterwardes out of it, and betwene him, which hauing knowledge of the Gospel afterward departeth from it, and of such is the place of Ezechiel, of such I say, as haue gone backe and fallen away.
                     I knowe none, that haue bene Preachers of the Gospell, and after in the tyme of Queene Mary Massemongers, which now are zealous, godly, and learned preachers, & if there be any such I thinke for offence sake, the Churche mighte better be withoute them, than haue them. You saye God in that place sheweth howe greeuous a synne Idolatrie is, in the Priestes especially: And is it not nowe more greeuous in the Minister of the Gospell, whose function is more precious, and knowledge greater? and if the synne be greater, shoulde it haue nowe a lesse

punishment, than it had then? howe shall the faulte be esteemed greate or little, but by the greatnesse or smalnesse of the punishment? you sayde before, the places of Deuteronomie, touching adding and diminishing nothing from that which the Lorde commaundeth, were for the Iewes, and are not for our times. And this commaundement of God in Ezechiel, you say serued for that time, and not for ours.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The examples of M. Luther, Bucer, Cranmer. &c. do sufficiently confute the Admonitiō,The exāples of Luther. &c. are directly against the Admonition. the words wherof be these: In those dayes no Idolatrous sacrificers or heathenish priests were appoynted to be preachers of the Gospell: but we allow and like well of Popish Massemongers, men for all seasons, king Henries priests. &c. here you sée, that they doe not onely condemne suche as once knowing the truth, haue afterwards departed from it, but suche also as haue at any time sacrificed: why shoulde they else name king Henries priests, seing it is euident that the masse was not abolished in King Henries time? so that I haue better cause to aske, what hath so blinded you that you could not vnderstand their meaning, the words being so plaine? or rather that you would in that point wilfully blind your self, & others also? I know some that being preachers of the Gospell, & after in the time of Queene Mary massemongers, which now are zealous, godly & learned preachers, & of as good fame and credit with godlie men, as any be in this land (without offence be it spoken) neither be the quiet & humble members of the Churche offended with them, but reioyce at their conuersion, and praise God for them.
                        But you frame your doctrine according to your affection towardes certaine persons,Doctrine framed according to mens persons. as ye maner now a dayes of some is: for this doctrine hath béen taught generally, that no Idolatrous priest shuld remaine in the ministerie: & these examples of Luther, Bucer. &c. haue béen lightly reiected, as repugnant to the conunaundement of God: but now being better aduised, & remembring that some in that case be great promoters of your opinions, this mitigation forsooth must be made, that such as were preachers in king Edwards time. &c. they (I meane your fautors) were professors, though they were no preachers, they were also in Quéene Maries time Massemōgers, & now they be preachers, & yet all is well: for you haue the law in your hands, to coyne what opinions you list, to adde to them, or to take frō them, what you list, to apply & not apply them, to whom and when you list, euen Popelike.
                        The sinne of Idolatrie is nowe as great an offence as it was then, but the external & ciuill punishment for the same, is in the power of the Magistrate, being a portion ofTract. 2. cap. 6. the. 5. diuision. the iudiciall law, the necessitie wherof is wholy abrogated, as I haue proued before.
                        Those precepts in Deut. were giuen to the Iewes, both for the iudiciall & ceremoniall law also: they be giuen to vs for the law of faith & good maners only: for we are clearely deliuered from the ceremonies of the law: & the iudicials (wherof this in Ezechiel is a portion) are not enioyned to Christians, vpō any necessitie, but left to the discretion of the ciuil Magistrate. And therfore I haue said nothing, either of those places of Deut. or of this of Ezech. which I wil not by learning & good authoritie iustifie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 39. Sect. vlt.
                     God in that place of the prophet Ezechiel sheweth how greeuous a sinne idolatrie is, especially in the priests, but he prescribeth no generall rule of secluding them from their ministerie, if they falling, afterward repent.
                  
                  
                     T. C. pag. 27. Sect. 4.
                     You worke a sure way, which to mainteine your corruptions, denie the scripture, which speaketh against them, to be vnderstanded of those which be in our time, & that to be vnderstanded of our ministers, which was of theirs, or of our faultes, which was of theirs. This is not the way to Anabaptisme, but to all heresies, & schismes, that euer haue bene or shall be. For if you goe forwarde in clipping the scripture, as you begin, you will leaue vs nothing in the end, wherwith we may eyther defend our selues against heretikes, or be able to strike at them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I neither denie the scriptures, nor clip them, neither can my doctrine open the way to any

heresie: but I speake of them in this point as all learned and sounde writers doe, olde or newe: if I do not, disproue me, not by words, but by reasons and authorities.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 40. Sect. 1.
                     Besides this, there is a great difference betwixte the seueritie of the lawe, and the lenitie of the Gospell, betwixte the externall regiment of the Churche before Christ, and the Church after Christ, neither can you make the one in all poyntes correspondent to the other: Likewise betwixt the declining of those Priests, which was wholly from God to Gentilitie, & the falling of ours to Papistrie, which confesseth the same articles of fayth that we doe, although not sincerely. It is one thing wholly to worship false Gods, an other thing to worship the true God falsly and superstitiously. But among all other things I woulde gladly knowe wherein king Edwards priests haue offended you? It is happie you let Queene Elizabeths priests alone. I maruell whose priests you are?
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page 27. Sect. 5. 6.
                     Wheras you say, there is a great difference betweene the seueritie of the lawe and lenitie of the Gospell, me thinkes I smel a spice of the errour of the Maniches, which were also scholers in that behalfe of the olde heretike Cerdon, that there is a good and an euill, a gentle, and a seuere God, one vnder the lawe, and an other vnder the Gospell. For to saye that God was then a seuere punisher of sinne, and that nowe he is not at so great hatred with it, but that he will haue it gentlyer & softlyer dealte with: is euen al one in effecte with that, whiche supposeth two Gods. I will ioyne with you in it, that the transgressions of the law, in the time of the Gospell, ought rather to be seuerelier punished, than they were vnder the lawe, for as muche as the knowledge is greater, and the aboundance of the spirit of God, wherby the lawes are kept is more plentifull, than vnder the lawe.
                     At this time I wil content me with the place of ZacharieThe place of Zach. missev
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           derstoode. which prophecying of the kingdomeCap. 13. of Christ, and of the time of the Gospell saith, that then the father and mother of the false Prophete shall cause their owne sonne to be put to death.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        My opinion touching the seueritie of the lawe & lenitie of the Gospell,Difference betwixt the seueretie of the law and the lenitie of the Gospell. is farther from the error of the Maniches, than yours is from the Turkes or Iewes. I know God is as seuere a punisher of sinne now, as he was then, but the maner and kinde of corporally punishing it, is not the same now, that it was then: Neither wil I refuse to ioyne with you in this, that Christiā Magistrates are not bound to the iudiciall lawes of Moses, touching the kinde and maner of punishing sinne: and yet is not this to extenuate sinne one whit, but the contrary rather, as Cyrill doth note in his. 11. booke vpō 
                           Leuiticus, where he sheweth a reason why adultrie, & other crimes were commaunded in the law to be punished with corporal death, and not in the Gospell, which reason fully answereth your obiection, 
                              Quid igituridicemus quòd lex Mosi crudelis est. &c. what then? shall we say that the law of Moses is cruell, which commaundeth that the adulterer, and adultresse should be punished: and that the Gospell of Christ through indulgence and pardon, maketh the hearers the worsse? it is not so: for to this purpose dyd we bring in that saying of Paule before: howe muche more is he worthie of more greeuous punishment, whyche treadeth vnder feete the Sonne of GOD. &c. Heare therefore howe neyther the lawe was then cruell, neyther yet the Gospell is nowe dissolute, for the greatnesse of forgyuenesse: but in bothe, thoughe diuersely, the louyng kindnesse of GOD remayneth. This, that is according to the lawe (as for example, that the Adulterer and Adultresse weare punnyshed wyth presente deathe) for so muche as bothe of them

haue suffered punishment for their sinne, and haue receiued due rewarde for the wickednesse which they committed: what reuengement shall afterward hang ouer their soules, if they haue committed no other fault, if there is no other sinne, which may condemne them, but onely haue committed this fact, and for the same haue receiued the punishment due by the lawe? The Lord will not punishe one thing twise, for they haue receiued the rewarde for their sinne, and the paine for their offence is finished. And for this cause is not this kind of commaundement cruell (as the heretikes affirme, accusing the lawe of God, and denying that there is any kinde of humanitie in it) but it is full of mercie: bycause hereby the people should rather be purged from their sinnes, than condemned. But nowe there is no punishment layd vpon the body, nor any purging of sinne, through corporall punishment, but through repentance, which if a man doe worthily worke, so that he may seme worthie to haue the punishment withdrawne, he maye finde forgiuenesse. But howsoeuer this answere of Cyrill, may in some points minister occasion of quarrelling to suche as be disposed, yet this is euident, that the quantitie of sinne & the heynousnesse of it, is not to be estéemed according to the corporall and externall punishmente, but according to the commaundement of God, to the which it is repugnant, and according to the threatenings of God in the scriptures pronoūced against the same, for we sée that lesser faults are by man punished with greater torments, euen according to the state of euery coū
                           try. And this smelleth not one whitte of the Manichees heresie, but the cleane contrarie. Neither doe I make this difference betwixt the seueritie of the law, and lenitie of the Gospell, in any other respect, than of temporall punishment appoynted in the lawe.
                        The place of Zacharie doth not make for your purpose, except you will giue to theThe true mea ning of zacharie. 13. parents power of life and deathe ouer their sonnes and daughters, and giue libertie for one priuate man to kill another. The prophet in that place declareth what zeale shal be in the people against false prophets, & how much they shall preferre the true Religion of God before their owne naturall affection, and rather forsake their childrē yea hate them, and kill them, than by their meanes, they should be withdrawne from God: this is the true meaning of that place. If you will referre it to the time of the Gospell. But if you will apply it to the Israelites to whom this prophet now preacheth & prophecieth, then doth he declare vnto them what zeale and feruencie. God requireth in them, if they truely repent them of their former Idolatrie: euen that they shall not spare their owne children, but deale with them according to the law Deu. 13. ver. 6. &c. M. Luther expounding this place and referring it to the time of the GospellLuther. saith thus: 
                              Et est haec sententiae summa. &c. The sūme hereof is, that Christians shal reteine, & defend true and pure doctrine, without respect of any person, whether it be his kinsman, or friend, for it is necessarie that there shoulde be false doctrine, and heresies, that the truth might be tryed, but yet they shall not haue the vpper hande, or preuaile. And interpreting these wordes) his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he prophesieth) he saith, 
                              id est, non ferreis aut aereis armis & gladijs ipsum conficient, sed verbo Dei, erit enim spirituale & suaue certamen, quale est parentum cum suis liberis, sicut & diuus Paulus Corinthios confodit, & ipsorum errores verbo Dei reprehendit. That is to say, they shall destroy hym not wyth Iron or brasen armour and weapons, but wyth the worde of God: for the strife shall be spirituall and pleasant, suche as is betweene parentes and their Children, lyke as Saynt Paule dothe pearce throughe the Corinthians, and reprehendeth their errors by the word of God.
                        
                        But would you in déede conclude of thys place, that those whyche haue taughteThe bloudy assertion of T. C. false doctryne muste of necessitie be putto deathe, thoughe they repente? yea that their owne parentes and friendes muste kill them, or cause them to be kylled, and not rather receiue them willingly, if they will conuerte, and embrace them moste ioyfully? vndoubtedly, the Prophete hathe no suche meaning: neyther haue you anye example of suche extremitie committed by a true Christian towardes a repentant Idolater, from the natiuitie of Christe vnto thys houre: neyther is there anye thyng in the whole newe Testamente, whereby anye suche facte can be warranted. And howesoeuer thys place maye make, for the seuere punishyng of stubborne

and peruerse Idolaters, it maketh nothing at all for suche as repente and be conuerted: and therefore it may be, that this place of Scripture dothe content you, but surely it can not persuade any that duely considereth it, that Idolaters thoughe they repent, may not be receyued bothe to mercy, and also into the ministerie.
                        And if any man shall thinke that I wring his wordes agaynst his meaning, let him consider agaynst whom he bendeth his force, and vrgeth this place of Zacharie (that is, agaynst them whiche haue fallen, and haue bin Massemongers, and nowe are none, but preachers of the Gospell) and he shall easily perceyue bothe the blo
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           dinesse of his opinion, and also that I haue not héerein dealt vnfaythfully. Surely (al circumstances considered) it is not vnlike that this hathe béene some occasion of the mischéeuons attempt which of late hath béene put in practise.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 28. Lin. 2. & Sect. 1.
                     It is as absurde which is brought, to proue that the Papistes which worship God falsly, doe not faulte so haynously as the Israelites did, whiche worshipped the Idols. As who should say, the Iewes, or any other the grossest Idolaters that euer were, didAs who should say, that any man can doubt of this. euer take those thinges which they worshipped, serpents, oxen, fyre, water. &c. to be God, or knew not the Images, before whiche they fe
                           〈1 line〉
                         downe, were wood or stone, siluer and golde.A 
                              〈1 line〉
                           osse 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           rour, for 
                              〈◊〉
                            of the wise▪ gē
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ls thought that the heauens & 
                              〈◊〉
                            were neuer created. And who knoweth not, that they thought that they worshipped by them and in them, the God which made heauen and earthe. The Iewes when they molted a golden Calfe, and fell downe before it, dydA manyse
                              〈1 line〉
                            vntruthe, as shall appeare. neuer thinke that toExod. 32. be God, but sayde that they woulde keepe holydaye to theAn vntruthe, for they sayde not so Lorde Iehouah. wherein I will put you ouer to the learned trearises of the godly new writers, whiche doe resute this distinction beeing brought of the Papistes, as a shifte to proue that the Idolatrie whiche is forbidden in the olde Testament, toucheth not them, because they worship God by these thinges, and the Idolatrous Iewes and Infidels, worshipped nothing else, nor looked at nothing else, than the bare things before whiche they fell downe. Whiche selfe same distinctiou you bring to proue, that Papistrie is not so detestable, as the Idolatrie of the Iewes. It may be, that certayne of the Gentiles worshipped by their ImagesThis is contrarie to that which you 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            before. Iupiter & Iuno. &c. But you can not shew, that the Israelites euer worshipped any other god, than the true God, so that their faulte was onely, in that they worshipped him otherwise, than he had appoynted. And the Gentils that worshipped many gods, worshipped one as the head and chiefe, and the rest as small companions, and as they termed them, minorum gentium deos, as the Papistes doe God as the chiefe, and the Sainctes as other pettie Gods.
                     And heere all men may see, what a good proctor you be for the Papistes, both in lessening their faultes, and abating their punishments, and yet will not I say, that you are conspired with them, or haue receyued your fee of them. But if you can shewe where, or in what one poynt, those that you charge with confederacie, haue layde so soft pillowes vnder their heades as these are: they refuse not to be called confederate, and conspired with the Papistes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The distinction betwixte the worshipping of the false gods wholly, and the worshipping of the true God falsly and superstitiously, is not yet by you proued to haue any absurditie in it. But it is great boldnesse for you to affirme, that the Gentiles and the moste grosse Idolaters neuer tooke those whiche they dyd worship for Gods, but that in them, and by them they thought they worshipped the God that made heauen and earthe. For what prophane Philosopher, what drunken Poet, what boy in the Grammer schole knowethThe gentiles tooke the Images to 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e gods. 
                                 Psal. 115. Esay. 44. Ierem. 10. Baru
                                       〈1 line〉
                                    . 6. Hist. Bel & Dracon. Iudg. 2. 1. Reg. 18.
                            not the contrarie? Was Iupiter, Apollo, Uenus, Diana. &c. Gods or Goddesses that created heauen and earth? or thought to haue made heauen and earth? and yet these and suche like they were, whome the Gentiles did worship euen in their Images. Nay they tooke the very Images themselues sometimes to be their Gods. Dothe not the 115. Psal. Esay. 44. Iere. 10. Baruch. 6. the storie of Bell and the Dragon, and the Scripture in sundrie places else, manyfestly declare it? And did not the Iewes oftentimes sinne in this poynt as grossely as the Gentiles did? Looke Iudge. 2. verse. 10. 11. 12. &c. 1. Reg. 18. wherin it is playne, that the Iewes were as grosse in taking those thinges to be Gods in déede, as were the Gentiles. And surely I thinke the places in the Scripture before alleaged, so manifest for the proofe héereof, that no man reading the same, can any thing doubt of this matter.
                        
                           The wordes of the texte doe expresly signifie vnto vs, that the Israelites tooke the golden Calfe to be God: but be it that they maye be taken there metonimically (whiche is but a coniecture) that can not excuse their grossenesse at other tymes, when they were conuersant among the Gentiles, and allured so worshippe theirThe example of T. C. agaynst him selfe. Gods. But this example serueth very well for my purpose, for Aaron dyd not onely make this Calfe, but also sacrificed vnto it, and caused the people to worship it: and yet notwithstanding he was not deposed from his priesthoode, although his case was all one with theirs, agaynst whome you nowe speake.
                        You saye the people sayde that they woulde keepe holyday to the Lorde Iehouah, and therefore did not take the Calfe to be God: wherein you saye not truely, for those were the words, not of the people, but of Aaron: the people sayde, These be thyExo. 32. ver. 4. Gods, O Israell, whiche brought thee out of the lande of Egypte, so that, that reason may shewe what Aaron thought of it: and this, what was the opinion of the people. I would haue you to deale sincerely in alleaging of the scriptures.
                        You put me ouer to the treatises of godly newe wryters, which doe refuse this distinction. &c. But you neither name those wryters vnto me, nor let me vnderstande where to finde those treatises, whiche maketh me suspecte that you neyther knowe whose, nor where they be: but the matter is not greate. I doe as muche mislike that distinction of the Papistes, and the intent of it, as any man dothe, neyther doe I goe aboute to excuse them from wycked, and (without repentance and Gods singular mercy) damnable Idolatrie: But yet doe I saye the Idolatrie bothe of the Iewes, and of the Gentiles (for the causes by me alleaged) to be muche greater. For thereThree kindes of Idolatrie. Martyr in Iud. 2. Musculus in Lo. com. in expla. 1. praecept.
                            are thrée kyndes of Idolatrie. One is, when the true God is worshipped by other meanes and wayes, than he hathe prescribed, or woulde be worshipped. The other is, when the true God is worshipped, togither wyth false Gods. 2. Regum. 17. The thirde is, when we worship false Gods eyther in harte and mynde, or in externall creatures liuing, or dead, and altogither forget the worshippe of the true God. All these thrée kindes are detestable, but the first is the least, and the laste is the worste: in the whiche kinde the Israelites sundrie tymes offended, as is manifest in the places before mentioned.
                        The Papistes worship God otherwyse than his will is, and otherwise than he hathe prescribed, almoste in all poyntes of their worship: they also giue to the creature that whiche is due to the Creator, and sinne agaynst the first table: yet are they not for ought that I can see, or learne, in the thirde kinde of Idolatrie: and therfore if they repent vnfaynedly, they are not to be caste either out of the Churche, or out of the ministerie.
                        The Papistes haue little cause to thanke me, or to fée me, for any thing that I haue spoken in their behalfe as yet: you sée that I place them among wicked and damnable Idolaters. My defense is of those that haue bin Papistes, and be not, and for no other: for them I speake my conscience according to my poore knowledge, take it as you please.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Ministers learning of Catechismes.
               
                  Chap. 3.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The thirde. Then 1. Tim. 4. II they taught others, nowe they muste be instructed themselues, and therfore like yong children they Ministers of London 
                              〈◊〉
                            ioyned to learne M. Novvels C
                              〈1 line〉
                            techisme. muste learne Catechismes.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 40. Sect. 3. 4. 5. &. Pag▪ 41▪ Sect. 1. 2.
                        God be thanked, there is a great number of Ministers that can teach others, and may be your scholemasters in al kinde of learning, except you haue more than you vtter in these treatises.
                        
                           If they that finde some want of learning in themselues, or that be crepte into the ministerie vnlearned, either of their owne accord, or by commaundement of their Ordinarie, reade and learne godly and learned Catechismes, they are to be commended, and so is he that prouoketh them therevnto.
                        That Catechisme whiche you in derision quote in the margent, is a booke fit for you to learne also: and I knowe no man so well learned, but it may become him to read and learne that learned and necessarie booke. But some arrogant spirites there be, that thinke them selues of all men best learned, and disdayne to learne of any.
                        That place of the fourth chapter of the first to Timothie, doth not forbid a man to learne.
                        He that is a good and modest preacher, will not disdayne as well to be taught, as to teache.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 28. Sect. 2. 3.
                     What shoulde become of the people in the meane season, whilest they learne their Catechisme, and when they haue learned it, they are no more fit to be Ministers, and to teache other, than he that hath learned his Accidence, is meete to set vp a schole. And it can not be defended, but it was a grosse ouersighte, to enioyne ministers to learne a Catechisme. It were muche to compell them to reade it. And if a man would haue dec
                           〈1 line〉
                        amed agaynst the ignorance of the moste parte of the ministers, three whole dayes togither, he coulde not haue sayde more agaynst them, than that Canon which sendeth them to their A. B. C. and principles of their religion. Howe knowe you that they quote the Catechisme in the margent in derision? is there any sillable or letter that soundeth that wayes? if you coniecture it because they haue set it in the margent, you may as well say, that they likewise quote the scriptures in derision, beeing also placed there.
                     
                        It followeth euen as the rest of your argu ments do, for it is your own, and no mans else. But howe followeth this? It is meete that ministers shoulde learne euery day, therefore it is meete they be enioyned to learne Catechismes? it is meete they shoulde reade Catechismes, therefore meete to learne them, and be enioyned to learne them? Is there nothing worthier the learning and profession of the Minister, than to learne Catechismes? or dothe a man learne those thinges alwayes, which he readeth? dothe he not reade things sometime to recorde the things that he hathe learned? For bicause they say it is not meete that ministers should be enioyned to learne a Catechisme, you conclude of their wordes, that they woulde not haue a minister to learne, or to reade any thing, whiche is as farre from their meaning or wordes eyther, as you are from the reasonable and vpright expounding of them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        God be thanked, the people néede not pyne awaye for lacke of foode, they haue the Scriptures read vnto them, they haue also profitable and fruitef
                              〈1 line〉
                           ll Homilies, they haue the Sacramentes rightly ministred, and publyke prayers in a knowne tongue: and sometyme God sendeth vnto them some well disposed preacher further to instructe them, and the Curate is not so slothefull and carelesse, but that he will also communicate with them that whiche he himselfe hathe by diligent reading learned.
                        Catechismes (and that especially) doe conteyne the groundes of religion, and the principall poyntes of faythe, and good lyfe, and therefore not vnfitte, or vnprofitable for any man to reade. I know not what weightier matters they can learne, than those that be conteyned in that booke: excepte you thinke nothing waightie, but suche matters as you nowe contende for: and for the which you so muche disturbe the peace of the Churche. It is well done to enioyne them to learne it, and it shall be no disgracing, no not to your selfe to reade it.
                        We doe not denie but that there be vnlearned Ministers in Englande, and we thinke it no discredite at all, to enioyne them to learne suche thinges as are moste profitable bothe for them to knowe, and to teache vnto other. To reade and to learne suche an A. B. C. is not vnprofitable for any: but you will still shewe that good opinion that you haue of your selfe, and howe greately you disdayne all other

mens labours.
                        Whether I haue truely sayd that note to be placed in the Margent in derision, or no, let the Reader iudge, to whome also I doe referre the consideration of your modestie, touching that matter. He that indifferently considereth their quotations of Scriptures, wyll thinke that the moste of them, were not placed there in good earnest.
                        The argument whiche it hathe pleased you to frame of my wordes (I graunte) followeth not: but thys followeth righte well, it is fitte that ignorante Ministers shoulde be enioyned to learne suche thinges, as be méete and profitable for them, Ergo, they maye be enioyned to learne Catechismes. And in lyke manner, it is méete they shoulde reade suche Bookes as maye instructe them: Ergo, they maye reade Catechismes. I thinke a man by reading, learneth: and I suppose that to reade those things agayne, whiche a man hathe forgotten, is to learne them agayne, if to learne be to vnderstande, and to remember.
                        
                        But all this your dallying about this matter, is to bring discredite vnto this state of the Churche, bicause there be many ignorante Ministers. Wherefore I will answere you with the very wordes in the confession of the Churches in Heluetia. VVe condemne all vnmeete Ministers, not indued with giftes necessarie for a shepheardConfes. eccles. Helueti
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . that shoulde feede his flocke. Howebeit we acknowledge that the harmlesse simplicitie of some shepheardes in the olde Churche, dyd sometymes more profite the Churche, than the great, exquisite, and fine or delicate, but a little too proude learning of some others: wherfore we reiect not nowe a dayes, the good simplicitie of certayne, so that they be not altogither vnskilfull of God and his worde.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of the election of Ministers by the voyces and consent of the people.
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The fourth. Then election was made by the common (r) consent of the whole Churche:Act. 1. 2
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ▪
                         now euery one picketh out for himselfe some notable good benefice, he obteineth the nexte aduouson, by money or by fauour, and so thinketh himselfe sufficiently chosen.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 42. Sect. 4. 5. 6.
                        To proue that the election was then made by the common consentMatthias elected extraordinarily. of the whole Churche, you quote the first of the Actes. I tolde you before master Caluines iudgement of that place: there is no mention of electing by any common consent. And in the place by you quoted, whiche is the. 26. verse, it is declared howe they gaue foorth their lottes, and that the lot fell on Matthias, and that he was by a common consente counted with the eleuen Apostles: heere is no mention of any election. But when he was extraordinarily through Gods prouidence by lot appoynted, then they al counted him, and esteemed him as one of the Apostles, where as before, some of them woulde haue had Barsabas.
                        
                        I thinke your meaning is not to haue alwayes two at once to be presented to the ministerie, and then one of them to be chosen by lotte: I knowe none of that opinion. Wherefore this example is

singular and extraordinarie, and therefore no generall rule to be followed.
                        If any man seeketh a benefice extraordinarily, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           r▪ vnlawfully. If any man desire 
                              honorem, the honor, not 
                              onus, the burthen: opes, the riches, not 
                              opus, the vvorke: he hath to answere for it: but I trust you wyll not accuse all, thoughe perhaps you knowe some, I meane of your selues, and peraduenture your owne selfe.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The fifthe. Then the congregation Act. 6. 2. 3. had authoritie to call ministers: in steade therof now they runne, they ride, and by vnlawfull sute and buying, preuente other suters also.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 42. Sect. 2. 3.
                        To proue that the congregation had then authoritie to call ministers: you alleage the sixte of the Actes, whiche place of the Actes I touched before: It speaketh not of Ministers of the worde, but of Deacons, whiche were appoynted to make prouision for the poore only (as you say) neyther dyd the multitude of the Disciples (for so they be called) electe them before they were willed so to doe by the twelue Apostles.
                        It may be that some vse to runne and ryde, and by vnlawfull suteA good rule may be brokē by some, and yet good still. and buying preuente others, and it maye be that you haue experience heereof: but all doe not so, this is the faulte of the man, not of the callyng: you maye not ascribe mens infirmities to a lawfull order. The rule maye bee good, thoughe it bee by some broken.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 28. Sect. 4.
                     It hathe bin likewyse shewed, what was in that election extraordinarie, and what perteyneth to the ordinarie callings. And in the sixte of the Actes it was shewed, if the Deacons should not be thrust vpon the congregation agaynst the wyll of it, muche lesse ought the minister. And if that congregation had by the commaundement of the Apostles, an interest in the choyse of their gouernours, I see not why the same cōmaundement remayneth not to be followed of other Churches. Your reasons wherwith you would make difference, shall be after considered,
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And I haue likewise answered to whatsoeuer you haue sayde there, but you tell vs neyther there nor héere, howe aptely this parte of the texte, scilicet, verse. 26. is in this place quoted. To your reason also gathered oute of the sixte of the Actes in the electing of Deacons I haue there answered: onely I thoughte good in this place to set downe the iudgement of Chrysostome 
                              Hom. 14. in Act. Ideò boc non permiserunt
                              Chryso. Hom. 14. in Act. 
                              sorti, ue
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  cum possent ipsi spiritu moti, eligere, hoc faciunt: sed magis statuunt quod multorum testimonijs approbatur. Nam definire numerum, & ordinare, & in talem vsum, hoc sibi vendicant: Eligere autem viros illis permittunt, vt ne videantur ipsi in gratiam quorundam agere. The Apostles dyd not committe the election of Deacons to lotte, neyther they beeyng moued with the spirite, dyd choose them, thoughe they mighte haue so done: for to appoynt the number, to ordayne them, and to suche an vse, they chalenged as due vnto them selues. And yet doe they permitte the election of them to the people, least they shoulde bee thoughte to bee partiall, or to doe any thing for fauoure. Your reasons to proue that to be a perpetuall rule, shall not (God willing) be passed ouer in their place.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 4. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The sirthe. Then no Act. 14. 13. 2. Cor. 8. 19 minister placed in any congregation, but by the consent of the people.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 42. Sect. vlt.
                        Coproue that no Minister was placed in any congregation, but by the consent of the people, you alleage the. 14. of the Actes, and of the. 2. to the Corinthians, the eyght chapter. In the. 14. of the Actes, verse. 23. (for the whiche you haue quoted the. 13.) it is thus written. When they (that is Paule and Barnabas) had ordeyned them elders by election (for so is some translation) in euery Church, and prayed and fasted. &c. The texte is playne that Paule and Barnabas did ordeyne them Elders.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 29. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
                     Unto these places of the first and sixte of the Actes is added, firste the place of the fourtenth of the Actes, where the authors of the Admonition doe proue, that the election ought not to be in one man his hande, but ought to be made by the Churche, agaynst which master Doctor taketh three exceptions. The first is, for that it is sayde that Paule and Barnabas ordeined Elders, whereby he woulde conclude, that the congregations had nothing to doe. But howe slender a reason that is, it may be considered of infinite places in the Scripture, whereof I will recite two or three.
                     In the fifthe Chapter of Iosua it is sayde, that Iosua made him sharpe knyues for the circumcising of the children of Israell, and a little afterwardes, that Iosua circumcised them. Shall we now vpon these words conclude, yt Iosua dyd make the kniues himselfe, or was a Cutler, or beeing made to his hande, did whette them, and sharpen them, or shall we saye that he dyd circumcise the children of Israell in his owne person, and himselfe alone, when as that was done by many, and by the Leuites, to whome that offyce apperteyned? No, but the Scripture declareth, that Iosua procured sharpe knyues to be made, and exhorted and commaunded the people to be circumcised.
                     In the eyghtenth of Exodus, it is sayde that Moses dyd appoynt vnto the people, Princes, Captaynes ouer thousandes and hundrethes. &c. And if any conciude therevpon that he dyd it1. Chap. verse. 15. himselfe alone, he is by and by confuted by that whiche is written in Deuteronomie, where it appeareth that the people dyd choose them, and presented them to Moses. What is it then that is sayde in Erodus, that Moses appoynted them, but that Moses assembled the people, and exhorted them to appoynt rulers, and tolde them what maner of men they shoulde be, and in a worde, sate as it were, moderatour in that election.
                     To come to the newe Testament. In the Actes it is sayde, that Paule and Timothie deliueredAct. 16. vnto the Churches, the orders and decrees of the Apostles and Elders, and yet it appeareth in another place, that the Churche had also to doe, and gaue their consent vnto the makingAct. 15. verse. 23. of those decrees, so that the former place meaneth, that the Apostles and Elders dyd go before, and were the chiefe, and directors of that action.
                     The same maner of speache is vsed of the You say so, but you shewe not one. Romane stories, wherein it is sayde, that the Counsell dyd make Magistrates, for because that he gathered the assembly and voyces, whereby they were made: and so S. Luke saythe heere, that Paule and Barnabas ordeyned, bicause they beeing the moderators of the election, caused it to be made, assembled the Churches, tolde them of the necessitie of hauing good pastors and gouernoures, gathered the voyces, tooke heede that nothing should be done lightly, nothing tumultuously or out of order. And so to conclude, it is an euill reason to say as M. Doctor dothe, that bicause S. Luke hath, that Paule and Barnabas ordeyned, therefore the people were excluded.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If the reason groūded vpon the playne words of the scripture, be but a slender reason, then do I confesse that to be so likewise. Howbeit, very godly and learned men thinke it a reason sufficient. Zuinglius in his Eccless. sayth, that some were called & electedZuinglius. Bullinger. to the ministerie of the worde, by the Apostles onely. Bullinger in his thirde booke 
                              aduersus Anabap. Cap. 4. sayth thus: 
                              Paulus & Barnabas presbyteros seu ministros elege
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 unt in ecclesijs Asiae. Paule and Barnabas did choose Elders or Ministers in the Churches of Asia.
                        
                        Those places of Scripture that you recite, may proue that there are suche maner of speaches in the scripture, but they proue not that this is suche, and therefore you haue in vayne rehearsed them.
                        
                           The example of Iosua is farre from prouyng thys phrase, to bée suche, sor you affirme, that Iosua is sayde to make sharpe knyues, and to Circumcic
                              〈1 line〉
                           , onelye bycause hcc procured sharpe knyues to bee made, and commaunded the people to bee circumcided, and not bycause hee hym selfe bydde sharpen the knyues, or circumcyde in hys owne person: But it is certaine that Paule and Barnabas had to doe in this action, and didde themselues in theyr owne persons, ordeyne ministers, and not commaunde others to ordeyne them. Wherefore the manner of speache can not bée lyke, excepte you will expounde thys place thus: Paule and Barnabas ordeyned them Elders, that is, commaunded the people to choose them Elders, whyche interpretation were straunge for thys place, and vnhearde of beefore.
                        That in the syrste of Deuteronomie dothe not directely proue, that Moyses alone didde not appoynte those Magistrates, for althoughe he wylled the people to bryng vnto him menne of wysedome, and of vnderstandyng. &c. yet it followeth not that they didde so, but it rather appeareth, that they commytted the choyse of them wholly to hym, for after in the fyftéenth verse of the same Chapter he sayeth, So I tooke the chiefe of youre tribes, wyse and knowne men, and madeDeu. 1. Ver. 15. them rulers. &c. Manyfest it is (that whether the people named any vnto hym or no) he appoynted them, and gaue them theyr authoritie, so that the maner of speache is proper, and without any trope or figure.
                        But doe you not still secretly pushe at the authoritie of the Ciuill Magistrate,T. C. vnder an other pretence pusheth at the ciuill Magistrate. vnder the pretence of speakyng agaynst the state Ecclesiasticall? For howesoeuer you woulde séeme to bryng in the place in the eightéenth of Exodus, to proue the phrase and manner of speaking, yet maye you bée thoughte secretely to insinuate that Princes maye not appoynte vnder-officers, without the Election of the people. And surely if your dealing in this place bée well marked, it may easily be séene, that in reasonyng agaynst the gouernemente of the Churche, you laye the groundes of confoundyng, or at the leaste, of chaungyng the state of the Common wealth.
                        In the fiftéenth of the Actes ver. 22. and. 23. there appeareth, that the whole Churche together wyth the Apostles and Elders, didde sende certayne chosen menne of theyr owne companye to Antiochia, wyth Paule and Barnabas. &c. and wrote Letters by them conteynyng these Decrées: wherevnto though the people subscribed, and gaue theyr consente, yet it followeth not, but that the Apostles and Elders made them: As it also appeareth verse. 2. and. 6. of the same chapter. Euery one that consenteth to Orders, and subscribeth vnto them, dothe not therefore make them: Wherefore they maye properly be sayde to be made by the Apostles and Elders onely, thoughe the people allowed well of them, and consented to them. And therefore sayth M. Caluine: the modestie of the peopleCal. in. 15. Act. herein dothe appeare, that after they had committed the decidyng of the controuersies to the Apostles, and other Doctours, they were also contente to subscribe to their decree. Whether there be any suche manner of speache or no in the Romayne stories, it is not materiall: neyther is there any thing here spoken, whyche proueth that thys is suche a manner of speache: wherefore it muste remayne as proper and literally true, vntill there be stronger reasons brought to proue as playnely, that the people ordeyned ministers, as it is here written, that Paule and Barnabas did.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the thirde Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 43. Lin. 8.
                     And the Greeke worde 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         although it signifie to elect, by putting vp of handes, yet it is the common opinion almoste of all Ecclesiasticall writers, that this worde in Scripture is vsed for the solemne maner of ordering ministers by the imposition of hands.
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 29. Sect. 6. & Pag. 30. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4.
                     And I maruayle with what conscience he coulde answere so in this place, especially where it is forthwith added, that they ordeyned them by the suffrages, and voyces of the Church. But you say that the Greeke worde 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         is by the common opinion of almost all ecclesiasticall wryters, vsed in the scripture for the solemne maner of ordeyning of ministers, by the imposition of hā
                        des: which is the seconde exception you take to this reason. Wherein, but that I haue promised to holde my selfe to the matter, and that these bolde asseuerances in matters most vntrue, are so cō
                        mon, that if I shoulde euery foote pursue them, I should wearie my selfe and all others, I coulde not keepe my selfe from running out to maruell at suche high speaches voyde of truth. First, where you say that somè translation hath, that they ordeyned ministers without making mention of Election, what haue you gayned thereby, when I can shewe moe that translate it otherwise, and say it is, that they ordeyned by election, or voyces, or suffrages? I had not the commoditie of Bokes, whereby I coulde see the iudgement of all Ecclesiasticall writers. But of those which I had, I finde that there was but An vntruth, as will appeare. one, onely M. Gualter of that minde, and yet he doth not shut out the peoples consentin the Election, neyther M. Caluine, M. Beza, M. Bullinger, M. Musculus, M. Brentius, he that translated Chrysostome vpon that place, Erasmus in his Paraphrases vpon that place are of the contrarie iudgement, of whose iudgement I woulde not haue spoken, if you would not haue gone about, thus to abuse your reader, with such manifest vntruthes, to ouerthrow the order which God hath established.
                     But let all authorities of men goe, and let vs examine the thing in it selfe. If so be that the holie Ghost had meant the solemne putting on of the hands vpon the hed of him that was created Elder and Minister, had he not words inow to vtter this his meaning? would he haue for laying on of hands vsed a word that signifieth lyfting vp of handes: would he haue vsed a word signifying holding vp for laying downe? for when the handes are layde of the heade of an other, they are layde downe, and not holden vp. There are woordes in the olde Testamente, and in the newe before Luke wrote, and after he wrote, to expresse thys Ceremonie of laying on of hands, and yet none haue euer expressed this.
                     Saincte Paule speaketh thrise of it in his Epistles to Timothie, and alwayes hee vseth1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 5. 2. Tim. 1. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . In the olde Testamente where this ceremonie is vsed and spoken of, the Septuaginta did neuer traslate 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , But as the wryters of the newe Testament, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . And what shoulde I stande in thys, when as Sainct Luke himselfe, bothe before and after, speakyng of that Ceremonie of laying on of handes, dothe neuer vse this woorde8. Actes. 9. Actes. 19. Actes. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         but the same woorde whyche Saincte Paule vseth, and the Septuaginta? And althoughe the Holye Ghoste speake proprely, and well by whome soeuer he speaketh, yet it coulde haue bene worste of all sayde by Saincte Luke, of all the Canonicall writers, that hee shoulde speake thus vnproprely, who of them all wryteth moste purely and elegantely, accordyng to the phrase of the moste eloquent Grecians, and therefore hee borrowed thys speache of the auncient Greeke wryters, whyche dyd vse to expresse theyr Elections by thys worde, bycause they were made, and voyces giuen by this Ceremonie of lyftyng vp of handes.
                     But what if Saincte Luke haue vsed this worde before, and in thys booke, in the signification of choosyng by voyce, dare you then saye, that he vseth it here for putting on of hands?
                     In the. 10. of the Actes Sainct Peter sayth, that Christe after his resurrection, appeared not vnto the whole people, but vnto those whome he had before chosen by his If you will graunte that this word is taken for electing by one voice, we shall soone agree. voyce, to bee his witnesses, he vseth this 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Nowe if you will saye here, that it is to be turned, those of whome he layde his handes: I will aske you where you reade, that euer he layde his handes of theyr heades. I will shewe you where he dyd by hys heauenly voyce appoynt them. And I thynke you are not able to shewe in any Greeke authour auncient, and whiche men doo take to be autenticall to teache the propertie or eloquence of the greke tongue I meane whyche were before Saincte Luke his tyme, where the worde 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         is taken for the laying on of handes of the head of any.
                     This I confesse that the Greeke Ecclesiasticall wryters haue sometymes vsed it so, but you must remember that Sainct Luke coulde not learne to speake of them that came two or three hundred yeares after him? but he borowed this phrase of speach of those that were before him, and therefore speaketh of elections as they dyd. So that you see this shift will not serue.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is nothyng to proue that they ordeyned them by the suffrages of the Churche, but this worde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , the acceptation whereof in this place is nowe in question: I say still, that although it proprely signifie to electe by putting vp of handes, yet is it the common opinion almoste of all ecclesiasticalThe signification of the worde 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                            writers, that it is vsed in Scripture for the solemne maner of ordering ministers by the imposition of handes. And that thys is neyther so straunge nor so vntrue, as you would séeme to make the reader beléeue, I haue set downe those authors which haue taught me so to say.
                        
                           Bullinger vppon the same place sayeth thus: Caeterum dictio 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           ,

                           
                              ita ponitur, vt velsuffragijs populi delectos esse, vel manuum impositione inauguratos intelligere possimus. But the woorde 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           is so placed that wee may vnderstande either that they were chosen by the voyces of the people, or ordeyned by the laying on of handes.
                        
                        
                           M. Caluine vpon the same place hath these woordes, Verbum Graecum 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           
                              significat
                              Caluin
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . 
                              aliquid manibus sublatis discernere, qualiter in commitijs populi fieri solet. Scriptores tamen ecclesiastici nomen
                            
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           
                              alio sensu vsurpant: nempè pro solenni ordinationis ritu, qui in Scripturis vocatur, manuum impositio. The greeke woorde 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           signifieth to determine some thing by holding vp of handes, according as it was vsuall in the assemblies and elections of the people: notwithstanding the Ecclesiasticall wryters vse this woorde 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           in an other sense. For the solemne manner of ordering, which in the scriptures is called the laying on of handes. And this saying of M. Caluine hathe Marlorat also written in his collections, as allowyng the same. The same M. Caluine Instit: cap. 8. Sect. 65. Sequitur iam vt tractemus. &c. It foloweth nowe that we shoulde intreate of the maner wherby the ministers of the primitiue Churche were placed in theyr office. This the Latinistes call ordering or consecration, the Grecians 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , and sometimes also 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : although 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           is properly called that kynde of election, wherin the voyces are signifyed by lifting vp of handes.
                           Gualter.
                        
                        Lykewise Gualter vpon the fourtéenth of the Actes. Deinde 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           
                              mentionem facit Lucas. &c. Furthermore Luke maketh mention of 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , by the which not onely the gathering of voyces, but also the laying on of handes, whiche was a signe of consecration, maye be signifyed: And surely the latter seemeth moste conueniente. For it is not lykely that the Apostles woulde departe from that order, whiche wee see to haue bene obserued in the election of Matthias, and permitte any thing to the iudgemente of man (whiche in voyces oftentymes commeth to passe) seeyng that they stirred vp the whole Churche to prayer and fasting.
                        
                        Thus then you sée that the matter is nothing so straunge as you make it: for all these learned wryters affirme as muche touching the acceptation of this woorde, as I haue done: and if you will giue mée leaue to alleadge the Canons attributed to the Apostles, as you do, I wil fynde it there taken in thesame signification also: for inCan. Apost. 1. &. 2. the first Canō it is thus written, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Let a bishop be ordeyned of two or three Bishops. And in the second Can. 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Lette a minister be ordeyned of one Bishop. You can not denie, but that the olde translations and commentaries also make only mention of electing and ordeyning, and not of electing or ordeyning by voyces.
                        
                           Oecumenius in his commentaries vpon this place dothe affirme, that Paule and Barnabas did create and ordeyne them: so doe other lykewise: and howesoeuer the worde in Chrysostome is translated, yet Chrysostome giueth no signification in hysChaysost. in 14. in Act. commentaries that his meaning was so. But 
                              Hom. 14 in Act.
                            he wryteth thus, 
                              Vide quomodò scriptor. &c. Marke howe the writer is not superfluous, for he dothe not declare how, but he simply declareth, that they were ordeyned by prayers: for this i' 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . 
                              ordinatio, that is to say, ordeyning, the handes are layde vpon the man, but God worketh the whole, and it is his hande that toucheth the head of him that is ordeyned, if he be ordeynedasHierome. as he ought to be. Hierome also writing vppon the. 58. of Esaie sayeth, that 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           is vsuallye taken for the ordeining of Clerkes, by Prayer and laying on of handes.
                        
                        I denie not but that many doe translate it, as you saye, yet is it doubtefull in
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              . diuers of them whether they ment the voyces of the whole Churche, or of the ministers, or of Paule and Barnabas onely. M. Bullinger sayeth that hee is elected by the common suffrages of the people, qui optimorum testimonio probatus est: whiche is approued by the testimonie of the best. And the lawe sayth, 
                              in publico negotio qui se non apponit cum possit, consentire intelligitur, he is thought to consent in a publike businesse, whiche doth not withstande when he may.
                        
                        I thinke your complaint for lack of bookes is without cause, & verie vnlykely it is

to be true, all thyngs consydered. Howe so euer M. Caluine, or M. Bullinger doe take that worde themselues, yet haue they affirmed as muche of the other signification, as I haue doone, and therfore the more lyke to be true. Neyther haue you as yet alleaged any thing that can proue the contrarie.
                        You maye not teache the Holye Ghoste howe to speake, neyther muste you in suche matters vse so lyghte and vayne reasons. Neyther M. Bullinger nor M. Caluine disalloweth that signification, or goeth aboute to confute it, and you youre selfe confesse, that the Greeke Ecclesiasticall wryters haue semetyme vsed it so, as in déede they commonly doe, which maye easily be vnderstanded, by that that I haue hitherto spoken.
                        Hee that layeth hys handes vpon a mannes head, dothe lyfte them vp be fore hée can laye them on, and therefore you doe but trifle in makyng so muche a doe aboute holdyng vp, and laying downe. There bée other weordes, (I graunt) to expresse thys Ceremonie of laying on of handes, and I knowe that Luke and Paule doe vse an other woorde for the same, and the Septuagint. in lyke manner, but what is all thys to the purpose? What can you conclude hereof? Is thys sufficiente to proue, that thys woord therefore in this place may not signifie the same? are these bare coniectures sufficiente, to improue so manye learned mennes iudgementes.
                        I doe not saye that 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            dothe signifye onely the bare Ceremonie of laying on of handes, but the whole solemnitie of creatyng Ministers, whyche is also sometymes signifyed by 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , as namely, 1. Ti. 9. But Saincte Luke, when he vseth in other places 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , he dothe vse it in the bare signification of laying on of handes, and not for any other ryte or solemnitie, as he doth this worde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            in thys place: and therefore you doe petere principium, when you frame youre proofes, as thoughe it were affirmed or graunted, that Saincte Luke by this worde shoulde meane onely the bare ceremonie of imposition of handes.T. C. bringeth a place against himself.
                        
                        The place that you alledge oute of the tenthe of the Actes maketh moste agaynste youre selfe, and ouerthroweth youre whole buyldyng. Fyrste, bycause 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            is not there taken for liftyng vp of handes, but for appoyntyng or ordeinyng onely: for Christe didde not appoynte his Disciples by lifting vp of handes: Secondly, it signifyeth not to appoynt or to ordeyne by the suffrages and consente of other: for Christe required no mannes consente in the choyse of his Apostles: so that you haue loste and not gayned by alleadging of that place: for as this worde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            in the tenthe of the Actes doth not signifye, that the Apostles were chosen by the consente or voyce of any other, than of Christe onely: so dothe 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            also in this fourtéenth of the Actes signifie, that Paule and Barnabas didde appoynte and ordeyne them ministers by theyr owne voyces onely, and not by the suffrages of the people. Certainly that place of the tenth of the Acts manifestly declareth, that this worde in Scripture dothe not signifie anye common Election by the voyces of the people, as you woulde haue it to doe. Wherfore I thinke that theyr iudgemente can not iustly be mislyked, whyche say this worde in this fouretéenth of the Actes, to signifie the solemne manner of ordeining Ministers by the imposition of handes: not meaning thereby the bare Ceremonie, but the whole action of ordeyning. To conclude, I wyll desyre no other interpretation of thys worde in the. 14. of the Acts, than that same place whyche you haue alleadged Actes. 10. whiche also answereth, what so euer you haue héere spoken of Saincte Lukes skyll in the Gréeke tongue: or of the vse of this woorde in the Scriptures: so that I shall not néede any other Author before Sainct Lukes tyme, to proue the same.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 4. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 43. Lin. 12.
                     Surely howesoeuer the woorde is taken, yet here is no generall rule prescribed of electing ministers. You maye as wel conclude, that all thinges oughte to bee common among Christians, bycause wee reade Act. 2. that all those whyche beleeued, had all thinges common among them: and that those which be conuerted to the Gospell, ought to sell their goodes and landes, to be distributed at the discretion of the ministers, bicause they did so. Act. 2. &. 3.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 30. Sect. 5. 6. & Pag. 31. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4.
                     Lette vs therefore see youre thyrde: whyche is, that although the Churches consente was then required, yet it is not nowe, and that it is no generall rule, no more than (saye you) that all thyngs shoulde be therefore common nowe, bicause they were in the Apostles tyme.
                     The authors of the Admenition, with theyr fauourers, muste be counted Anabaptistes, no one worde beyng shewed whiche tendeth therevnto, you muste accuse them, whiche confirme that foundation whereof they buylde their communitie of all things, whiche is one of their chief heresyes. If I shoulde saye nowe that you are lyke to those that row in a boate, which although they looke backewardes, yet they thruste an other way, I shoulde speake with more lykelyhode than you haue doone. For although you make a countenaunce, and speake hotly agaynst Anabaptistes, yet in deede you strengthen theyr handes with reasons. But I will not saye so, neyther doe I thynke that you fauour that secte, but onely the whirlewinde and tempest of your affection bente to mayntayne this estate, whereby you haue so greate honour and wealth, driueth you vpon these rockes, to wracke your selfe on, and others.
                     For I pray you what communitie is spoken of eyther in the two, or three, or fourthe of the Actes, whiche ought not to be in the Churche: as long as the world standeth? was there any communitie but as touching the vse, and so farre foorth as the poore brethren had neede of, andAct. 1. Act. 5. not to take euery man alyke? was it not in any man his power to sell his houses, or landes, or not to sell them? When he had solde them, were they not in euery man his libertie to keepe the money to himselfe at his pleasure? andThe text sayeth playnly, that as many as were possessoures of lands. &c. soul
                              〈1 line〉
                            them. all they that were of the Churche didde not sell theyr possessions, but those whose hartes the Lord touched singularly with the compassion of the neede of others, and whome God had blessed with aboundance, that they had to serue themselues, and helpe others, and therefore it is reckened as a rare example, that Barnabas the Cyprian and Leuite didde sell his possession, and broughte the price to the feete of the Apostles.
                     And as for Ananias and Saphira, they were not punished for bycause they brought not the price of their possessions to the Apostles, but bycause they lyed, saying that they had broughte the whole when they had brought but parte. And to bee shorte, is there any more doone there, than Sainct Paule prescribeth to the Corinthians, and in them to all Churches to the worldes ende? After he had exhorted to liberalitie towardes the poore Churche in Hierusalem, not (sayeth2. Cor. 8. he) that other shoulde bee releeued, and you oppressed, but vppon lyke condition at thys tyme your aboundance supplyeth theyr lacke, that also theyr aboundance maye be for your lacke, that there might bee equalitie, as it is written, he that gathered muche, had nothing ouer, and he that gathered little, had not the lesse.
                     Surely it were better you were no Doctour in the Churche, than that the Anabaptistes shoulde haue suche holde to bring in their communitie as you giue them.
                     In summe the Apostolike communitie, or the Churches in their tyme, was not Anabapti
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        ticall.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue shewed before in the begynning of my Answere to the Admonition,No good argument, a f
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              ▪ cto ad iu
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . not onely howe weake, but also howe daungerous a kynde of reasonyng it is, to saye, that the Apostles did it, Ergo, wée muste doe it, or the Apostles didde it not, Ergo we muste not doe it. Zuinglius a notable learned man, dothe especially reproue the Anabaptistes for this kynde of reason, and sayeth that an argumente, 
                              à facto ad ius, or à non facto ad non ius,
                            is neuer good, excepte those examples be grounded vppon some lawe or rule. Wherefore, when I thus laboure to ouerthrowe the vitious manner and kynde of the Anabaptisticall argumente, I truste no indifferent man will suspect me of their errors? when I say, that this is no good argument: In the Apostles time those that beléeued had all things common among them, therefore Christians muste haue all thynges common: doe I confirme theyr

heresie of hauing all things common? I knowe not why you shoulde so charge mée with the whirlewynde and tempest of my affection bente to mayntaine this estate. &c. except you be offended bicause I shewe the weakenesse of the Anabaptistes reasons for their communitie.
                        My honour and wealth is not so muche, but yet I would be loth to haue it common, and you may not blame me though I maynteyne that state, where all men may quietly enioye their owne, without confusion.
                        I know the Anabaptistes doe not only erre in their kinde of reasoning, but in the right vnderstanding of the Scriptures also, euen of those places wherevppon they frame their argumente. But the texte sayeth playnely, 
                              Omnes qui credebant. &c. All whiche beleeued, were in one place, and had all thyngs common. Acto. 2. &. 4. Quotquot
                              Act. 2. Act. 4. 
                              enim possessores praediorum aut domorum erant. &c. For as manie as were possessours of landes or houses solde them. &c. And thoughe they were greately to be commended in sellyng their landes and possessions, and in so lyghtly estéeming the riches of this worlde, yet it followeth not, that no man can bée a good Christian, vnlesse he followe that example. There are sundrie places of the Scripture that ouerthrow the Anabaptisticall communitie: and therefore howesoeuer they vnderstande these examples, yet can they not proue theyr errour, for it is true that Zuinglius sayeth, Nullius facta iuri praeiudicant, examples must giue place when they be agaynste a generall lawe, commaundement or right.
                        
                        I haue not spoken one woorde of Ananias and Saphira, and therefore I muse to what purpose you bryng them in: neyther am I agaynste the interpretation of those places of the Actes, yet doe I saye, that no man is bounde of necessitie to folowe those examples, excepte it were in the lyke tyme, and state. So that if the Anabaptistes bothe erre in the vnderstandyng of those places, and in theyr kynde of reasoning also as they doe in bothe. M. Doctor maye kéepe his Doctorship still, and they be farre enough from their communitie. The communitie that was in the Apostles tyme was Christian, and moste fitte for that tyme, but the same maye not nowe be vrged in the selfe same maner, and forme, without suspicion of Anabaptisms. And it is a very good argument againste you: for as the communitie vsed amongste the Christians Act. 2. &. 4. was godlie, and yet not necessarie nor méete for all states of the Churche, euen so the election then vsed was also godlie, and yet not at all tymes to be practised, but only in the lyke state of time.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the fyft Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 43. Lin. 20. & Sect. 1.
                     In the seconde to the Corinthians. 8. the Apostle declareth how the Churches had chosen Luke (or as some thinke Barnabas) to be his companion in his iourney: But what maketh this for electing of ministers? howe followeth this argument? The Churches had chosen Luke or Barnabas, to be Paules companion in his iourney: therfore ministers of the worde must be elected by the people?
                     These three laste reasons are all one, and the places of Scripture whiche I haue sette downe, and answered, be alleaged of you to proue, that the election of ministers, was then made by the common consent of the people, and that euery congregation had authoritie to call their ministers.
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Page. 31. Sect 4.
                     Unto the place of the. 2. epistle to the Corinthians, and. 8. chapter, you aske what maketh that to the election of the ministers? But why do not you say here as you did in the other place, that the Apostle meaneth nothing else but the putting on of the handes of them which ordayned? For the same word 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         is here vsed, that was there, and this place doth manifestly and without all contradiction conuince your vayne signifycation that you make of it in the other place, and the vntruth wherein you say that the scripture vseth this word for a solemne manner of ordering ministers, by putting on of handes. For heere it is saide, that he that was ioyned with Paule, was 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         by the Church, and it is manifest that the impositiō of hāds, was not by the Church and people, but by the elders and ministers, as it appeareth in S. Paule to Timothie.1. Tim. 4. 2. Tim. 1.
                     
                     Now to come to that which you make so light of: for say you, how followeth this: The Church chose Luke or Barnabas to be companion of Paules iourney: Ergo the Churches must choose their ministers? It followeth very well, for if it were thought meete that S. Paule shoulde not choose himselfe of his owne authoritie, a companiō to help him, being an Apostle, is there any Archbishop that shall dare take vpon him to make a minister of the Gospell, being so many degrees (both in authoritie and in all gifts needefull to discerne, and trieout, or take knowledge of a sufficient minister of the Gospell) inferioure to S. Paule.
                     And if S. Paule would haue the authoritie of the Church to ordayne the Minister, that should ayde him in other places, to the building and gathering of other Churches, howe much more dyd he thinke it meete, that the Churches should choose their owne Minister, which shoulde gouerne them: & which things may be also said of the election in the first of the Acts. For there theVntr
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Church first chose two, whereof one should be an Apostle, which should not be minister of that Church but should be sent into all the world, so that always the Apostles haue shunned to do any thing of theyr owne willes, without the knowledge eyther of those Churches, where they instituted any gouernours, or if it were for the behoofe of those places where there were no Churches gathered, yet woulde they ordayne none, but by the consente of some other Churche, whiche was alreadye established.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Of the acceptation of this worde in the. 14. of the Acts, I haue spoken sufficiently This place is not one whit contrary to any thing that is said in that matter: for in the 14. of the Acts it is referred to the appointing of ministers of the worde, and in thys place of the secōd. Cor. 8. it is applyed to the sending of some with Paule to gather the beneuolence of the Churches, and to carrie the same to the poore Saints. Now though 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            may signify the imposition of hands, or the whole action of ordering ministers, when it is referred to that matter, yet doth it not follow, that it should alwayes signify so, to whatsoeuer it is applyed. But take it as you list, it is as well spoken of one alone, as of many, as the place Act. 10. manifestly declareth: and therfore doth not of necessitie signify an election made by the people, except some other word be ioyned with it, to expresse the same, as there is in this. 2. Cor. 8. For thus the Apostle saithe 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            which addition should not haue néeded, if this worde2. Cor. 8. alone had of necessitie signifyed in the scripture any such election, as you woulde haue it to do.
                        In the argument there is no sequele at all, for it was very conuenient and méete,Why the com panions of Paule were chosen by consent. for the auoyding of suspicion of priuate gayne, or corrupt dealing, that such as shoulde haue to do in gathering and distributing almes, shoulde be chosen by a common consent: and it is manifest, that it was Paules owne request to haue them in this businesse, by the consent of the Churches, ioyned with him, for the stopping of the mouths of such as would otherwise haue bin ready to suspect Paules integritie in that money matter: and that this is true, these words declare, 
                              declinantes boc nè quis nos carpat in bat
                              2. Cor. 8. 
                              exuber antia quae administratur à nobis, procurantes bonesta. &c. Auoyding this, that no man should blame vs in this abundance that is ministred by vs, prouiding for honest things, not only before the Lord, but also before men: as though he would say, therefore haue I procured that by the consent of the Churches some might be ioyned with me in this collection, least any man should take occasion to suspecte me of corrupt dealing, or to report, that in this businesse I robbed the Church to enrich my selfe.
                        Now therefore how any thing can be gathered of this place, to proue that ministers of the word ought to be chosen by a common consent of the people, let the reader iudge. Paule might haue chosen thē himselfe if he would, but he desired the Churches to choose them, that his vpright dealing in collecting and distributing of the almes,

might not be brought into suspicion, as I haue said before. And therefore an Archbishop may dare take vpon him to make a minister of the Gospell. &c. for any thing that is in this place to the contrary. In déede if an Archbishop should be appoynted to collecte, and to distribute almes, then were it fitte (for his owne credite sake, and to auoyde the slaunderous speaches of those that be quarrelous) that he should desire some to be ioyned with him, by the common consent of those of whome he should collect. And this is the only thing that may be gathered of this place, touching any election.
                        It is vntrue, that in the first of the Acts the Church did first choose those two, that stoode in the electiō for the Apostleship: the Apostles only did propound them to the church, as M. Beza truly saith in these words, 
                              apparet cum eligendus esset qui in Iudae proditoris locum
                              Beza. li. confe. cap. 5. 
                              succederet, fuisse multitudini propositos ab Apostolis eos, quos maximè idoneos censebant. It appeareth, when he was to be chosen, which should succeede in the roome of Iudas the traytoure, that they were propounded vnto the multitude by the Apostles, whom they thought most meete. Neyther were the Apostles chosen by men, but immediatly by God, as al writers confesse, whiche was the cause why matthias was there chosen by lot, and not by the voyces of men.
                        Why in the Apostles time it was conuenient to require the consent of the people in some things, and yet not conuenient now so to do, is declared afterwards.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 4. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 43. Sect. vlt.
                     I do not denie but in the Apostles time, and after euē to Cyprians
                        The consent of the people vnto Cyprians time. time, the peoples consente was in many places required in the appoynting of ministers.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 31. Sect. vlt. &. Pag. 32. Sect. 1.
                     You will not denie but that in the Apostles time, and S. Cyprians time in many places, the consent of the people was required: shew any one place where it was not.
                     Doth not S. Luke say that it was done Church by Church, that is in euery Churche? And where you say it enduredAn vntruth, for I say not, but to Cyprias time. but to S. Cyprians time, it shall appeare to all men that it endured in the Church a thousand yeares and more after his time: and it appeareth in the. 4. epistle of his first booke that he vsed it not as a thing indifferent, but necessary, and argueth the necessitie of it, of the place of the first of the Acts, which is alledged by the authours of the Admonition. And so they are not their argumentes that you throwe vp so scornefully, saying, how followeth this, and this, what proueth it? but Cyprians, whome by their sides you thrust through, and so vnreuerently handle.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You bid me shew any one place where the consent of the people was not required in electing of ministers, in the Apostles, or in Cyprians time. I might rather aske you this question,Election of ministers by the people not general in the Apostls time. especially of the Apostles time, and bid you shewe vnto me any one place, that directly proueth the consent of the people to haue bin required in the election of the ministers of the word. In the first of the Acts, the Apostles propounded two, and the election was not by voice, but by lot. In the. 14. of the Acts it is playne, that Paule and Barnabas did choose the ministers of the word. S. Paule saith to Timothie. 1. Ti. 5.1. Tim. 5. Tit. 1. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            
                           
                              manus citò ne cui imponas: lay hands on no man sodainely. And to Titus Chap. 1. that for this cause he left him at Creta. &c. That he should ordeyne elders in euery citie. To be shorte, Christe himselfe alone, withoute the consente of any other, appoynted his Apostles. Shew you me the like euident places for your purpose if you can.
                        The 6. of the Acts is but of Deacons: who bycause they were occupyed about moueyWhy Deacons were chosen by com mon consente. 
                                 Act. 6. 2. Cor. 8.
                            matters, and collecting and distributing of almes, it was méete that they shoulde bée chosen by a common consente, to auoyde the grudging of the people that gaue almes, and the suspicion of others, as the place it selfe doth manifestly declare. Acts. 6. There arose a murmuring of the Graecians towards the Hebrues, bycause their widdowes were neglected in the dayly ministring. &c. The. 2. Cor. 8. is to the like effecte, whereof I haue spoken sufficientely. There onelye remayneth too helpe you, thys

word 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            which I haue proued not of necessitie to signify in the scripture any election by the people, excepte there be some other word added vnto it, to expresse the same as there is. 2. Cor. 8. and therefore my assertion is grounded vpon the playne and euident places of the scriptures, yours vpon likelyhoods and coniectures onely. And if it were as lawfull for me to alledge the Canons attributed to the Apostles, as it is for you (who haue alledged them in sundry places) then could I tell you out of them also, that the electing of ministers by the people, was not generall at that time:Cano. Apo. 36. as it may be gathered out of the. 36. Canon.
                        If you will beléeùe Eusebius li.
                            2. eccle. histo. cap. 23. or Zuinglius in his eccles. you shallEuseb. Zuinglius find that the Apostles did appoint and ordeyne Iames to be Byshop of Nierusalem. But I will not now stand vpon this matter, I shal haue more occasion to speake of it hereafter: in the meane time, this whiche I haue saide is sufficient to satisfie your request, for the Apostles time. Touching that of Luke, that it was done Church by Church, if you meane the ordering of ministers by Paule and Barnabas, it is answered before, where I haue shewed that it maketh againste you: if you vnderstande by euery Church, those Churches where Paule and Barnabas were togither, then do you expound Church by Church well: else not. But this is not materiall.Election of ministers by the people not generall in th
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               of Cyprian.
                        
                        Now that the electing of ministers by the people was not generall in Cyprians time, I proue by Cyprians owne words. li. 1. epist. 4. where he speaking of electing by the people saith, 
                              quod apud nos quoque, & ferè per prouincias vniuersas tenetur, which also is obserued with vs, and almost throughout all prouinces &c. In that he saith it was almost in euery prouince, he playnly signifyeth that there were some prouinces, wherein thisCyprian. 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                              . 4. manner and forme of electing was not vsed.
                        When I say that the consente of the people was required in many places euen to Cyprians time, I do not denie, but that it was also required after Cyprians time, neither do I speake any otherwise in that poynt, than Musculus
                           Musculus. hath spoken in his common places: ti. de verbi. ministris, where he saithe thus, 
                              haec forma electionis ad Cypriani vsquè tempora in ecclesijs durauit. &c. This forme of election remayned in the Churches vntill Cyprians time. I knowe it was both before, and after Cyprians time, in many places: but that is not the question (for it partly is, and shall more at large hereafter be declared, that it was also otherwise both before and after Cyprians time) but our question is whether it ought to be so at all times, or no, & at this time, especially in this Church of England.
                        You say it appeareth that Cyprian in his. 4. epistl of his. 1. Booke vseth it not as a thing indifferente. &c. Surely if Cyprians wordes be well considered you will be founde notThe place of 
                                 〈◊〉
                               examined. to haue reported truly of him: for he with other Bishops, answering the 
                              〈◊〉
                            that was demaunded of them touching Martialis and Basilides, whether (seeing they were conuicted of heynous crimes) they might still enioy their office, and minister vnto the Lord, first, declareth out of Exod. 19. Leui. 21. &c. of what integritie and holynesse those ought to be that serue the altar, and celebrate diuine sacrifices. Likewise they shew that such precepts must be obeyed, and héede taken, that none be chosen into the ministerie, but suche as be blamelesse, signifying by the way, how greatly that people doth offend, that doth communicate with a sinfull priest, and consenteth to the vniust and vnlawfull office of him, that is placed ouer them, shewing out of the Prophet Osee and the booke of numbers, what punishment is due vnto them, that be contaminated with the sacrifice of a prophane and vnlawfull priest: where vpon he bringeth in these words: 
                              propter quod plebs obseque
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 s praeceptis dominicis, & deum metuens, a peccatore praeposito separare se debet, nec se ad sacrilegi sacerdotis sacrificia miscere, cum ipsa maximè habeat potestatem vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi. Quod & ipsum videmus de diuina authoritate discendere, vt sacerdos plebe praesente sub omnium oculis deligatur, & dignus atquè idoneus publico iudicio, ac testimonio comprobetur. &c. For which cause, the people obeying the commaundementes of the Lorde, and fearing God, ought to separate themselues from a wicked gouernoure, & not to cōmunicate in the sacrifices of a wicked priest, for so much as they especially haue authoritie, either to choose those priests which be worthy, or

else to refuse them which are vnwoorthy. The whiche thing also we see to proceede of the authoritie of God, that the priest should be chosen before the face of all, the people being present, and that he which is sit and worthy, should by the publique iudgement and testimonie be approued, as the Lord commaunded Moses in the booke of numbers saying, take Aaron thy brother, and Eleazer his sonne, for Aaron shall be gathered to his fathers, and shall dye there. God commaunded the priest to be appointed before the whole sinagogue, that is, he declareth that the ordering of priests ought not to be, but (sub populi 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  is conscientia) by the knowledge of the people standing by, that the people being present, vel detegātur malorum crimina, vel bonorum merita praedicentur. &c. either the faults of euil mē might be bewrayed, or the desertes of those whiche are good might be commended: and that that ordering might be iust and lawfull, which shall be examined by the voices and iudgement of all. VVhich thing was afterward obserued according to the rule of God, when as Peter spake vnto the people, concerning the choosing of a bishop into the place of Iudas.
                        
                        Where the words of Cyprian and the other Bishops be plaine, that the ordering of ministers ought to be in the presence of the people, to the intent they may obiect any thing against them if they can, but not that it ought to be by their voyces and election, the which the example that he vseth of Eleazer Num. 20. and the words that he reciteth out of the first of the Acts, plainly declare, for though Eleazer was placed in Aarons roome in the presence of the people, yet had they no voyces in hys election: No more had they in the election of Matthias, though it were in theyr presence.
                        That also whiche followeth in the same epistle dothe proue this to be their true meaning, for alittle after, it is said, 
                              propter quod diligenter de traditione diuina. &c. VVherfore it ought diligently to be obserued and holden as proceeding from the tradition of God, and the obseruation of the Apostles (the which also is reteyned almost thoroughout all prouinces) that, to the intent orders should be rightly celebrated, all the next Byshops of the same prouince, should assemble vnto that people, to whome a gouernoure is to be appointed, and that the Byshop should be chosen in the presence of the people, which dothe fully know the life of euery one. &c. so that Cyprians meaning is to haue the people present at the ordering of ministers, that if they know any crime in them, they may obiect it: if not, with their silence allow of the parties: for as the law saith 
                              ta
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 iturnitas pro consensu habetur, silence is taken for a consent. And to this purpose serue the places that he vseth Numer. 20. Act. 1. and to no other, as the diligent reader may easily perceiue. But howsoeuer the words of Cyprian sound, certayne it is, that neyther that in the. 20. of Numeri, nor this in the. 1. of the Acts, can proue any election made by the people.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 44. Lin. 1.No certayne forme of electing ministers commaunded in the scriptures.
                     
                     But I saye that in the whole scripture, there is no commaundement that it should so be, nor any example that maketh therein any necessary or generall rule, but that it may be altered as time and occasion serueth. For in suche matters not commaunded or prohibited in scripture, touching ceremonies, discipline, and gouernmente, the Churche hathe authoritie from time to time, to appointe that whiche is most conuenient, for the presente state: as I haue before declared.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 32. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
                     But you saye these examples are no generall rules. It will fal out that you haue neyther examples of all Apostles, nor of all Churches nor of 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            times. Examples of all the Apostles, in all

Churches, and in all purer times, vncontrolled, and vnretracted, either by any the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        rimitiue and purer Churches, or by any rule of the scripture, I thinke ought to stande. If it were a priuate example of one, or in one place alone, or if it were countermaunded by any other rule of the scripture, then the example were not always safe to follow. But what if there be commaundement also▪
                     
                     In the You are driu
                              〈1 line〉
                            to a streight, when you are glad to serch a mandatum out of the ceremoniall law. eight of the booke of numbers the Lorde commaundeth that the Leuites, whiche preached the word of God to the people in their seuerall congregations, shoulde be broughte before the Lord and before the people, & the people should lay their handes vpon the Leuits heads: whiche what other thinge is it than to declare their liking of them, and by that ceremonie to consecrate them and set them apart for that vse of their ministerie? And if you say that it were a disorder that all should lay on their hands, I graunt you: but so he speaketh, bycause the approbation was by all, and some in the name of the rest declared that, by their laying on of hands.
                     But me thinketh I here your old answer that this perteyneth not vnto vs, being a thing done vnder the law: But take heede what you say, for if you will admitte neyther the generall examples of the new testament, nor the commaundements and examples of the old, take heede that you do not or euer you be aware, spoyle vs of the chiefe and principall pillers and buttresses of our religion, and bring vs Not so, but you seeme to bring vs to plai
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           udaisme. to playne Catabaptistrie, which you say you are so afraid of.
                     For to proue the baptisme of children and yong infants, what stronger hold haue we than that God commaunded in the old Testament, that they should be circumcised, and examples thereof in the new Testament, for that the Apostles baptised whole families, where, by al likelyhoode there were children. Now we say that there is this commaundement in the old Testament, of the ministers, and there are examples in the newe Testament generall and throughout, why shoulde it not then be necessarie in this as well as in the other? Besides that in the This is a silly place to proue 
                              〈◊〉
                            generall commaundement. 6. of the Acts, the Apostles commaund that the Church shoulde seeke them out Deacons, whome they might appoynt ouer the poore.
                     Touching certayne Ceremonies, I haue shewed that they are necessary, as namely the sacramentes.
                     And as for discipline and gouernmente, I haue shewed partly, and more heereafter will be shewed, that they are of the substance of the Gospell, if to haue excommunication be to haue discipline, or if to haue pastors, or Byshops and Doctors and Deacons be gouernmente of the Church.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You do still petere principium, and build vpon a false grounde: for I denie that you haue examples either of all, or of any of the Apostles: or that this kind of election hath bin in all Churches & in al purer times. &c. and albeit, for the proofe of this, sufficiēt is said before, yet will I adde something now also. All the places of scriptures that you haueThe diuersitie of electiōs in the Apostles time. hither to alleadged, are Act. 1. Act. 6. Act. 14. and. 2. Cor. 8. whiche places neither agrée in persons that were to be chosen, nor in the manner and forme of choosing. For the first of the Acts is of an Apostle, the. 6. of Deacons, the. 14. of Byshops, and the. 2. Cor. 8. of such as were ioyned with Paule for the collecting and distributing of Almes. Al men do graunt that the calling and electing of an Apostle is immediatly from God, and therefore dothe differ from all other elections of Pastors, Deacons. &c. But to let thys passe: I pray you consider the diuers manner and forme vsed in all these places. In the firste of the Acts, Péeter made an exhortation to the disciples, he appoynted out of what company the newe Apostle shoulde be taken: the Apostles presented two, after prayers made, lots were giuen foorth, and the Apostle was chosen by lot, and not by voice, but immediatly taken and reputed with the eleuen Apostles.
                        In the. 6. of the Acts, the twelue Apostles willed the whole multitude to looke out seuen men of honest report. &c. to be Deacons, and the whole multitude did choose seuen and presented them to the Apostles: and the Apostles prayed & layed theyr hands on them.
                        In the. 14. of the Acts Paule and Barnabas ordeyned ministers in euery Churche, with praying and fasting.
                        In the seconde Corinth. eyghte. At Paules request the Churches appoynte certayne to bée collectours for the poore Saynctes with hym: whyche of all these examples woulde you followe? will you name them to the people, or shall the people, name them too you? Will you haue two put vp togyther, and one of them chosen by lotte? Or will you haue the whole people for to

choose, and you to lay on handes: or will you only haue the Bishops to choose? to bée short, will you pray only at the election, or will you both pray and fast? or haue you any commission to make a mixture of all those examples, and so to make one rule, where vnto all Churches at all times must of necessitie be bound?
                        I told you before, that M. Caluine saith plainly that out of that example in the first of the Acts, no certaine rule can be gathered of electing and choosing of ministers: and M. Beza li. confess. ca. 5.
                            is as plaine, that there can be no certaine rule gathered out of theBeza. 6. of the Acts, or out of that in the first: his words be these. In the election of Matthias lottes were cast, but for a peculiar cause, for it behoued the Apostles to be chosen immediatly of God: In the election of Deacons Luke hath not set downe what the Church did obserue: But in another place, we may gather by Paule, that they of Asia vsed the holding vp of hands, which manner was vsuall with the most of the Graecians: wherefore there is no cause why any man should ouercuriously prescribe here any certaine rule. &c.
                        
                        Now to reherse what varietie hath bin vsed in the Churches touching this election,Uarietie vsed in the electiōs in ye pr
                                 〈1 line〉
                              tiue Churches. Caluine.
                            were néedelesse, it shall be sufficient only to set downe that which M. Caluine speaketh of it in his 
                              Insti. cap. 8. Sect. 60. &c.
                            wher first he declareth that the rule of S. Paule touching the qualities of a minister is to be obserued, and that he is to be examined according to the same. Then doth he shew, how that there hath not always one order bin obserued touching the electours and appointers: for sometimes none was chosen without the consent of the whole people, and other sometimes the people committed the choise to the Bishop and ministers or Seniors, except it were in the election of the Bishop. And sometimes onely the ministers did first choose, and then offer those whome they had chosen to the magistrate, or to the Senat, or to the chiefe rulers, who ratifyed the election if they liked it, if not, then did they choose out other. &c. This varietie of electing ministers doth M. Caluine declare in that place.
                        It appeareth in the. 35. or as some counteth. 36. of the canons attributed to the Apostles,Can. Apost. 36 that Bishops were not then chosen by the consent of the people, for that canon speaketh of such Byshops, as being appoynted to some Church, were not receyued by the people, and yet remayned Bishops still. To the like effect is the. 18. can. Con. Ancyra.
                           
                              
                                 Con: Ancyr. can. 18. Con. Antioch. can. 17. 18. Con: Laodic. can. 12. Can. 13. T. C. seeketh a commaundement in the Ceremoniall law, for the election of the ministers of the Gospell. The place Numbers. 8. proueth not his purpose. and the. 17. and. 18. of the Councell of Antioch. In the. 12. Canon of the Councell of Laodicea it is decréed that the Metropolitane with other Byshops adioyning should haue the election of Byshops, and of such as are to be preferred to a cure. And the. 13. Can. of the same councell doth forbid that the elections of ministers should be committed to the people. So that you sée your manner of electing by the people not to haue bin in all Churches in all purer times.
                        It appeareth that you were put to a pinch for a commaundement to establish your manner and kind of electing ministers, when you are constrayned to fetch one out of the booke of Numbers, and that nothing at all perteyning to your purpose. For what one word is there in that place that hath any shadow of your election? First, the people there did not elect the Leuits: Secondly, they laid their hands vpon them: which I am sure you will not haue the people to do in the ordeyning of Byshops, for you say that only elders and ministers vsed to lay on their hands. So that this place of the Booke of Numbers doth commaund that whiche you will not admitte, and speaketh not one word of that for the which you do alledge it.
                        But tell me in good earnest, will you bind vs to the obseruation of the Ceremonial law also, as you haue done before to the iudiciall? For what else is there in that whole chapter, but lawes touching ceremonies, and in that place by you alleadged especially? for there he speaketh of the manner of purifying of the Leuites and of their offering: he speaketh not of any election. For God himselfe had chosen the Leuites before, for the first borne of the children of Israell. cap. 3.
                        I would to God men would but indifferently consider how vndiscréetely you alleadge the scriptures, lest you should séeme to be voyde of scripture. You say the people by laying on their hands did by that ceremonie consecrate them. Would you haue the people to consecrate ministers by laying on of hands? do you not care what absurdities, and contrarieties you speake? you make a distinction in that whiche followeth betwixte

ordeyning & electing, and you say that election perteyneth to the people, & ordeyning to the Bishop.Pag. 40. lin. vlt. &c. Pag. 31. sect. 4. And in another place: that the imposition of handes was not by the Churche and people, but by the Elders and Ministers. But if this be a commaundement for vs now to obserue, then must you recant that saying.
                        I doe admitte this Scripture as a portion of the Ceremoniall lawe, but I doe notThe dealings of T. C. tend to Iudaisme. admit it as a perpetuall commaundement, bicause I knowe the Ceremoniall lawe is abrogated, excepte you will haue all those Ceremonies whiche were vsed in that place, and are conteyned in the same commaundement, as of sprinkling them with water, of shauing their bodies, of washing their clothes, of laying their handes on the heads of bullocks. &c. practized in ordering ministers of the Gospel. Neither is this any title of Catabaptistrie, but yours smelleth of Iudaisme, for you bounde vs before to the Iudiciall law, and now you will bind vs to the Ceremoniall also: what remayneth but to say that Christ is not yet come.
                        Circumcision is a figure of baptisme, but the Leuiticall priesthoode is no figure of the ministerie of the Gospell, therfore we may well proue the baptizing of Infantes by circumcision, but we can not proue the ordering of ministers of the Gospell by the ceremonies vsed about the Leuites.
                        Those examples of the Apostles doe well proue the baptizing of children, bicauseGene. 17. Mat. 28. they be grounded vpon these generall places of the Scriptures, 
                              Ego sum Deus tuus. &c. I am thy God, and the God of thy seede. &c. and Mat. 28. 
                              Baptizantes omnes gentes, Baptizing all nations.
                           The contention is not whether discipline. &c. be necessarie, but whether one kinde be necessarie.
                        
                        Of discipline also and gouernment, I haue something spoken before, and minde to speake hereafter when further occasion is offered: in this place it is answere sufficient to say, that the contention is not whether discipline or gouernment be necessarie in the Churche, or no, but whether this or that kinde of discipline and gouernment be necessarie, and whether there be one certayne kinde and forme of discipline and gouernment to be vsed in the Churche at all times, and in all places. As for Pastors, Bishops, Doctors, Deacons. &c. they be necessarie ministers in the Churche, but it doth not therfore follow, that there must be alwayes one kinde and forme of gouernment.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 44. Sect. 1.
                     And I adde, that howsoeuer in the Apostles time, that kinde of electing and calling ministers was conuenient and profitable, now in this state of the Churche, it were moste pernicious and hurtfull.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 32. Sect. 6. 7.
                     You say that howsoeuer in the Apostles tyme. this vse was of hauing the consent of the church in the choyse of their Pastor or Bishop, nowe in this state it were moste pernicious and hurtefull. Wherein, see howe This is an v
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           aduised collestion. vnaduisedly you condemne the churches of Geneua, of all Fraunce, of certayne of the Germayne churches, which keepe this order. But you alleage your reasons, therfore those are to be considered, bicause they come so rare. For your maner is, that if you can haue but one writer new or olde, of your side, or which seemeth to be of your side, you runne away with the matter, as though you had scripture, reason, Doctors, and all.
                     I will therefore then take a view of your reasons, when as I shal haue briefly set downe those reasons, wherby the perpetuall equitie, reasonablenesse, & conueniencie of this order, that the church should haue a stroke in hir ministers election, may appeare.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I condemne no Churches that haue appoynted any order for the electing of their Pastors, which they thinke to be agreable to their state, and moste profitable for them: for therefore I say, that no certayne maner or forme of electing ministers is prescribed in the Scripture, bicause euery Churche may doe therein as it shall séeme to be moste expediente for the same. That maye be profitable for the Churches of Geneua and Fraunce. &c. whiche woulde be moste hurtefull to this Churche of Englande.

And therefore I saye that howsoeuer this popular kinds of electing was conuenient or profitable in the Apostles tyme, yet in this state of the Churche of Englande, it woulde be pernicious and hurtfull.
                        You say my manner is, that if I can haue but one writer. &c. Truely I doe not stande so muche in my owne conceyte, neyther am I so well persuaded of my owne witte and vnderstanding, but that I greatly estéeme the opinions of learned men: and I thinke my selfe to haue reason sufficient, when I haue good and learned authoritie, which is grounded both vpon Scripture and reason. And to put you out of doubte, if you be offended bicause I so doe, you must be offended still: For I had rather alleage the authoritie of learned men, whiche is grounded bothe vpon the Scriptures and reason, than to sticke to mine owne phansie, bothe without authoritie and reason, as those commonly doe, whiche are desirous of innouations, and haue their heades filled with new deuises.
                        But you will take a view of my reasons. &c. and I will first examine your reasons seuerally, and then answere for my owne.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               An examination of the reasons which T. C. vseth to proue the perpetuall equitie, &c. of elections by the people.
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 32. Sect. 8.
                     It is sayde amongest the Lawyers, and in deede reason which is the law of all nations confirmeth it, Quod omnium interest, ab. omnibus approbari debet. That which standeth all men vppon, shoulde be approued of all men. Whiche lawe hath this sense, that if it may be, it were good that those thinges, whiche shall binde all men, and whiche require the obedience of all shoulde be concluded as farre as may be, by the consent of all, or at least by the consent of as many as may be gotten. And therefore it draweth muche the obedience of the subiectes of this realme; that the statutes whereby the realme is gouerned; passe by the consent of the moste parte of it, whilest they be made by them, whome the rest put in trust, and choose for that purpose, beeing as it were all their actes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You vse for your purpose a rule of the lawe, whiche you doe not vnderstande, norThe first reason examined. rightly interprete: for where as this word Debet, importeth a necessitie, you expound it as a word of courtesie, saying, if it may be, and it were good to be concluded: when as the lawe sayth, 
                              Debet approbari, it ought to be allowed. And reason wil the same, that where many men haue interest in any thing, or haue any thing in common, whereof euery of them hathe a priuate interest, right, or propertie, there euery mans consent should be had: as if a house, or any other thing be common among halfe a dosen men by purchase, discent, or gifte, and fiue of them would burden that thing with any charge, or doe any acte to preiudice the sixte man, it shall not binde him without his consent: for there this rule is true. Further more a thing is sayde 
                              omnes tangere, to perteyne to all, whiche is common either Pluribus vt vniuersis, or else Pluribus vt singulis. In the first kinde, are those things that pertayne to bodies politike, as the body of a whole common wealth, Citie, Borough, Towne, Colledge, Churche. &c. Wherein (as the Lawyers say) this rule hathe no force. The reason of the lawe is, bicause it béeing almoste an impossible thing, for all men in suche a body to agrée in one, and there béeing amongst men for the moste parte (as it were) a naturall inclination to dissent, and disagrée one from an other, there should neuer any law or order be made, if euery singular mans consent should of necessitie be had: It is therefore sufficient in suche places and matters, if the lawes, statutes, and customes of the place be obserued.
                        Wherefore the rule hathe onely place in the seconde: that is, in thinges that areThis law can not take holde in the election of ministers. common 
                              Pluribus vt singulis, to many seuerally, that is, wherein euery man hathe a proprietie and particular righte: as it is properly in landes, possessions. &c. in the whiche the Minister can not be comprehended: for it were a greate absurditie,

that in the election of the minister euery singular mans consent shoulde of necessitie be required: for then if any one frowarde man in the whole parishe were disposed to withstande the election, it coulde neuer be ended: and this muste necessarily come to passe, if you will builde vpon this lawe.
                        And yet in suche cases this law admitteth this generall exception, if there be especiallThe lawe as mitteth exceptions. reason and cause why that thing whiche concerneth many, shoulde be done by some other way, rather than by the consent of them, whiche haue interest. And these are taken for good reasons in this case: Fyrst, if it be rather behouefull for the common wealthe, and Churche of God to doe that whiche concerneth a number, some other way, rather than by the consent of euery particular man. Secondly, if it be for the more quiet estate of the common wealthe, not to haue their consent. Thirdly, if it be better for the parties themselues, to haue it otherwise prouided: Last of all, if it be agaynst the lawes of God, or of the customes and lawes of any Countrey.
                        If I were a Lawyer, I could tell you, that this law admitteth many exceptions. What is more expedient for all men, than to haue a good Prince, good Councellors, good Iudges. &c. and yet I thinke it were moste pernicious to haue those offices committed to the election of the people.
                        But what néede I stryue with you in this matter? For if those things that be concluded by Parliament, be by the consent of the moste parte of the Realme, bicause the peoples consent is there in their knightes of their shires, and other Burgeses (as in déede it is, whiche you also confesse) then haue you no more to saye in this matter: for the booke of ordering Ministers and Deacons. &c. is allowed and graunted by Parliament, and therefore the Bishops and Ministers of this Churche of England are chosen by the consent of the people, nay (which is more) of the whole Realme, bicause they are ordeyned and chosen according to that order and rule, whiche the whole realme in Parliament hath made and bounde them selues vnto.
                        But (by the way) if this grounde of lawe be good in that sense that you alleage it, and be transferred to the ciuill state, it will be founde very daungerous, and tootoo muche sauouring of popularitie: as in déede the whole course of your doctrine is.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 5. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 33. Sect. 1.
                     So is it also when the question is to choose the Magistrate, Mayre, or Bayliffe, or Constable of euery towne, whiche things if they haue groundes in ciuill affayres, they haue muche better in Ecclesiasticall. For it is muche more vnreasonable, that there shoulde be thrust vpon me, a gouernour, of whome the euerlasting saluation or damnation bothe of my body and soule dothe depende, than him of whome my wealth and commoditie of this lyfe dothe hang. Unlesse those vpon whome he were thrust, were fooles, or madde men, or children, without all discretion of ordering themselues, whiche as I will shewe, can not agree with those, that are the Churche of God, and are to haue a Pastor. For they of the Churche of God, althoughe they be called sheepe in respect of their simplicitie and harmlesnesse, yet are they also for their circumspection wise as serpentes, in the wisedome, especially whiche is to saluation: and howe No man 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           keth vi
                              〈1 line〉
                           e a
                              〈1 line〉
                           oūt of the people of God: but you partly of 
                              〈◊〉
                           , partly of popular affection, would haue it seeme so, thereby to 
                              〈◊〉
                            hatred agaynst vs. vyle accompte soeuer you will make of them, they are the people of God, and therefore spirituall, and foorthwith those of whome sainct1. Cor. 2. Paule sayth, the spirituall man discerneth all things.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The disorder of suche popular elections hathe bin suche, the contentions mouedElections by the multitu
                                 •
                              e are for ye most parte tumultuous. in them so great, the ambition of the persons standing in election so notorious, the partiall affection of the people inclining to their kinsfolkes, friendes, or landlords. &c. so vntollerable, to be short, the lacke of iudgement & discretion in many of them so apparant, that that maner of electing vpon great cōsiderations hath bin altred in diuers places, & desired to be altered in others also, by al those that are wise & discrete, & that wishe for quietnesse & good gouernment. Neither is it true, that the election of those officers which you name, is euery where in the people. In the best ordered Cities

and townes it is otherwise: and experience dothe teache, that those offices whiche are in the Princes bestowing, and some other to whome she committeth the same, are the best bestowed, and vpon the moste worthyest persons, as Bishoprikes, the offices of Iudges, Iustices. &c.
                        In ecclesiasticall affayres, it is muche méeter, that suche as haue knowledge, zeale, and care for the people, shoulde place ouer them a méete and fitte Pastor, than that the choyse of him should be committed to the multitude, whiche is not onely for the moste parte ignorant, but carelesse in suche matters, yea and oftentimes euill disposed, and commonly led by affection, as friendship, hatred, feare. &c.
                        I knowe that Christian men are not called sheepe bycause they be voyde of reason:Christiā men 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              eepe. For as Chrysostome saythe, 
                              Oues sunt, sed rationales, They are sheepe, but suche as are indued with reason. And god dothe at one tyme or other (if they be his) open hys truthe vnto them, and indueth them with the spirite of discerning betwixte true and false doctrine, in those things that doe pertayne to their saluation. But bicause God dothe in his good time open his truthe vnto them, are they therfore alwayes voyde of affection and errour? or bicause some haue this spirite of discretion, is it therefore common to all, or to the moste parte? In déede if you speake of the inuisible Church, which is onely of the electe, then is it something that you say: but if you speake of the visible Churche, whiche is a mixture of good and euill, and wherein the euill are the greater number, then hath your saying no probabilitie in it. And why may not the Pope as well reason of this place. 1. Cor. 2. that he can not erre in matters of religion,Scripture vn aptly alleaged by T. C. as you may, that Parishes can not be deceyued in electing their pastors? for he dothe alleage this texte for himselfe to the same purpose: but the meaning of the Apostle is this: that he onely whiche is ruled and gouerned by the spirite of God, hath the true knowledge of the mysteries of God, and is able to discerne the truthe from falshood. You can no more proue therefore, by this sentence, that the Parishes can not erre in choosing their Pastors, than the Pope may doe that himselfe, generall Councels, and the Churche can not erre: and surely the more I consider the matter, the more I maruell what your meaning is in alleaging this texts.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 5. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 33. Sect. 2.
                     Moreouer, reason and experience teacheth, that it maketh much to the profiting of the Church vnder the hande of the Pastor or Bishop, that the Churche loue him and reuerence him. For the contempte and hatred of the minister for the moste parte, standeth not in his owne person, but reacheth euen vnto the doctrine which he teacheth. But the Minister that the Churche desireth, it commonly best loueth and moste reuerenceth, and of the other side, hateth and contemneth him, that is thrust vpon them, therefore it maketh muche to the profiting of the people in the doctrine of the Gospell, that the minister come in, by their consent. Likewise, the people muste by S. Paule hys1. Tim. 4. rule, followe the good example of the Minister: but men wyll not likely followe their examples, whome they loue not, nor loue them, which are thrust vpon them agaynst their willes. Therefore it standeth with the good conuersation and godly following of the steppes of the minister, that he be with the consent of the Churche.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This reason is buylded vpon a false grounde: for it is certaine that many pastorsThe seconde reason examined. are dearely beloued of their flockes, whiche neither were elected by them, desired of them, nor knowne vnto them before. And I thinke verily that there is not one parish in England which doth the worse loue or reuerence their pastors in that respecte, excepts such only as you and your adherents haue inflamed, not only with the spirite of discorde, but of disdayne, and contempt also towards all lawes, orders, and persons, that be not in all poyntes framed according to their imaginations. But would you that a Papistical parish (suche as there may be diuers in England) should choose their Pastor, that they might loue him? Surely then would they not choose a Protestant. Or do men alwayes continue in louing of those, whom they haue chosen? You know that experience teacheth the contrary: so long only do they loue him, as he pleaseth

them, and serueth their affections, whiche bycause he neither can nor ought to doe, therefore their affection of loue is soone quenched: and they beginne to hate and to contemne hym, and the rather bycause they did choose him. For in that respecte they thinke him more bound to please them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 33. Sect. 3.
                     And if it should happen (which may come to passe) that any Church should desire or choose, or consente vpon by the moste parte, some that is vnmeete, eyther for doctrine or manners, then the ministers & Elders of the other Churches round about, should aduertise first, and afterwarde asWhere find 
                              〈◊〉
                            this maner and forme in the 
                              〈◊〉
                           . occasion shoulde serue, sharpely and seuerely charge, that they forbeare suche election, or if it be made, that they confirme it not, by suffering him to exercise any ministerie. And if eyther the Churches rounde about do fayle of this duetie, or the Churche whiche is admonished rest not in theyr admonition, then to bring it to the next Synode, and if it rest not therin, then the Prince or Magistrate, whiche muste see that nothyng in the churches be disorderly and wickedly done, ought to driue that Churche from that election to an other which is conuenient. Now I will examine the reasons whiche you adde to proue, that althoughe in times paste the churche choosed theyr ministers, yet now it must be otherwyse.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What scripture haue you to proue, that if the Parishes shoulde choose an vnmeeteT. C. in pretending scripture, bringeth in that which hath no warrante in scripture. minister, then the ministers and elders of other Churches should take in hande the matter &c. and if they wyll not, then to bring it to the nexte Synode: if that wyll not serue, then that the Prince or Magistrate must and ought to driue that Churche from that election, to an other more conuenient? Where haue you I say, either commaundement, or example of any suche order in the whole scripture? will you of your owne head and brayne take vpon you to prescribe a rule besides all Scripture? And dare you so boldly condemne an order taken by the common consent of so great a Churche as thys of Englande is, bycause it is not in all poyntes correspondent to some examples in the scripture? Men may sée if they be not blynde, what your meaning is. You thinke peraduenture that if this were once brought to passe, it should not be long or you were placed somewhere, according to your desyre. The like pollicie and practise hath bin vsed by others: looke Zuinglius in his Ecclesi.
                        
                        But to come to a néerer examination of this your deuise: First, you haue forgottenT. C. contrarie to himself. yourselfe, for a little before you proued by that which S. Paul sayth. 1. Cor. 2. 
                              Spiritulis omnia dijudicat: he that is spirituall discerneth all thyngs. &c. That they were spirituall,Pag. 33. Sect. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . and therefore coulde not be without discretion of ordering them selues in choosing their pastor: and nowe you say, if any churche shoulde by the most part choose some vnmeet man. &c. Whereby you confessr that they maye be deceyued, contrarie to your former wordes.
                        Secondly, your order is most vnperfitte, & full of intollerable inconueniences: forThe order which. T. C. prescribeth vn perfecte, & full of inconueniences. who shall complaine of this election to other Churches? And when cōplaint is made, who shall call them togither? when they be called togither, what order shal be taken for the auoyding of confusion & tumult? or who shal beare their charges? or in what place shal they méete, or how often? Likewise If the churches round about do faile in this duetie. &c. who shall bring it to the next Synode? or who shall summon the Synode? or in what place shal it be kept? or at what stay shall the parishes be for a pastor, vntill the matter be determined? or who shal complaine to ye Prince and magistrate? or what if the Prince will not driue them to a new election, but allow of the olde? Do you not sée of what disorder, contentions, tumults, & inconueniences this your disordered order would be the cause? For how many méetings of Churches should we haue? how many Synodes? what parts takyng? what running vp and downe? what losse of time? what cause of offence? what quarels? yea what not?
                        But amongst al other things you haue here appoynted to ye Prince or magistrateThe Princes authoritie diminished, and hir troubles encreased. a good office, that he must stand and behold al this, and in the end only driue the parish to a newe election, which also you say that he must doe. Throughout your whole booke you take from the ciuil Magistrate his whole authoritie in ecclesiasticall matters, & giue

vnto him no more, (as I haue before declared) than the very Papistes doe, that is potestatem facti, and not potestatem iuris. For he muste onely at your commaundement execute suche lawes and orders as you and your Seniors haue deuised. Agayne, considering the great number of Parishes in this realme, the varietie of mens myndes, the diuersitie of opinions in Religion, and the generall inclination in the heartes of men to dissent and disagrée among them selues, it can not be, but that in shorte space the Prince shoulde be ouerpressed and surcharged with the composing and ordering of these confused and tumultuous elections: so that she muste be constrayned to let passe the care of the gouernment of the common wealthe, and be wholly troubled with hearing and redressing these matters. Wherefore to conclude, if you haue no better reasons for your popular elections than these, I thinke it will be long before you can persuade any reasonable or wyse man, to subscribe vnto it. But nowe to the defense of my owne reasons.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The diuersitie betwixte the Apostles tymes and oures, requireth a diuers kinde of gouernment, and of ordeyning Ministers.
               
                  Chapter. 6. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 44. Sect. 2.
                     Fyrst, bicause in the Apostles tyme, the Churche was vnder the crosse, and therefore very fewe in comparison was there, that embraced the Gospell, and commonly they kept togither, or at the least met oftentimes, so that one of them was throughly knowne to another, and they them selues could best iudge who among them was the fittest to teache and instructe, hauing alwayes diuers fit for that function. Nowe the Churche is in prosperitie, and therefore the number that professeth, great, and dispersed into diuers places, and in moste parishes not one fitte for the ministerie among them, or knowne vnto them: so that they should call they knowe not whome
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 33. Sect. 4.
                     You say it was in the Apostles times vnder the crosse, and therfore fewe, and so mighte easily knowe one an other, who were fit for the ministerie. But you forget your selfe maruellously. For in the Apostles tymes, the Churche (I meane visible and sensible, for else howe coulde it be persecuted) was It is not so much to haue the Gospell sowen in many places, as to haue it generally receyued in a fewe. sowen not onely throughout all Asia (whiche is the greatest parte of the world) but throughe a great parte of Affrica, and no small portion of Europe, and now it is shut in a smal corner of Europe, beeing altogither banished out of Asia & Affrica: And therfore there are not the There be many mo Christians in profession nowe thā were at that time. For though the Gospell was then dispersed in many places, yet was it professed but of fewe persons tithe nowe, of thosethat professed the Gospell then, and what a conclusion is this, the Church were fewe in number, because they were vnder the crosse.
                     For to let passe both other scriptures, and stories ecclesiasticall, haue you forgotten that which is sayde in the first of Exodus, that the more the children of Israell were pressed and persecuted, the more they multiplied? Then you saye they kepte togither, and met often, and so knowing one another, were best able to iudge one of another. But heerein you speake as one that hath small experience of persecuted Churches, for in the time of persecution, the Christians that were in one great citie, were fayne to gather them selues out of all the corners, and from all the endes of the citie, to one place, beeing not able to deuide themselues into many parishes, both for other considerations, and because they were not able to maynteine many ministers, and Elders and Deacons, so that we reade that the Churche which was at Antioche, wrote vnto the Churche at Ierusalem, and that of Ierusalem vnto them of Antioche, and S. Paule to the Churche at Rome, at Ephesus, and at Philippos. &c. Which speeches do declare, that by al likelyhood, in one great citie, they had but This proueth that there were but fewe Christians in those cities, in respecte of the rest, that were not Christians. one congregation, and therefore that muste needes be scattered heere and there, and so could not haue the commoditie either of often meeting, or of knowing one an other, so wel, as where suche a citie is deuided into many Churches. Those that knowe the estate of Fraunce in the tyme of persecution, do well vnderstande, that euery Churche almost was gathered of townes, whereof some were sixe miles, some seauen, some more, from the place of meeting, and keeping their congregations. And therfore could not meete so often, nor knowe one an other so well, as we by the grace of God may do, which meete oftener, and in lesse number than they do.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I remember my selfe very well, and I also remember that no learned writer oldeThe multitude of Christians is nowe greater. or newe denyeth this to be true that I haue sayde: you onely saye that in the Apostles time the visible Church of Christ was sowne not onely throughout all Asia which is the greatest part of the world but a great part of Affrica and no smal portion of Europe, you proue it not, either by Scripture, storie, or anye good writer. The Gospell I graunte was preached in all these partes of the world, yet was it not generally receyued in any one part of the world, no not in any citie, not at Ierusalem, where all the Apostles were, not in any the least towne. There were Christians at Ierusalem, at Antioche, at Ephesus, at Rome. &c. But not the tenth part in any of these, or other places, in comparison to the Iewes, and the Gentils that were there, and not Christians. In the Apostles time the visible Church of Christ at Rome was but an handful in cōparison, to the times that followed, when the whole citie was christened and professed Christ, and had Christian Magistrats. I speake not of the dispersing of the Gospell into diuers places, which I know was in the Apostles time, for that commaundement had they of Christ, that they should goe into the whole world. &c. but I speake of the multitude of ChristiansMar. 16 gathered togither in one place. In the Apostles time (as I sayd before) no one country or kingdome, no one citie, no one towne, did wholy professe Christ, or for the most part: now whole kingdomes, whole countries, whole nations, professe him.
                        When Matthias was chosen, the whole Church, was gathered together in one place. And so was it when the Deacons were chosen. Which thing now is vnpossible, bycause of the multitude: so that thoughe the election mighte be by the whole Church in the Apostles time, when it was together in one place, yet can it not be so now, séeing it is vnpossible for any one kingdome to conteine it. It might wel be that the people in euery citie might méete in one place without confusion or tumult, in the Apostles time, when as scarce the. xx. part of the citie were Christians: but it cannot be so now, when whole cities professe Christ. Wherfore I speake of the multitude ofComparison made in respect of the multitude in one place, no
                                 〈1 line〉
                               dispersed. Christians gathered togither in one place, not of the multitude dispersed throughout the whole worlde, though it is not to be imagined that the number of the Christians then dispersed through the whole world, is comparable to the number of Christians which at this day be in Europe.
                        
                        Now few Christians was there at Ierusalem not long before it was destroyed, beyng aboue. 40. yeares after Christ? Doth not 
                              Eusebius Lib. 3. cap. 5. testifie that they all were receiued into a little towne called Pella? and yet the Apostles had spent muche time and labour in preaching there: but the number of such as did not professe Christ was infinite in that citie at that time, if we beléeue histories, and especially Iosephus 
                              de bello Iuda. Lib. 7. cap. 17. wherfore your opinion of the multitude of Christians in the Apostles time, in comparison to those that be now, is but a very dreame.
                        It is a very good reason to say, that bycause the Churche was then vnderPersecution doth both diminishe & increase ye number of professors. the Crosse, therefore fewe in comparison embraced the Gospell (for sodde I say) bycause notwithstanding the number of true professors doe increase rather than diminishe in the time of persecution, yet is it not so with hypocrites, and dissemblers, who would séeme to professe the Gospell, and whom also we must count professors, bycause we sée not their hartes. This is manifest by this example. In the time of King Edward when the Gospell was in prosperitie, how many was there in London that séemed to be earnest and zealous professors of the same: but when the time of persecution came vnder Quéens Marie, what became of that number? howe fewe was there then in comparison? doe you not thinke that if God should send a triall there would be founde in that citie many false brethren? Moreouer in the time of prosperitie true Christians may without daunger shew themselues, and remaine in their cities, though the number be neuer so great: but in the time of persecution they are dispersed into sundry places.
                        We may learne in the. 8. of the Actes, that the Churche wholy remayned at Ierusalem,

vntill that persecution wherin Paule was a doer, and that then they were dispersed: shall we not then say that at Ierusalem the number of Christians by reason of persecution, were few in comparison? True it is that this dispersing was the cause why the Church of Christ was more enlarged, yet in the meane time was the number of Christians at Ierusalem meruelously diminished. Thus then you maye vnderstande if you please, that this is a good reason to say, the Church was then in persecution, and therefore very few incomparison, that embraced the Gospell, both in the respect of the visible Church generally, and also in respect of the same Churche particularly in euery ceuntrey or citie. And yet it is true that 
                              Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae, The bloud of Martyrs is the seede of the Churche, but that séede must haue time to grow in: and I speake of the externall professors of the Gospell.
                        That which you write to ouerthrow my words touching the kéeping together and often méeting of such Churches as be persecuted, confirmeth my meaning, for I saye they kept together in the time of persecution, and you affirme the same, wherevpon I also conclude, that therfore one of them must of necessitie be well knowne to another. And althoughe our assemblies in time of prosperitie be peraduenture as frequent asConference in the time of per secution, is a cause of better knowing one another. theirs is, or rather more frequent, yet haue we not such occasion to conferre one with another, or to consider one another, or to knowe one another as they haue, for they then admitte none into their societie at their méetings, but such as are knowen to be brethren, and of whose Religion and zeale they haue good tryall. And I thinke that those which haue béen exercised eyther in Fraunce, or elsewhere, in any suche time of persecutiō, know this to be true, that they know none so throughly, or are acquainted with none so intirely, as with such who haue béen with them in the time of persecution. You would fayne if you coulde, confute a knowne truth, and a manifest thing: for who would denie, but that such as kepe together in the time of persecution, muste of necessitie be knowne among themselues, and beste iudge who is fittest among them, for any function?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the second Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 44. Sect. 3.
                     Secondly in the Apostles time, all or the most that were ChristiansThe church now full of Hypocrits. &c. were vertuous and godly, and suche as dyd sincerely professe the worde, and therfore the election of their pastour might safely be committed to them: nowe the Church is ful of Hypocrites, dissemblers, drunkardes, whoremongers. &c. so that if anye election were committed to them, they woulde be sure to take one lyke to themselues.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page, 34. Sect. I.
                     To your second difference I answere, that in deede there be Hypocrites in our Churches now, and so were there then, but more nowe than then: I graunt you that also, but there is no greate daunger in them, as touching the election of the minister or Bishop, for that in such open and publike actions that come into the eyes of all men, there is no good man will doe so sincerely, so holily, as they will doe, although it be fainedly. The hurt that they doe, is in closer and secreter matters. But where you say our Churches are full of drunkards and whoremongers: besides that you vtter or euer you be aware, how euill successe the preaching of the Gospell hath had here (for want of discipline and good Ecclesiasticall gouernmenie) you bewraye a greate ignorance. For althoughe(a) A daungerous assertion tending to the doctrine of the Anabaptistes. there be Hypocrites, which beare the face of godly men in the churche, whose wickednesse is onely knowne to God, and therefore can not be discouered by men, yet in (*) the churches of Christ, there be no drunkardes nor whoremongers, at least which are knowne. For eyther vpon Admonition of the Churche they repent, and so are neyther drunkardes nor whoremongers, or else they

are cutte off by excommunication (if they continue stubberne in their synnes) and so are none of the Churche, and therefore haue nothing to doe in the election of the Minister of the Churche. And me thinketh you shoulde not haue bene ignorant of this, that although there be tares in the floure of the Church, which are lyke the wheate, and therefore being grounde, easily meeteth togetherMat. 13. in the loafe, yet there are no acornes which are bread for swine. And although there be goat
                           〈1 line〉
                        s amongst the flocke of the Churche, bycause they haue some likelyhoode with the sheepe, feedyng asMat. 25. they doe, giuing milke as they doe, yet in the Churche of Christ there are no swine, nor hogges, it pertaineth to God onely to seuer the tares from the wheate, and the goates from the sheepe: but the Churches can discerne betwene wheate and acornes, betwene swine and sheepe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There be not onely Hypocrites (which deale syncerely in nothing, no not in publyke actions) but there be such also as be corrupt both in Religion and life, who woulde no doubte be as corrupt in elections (if they might haue to doe therein) as they are in other matters.
                        In saying that the Church is now ful of Hypocrites, drunkards, whoremongers.Drunkards & whoremōgers in the visible churche. &c. I derogate no more from the good successe that the preaching of the Gospell hath had, than the lyke, or greater faultes dyd, from the same in the Churche of Corinthe, and Galatia. The Churche is a net that gathereth together of all kinde of fyshe Mat. 13. it is a fielde wherein the deuill soweth tares as fast as the husbandeman goodMat. 13. Mat. 22. Mat. 7. corne: and for one that profitably heareth the word of God, thrée doe the contrary, as the parable of the sower declareth. There be many called but fewe chosen: And the gate is wyde that leadeth to perdition: therefore it is no discredite to the Gospell, or to the preaching thereof, nor yet to the good gouernment of the Church, to haue many wicked and vngodly persons, which cannot possible be rooted out, vntill the time of Harnest: but this hath béen alwayes an Anabaptisticall cauill against the true Church of Christ, and lawfull gouernment thereof, as Bullinger declareth Lib. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . aduersus Anabap.
                           Bullinger. And vndoubtedly if this were a good argument to proue that the Gospell is not preached sincerely, then Esai, Ieremie, and other of the Prophetes, which had preached among the people many yeares, and smally preuayled with them, either concerning doctrine or manners, preached not sincerely.
                        Wheras you say that in the Church of Christ there be no drunkards or whoremongers, at the least which are knowne. &c. either doe you greatly ouershoote your selfe, and forget the great crimes that were knowne to be in the Church of Corinthe: or else woulde you secretly bring in the error of the Anabaptistes, which say, that, not to be the true Church of Christ in the which there appeareth manifest crymes: for the declaration of theA branch of Anabaptisme. which error and confutation also, I referre you to the thirde booke of Bul▪ aduersus Anabap and the. 2. and. 3. chapter: where you may likewise learne what profite hath cenie to this and the like Churches, where the Gospell is professed by the preaching of the word, though many wicked still remaine in the same. I graunt you that these vyces when they be knowne ought to be punished: But if, eyther bycause those that be in authoritie doe not their duetie therein, or else those vices continue notwithstanding, therfore you will conclude that this is not the Church of Christ, I tell you plainely, that you haue already entred into one branche of Anabaptisme.
                        It cannot be denyed but that the euill are continually mirt with the good in thys world, euen in the most purest Church: and that then they abound especially, when the Gospell is in prosperitie: so that this is a good cause why the election of ministers may not safely be committed to the common people.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the third Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition Pag. 44. Sect 4.
                     Thirdly, in the Apostles time, all that professed Christ had knowledge,The people now ignorant, and not able to iudge. and wereable to iudge who were meete to be theyr pastour.

Nowe the most be ignorant and wythout iudgement in suche matters.
                  
                  
                     T. C▪ Pag. 34. Sect. 2.
                     If they had knowledge then, it was bycause they were taughte, and that they are ignorantYou make a digression, and answere not the reason. nowe, it is bycause they haue no good ministers to teache them, and if the Churches should choose their ministers, I am sure they could not choose worse, than for the most part, they haue nowe, being thrust vpon them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        They were then diligently taughte, and they gaue them selues wholy to learne, bycause it was a time of persecution, in the which men be commonly beste disposed, and sequestred (as it were) from all worldly cares, lookyng continually to fall into the handes of the persecutors: nowe, thoughe they be in diuerse places well taught, yet bycause they haue not suche a sense, and féeling of the worde in the tyme of prosperitie, as they haue vnder the crosse (when the Churche of Christe is purest) the election of theyr Ministers can not be so safely committed vnto them nowe, as it myghte be then. But why haue you not answered my reason? for as yet that is vntouched.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 45. Sect. 1.
                     Fourthly, in the Apostles tyme there was in the Churche no Idolaters,The churche now full of Papistes and Atheistes. &c. no superstitious persons, no Papistes: nowe the Church is full of Papistes, Atheistes, and suche lyke, who seeth not therfore what straunge ministers we should haue, if the election of thē, were committed to their seuerall parishes?
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 34. Sect. 3.
                     I see that when a man is out of his waye, the further he goeth the worse. Before you placed in the churche whoremongers and drunkardes, as filthie swine in the Lordes courtes, nowe you bryng in Papistes, Idolaters, and Atheistes whyche are not onely filthie, but also poysoned and venomed beastes. I am not ignorant of that distinction, whyche sayth that there be in the Churche, whiche are not of the Churche, and those are Hypocrites as is before sayde: but I woulde gladly learne of you, what Scripture there is to proue, that Idolaters and Papistes and Atheistes are in the Churche. when Saynte PauleThe place is not rightly vn
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . calleth all suche without the churche and wyth whome the Churche hathe nothyng to doe, nor they with the churche: you mighte as well haue placed in the churche, Wolues, Tigers, Lions, and Beares, that is tyrants and persecutors. For those ye speake of, and (in the iudgement of men and of the churche) as well shut oute of it as they, in the eye of the Lorde, they maye be of the churche, and so maye and are sometymes the persecutors them selues: so that the election of the churche, is not, nor oughte not to be hyndered by those that haue nothyng to doe wyth it. But nowe I heare you aske me, what then shall become of the Papistes and Atheistes, if you will not haue them be of the churche? I answere that they mayThis is true in the common wealth of the Turke
                              〈1 line〉
                           , but not in this common wealth. be of, and in the common wealth, whiche neyther may, nor can be of, nor in the churche: And therefore the churche hauing nothyng to doe with suche, the MagistrateWhere finde you this (ought▪) oughte to see, that they ioyne to heare the Sermons in the place where they are made, whether it be in those parishes where there is a churche, and so preaching, or where else he shall thinke beste, and cause them to be examined, howe they profitte, and if they profit not, to punishe them, and as their contempt groweth, so to encrease the punishment, vntill suche tymes as they declare manifest tokens of vn
                           〈1 line〉
                        epentantnesse, and then as rotten members, that doe not onely no good, nor seruice in the body, but also corrupt and infect others, cut them off. And if they do profit in hearing, then to be adioyned vnto that church, which is next the place of their dwelling.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.How Papist
                                 〈1 line〉
                               &c. be in the Church.
                        
                        You muste of necessitie admitte this distinction (some be of the Church, and some be only in the Church) else can you not make any visible Church, for we only know, who be in the Churche: but who be of the Churche is knowne to him alone, who knoweth those that be his. If they communicate with vs in hearing the worde, and receyuing the Sacramentes, thoughe otherwyse they be drunkardes, supersticious, or infected with errours in doctrine. &c. yet must we count them in the Church, vntil they be cut of from it by excommunication. Wherefore whoremōgers, Papistes, Idolatrous and superstitious persons, though they be knowne to be suche (if they do cōmunicate with vs in the word and sacraments) are to be counted in the Church, vntill they be orderly secluded from the same. And yet there may be Papistes, Atheistes, and suche lyke, though they be not commonly knowne to be suche. And you knowe well inough, that they which in déede are Papistes in opinion, yet if they be content to conforme them selues to the outwarde orders of the Churche, would stande in their owne defense agaynst him that should accuse them.They 
                                 〈◊〉
                               are in the Church, and not of the Church, are not hypocrite
                                 〈1 line〉
                               onely. T. C. eueth & place agaynst himselfe.
                        
                        Neither is it true that onely hypocrites are suche as be in the Churche, and are not of the Churche. That chapter which you quote in your margent, and almost the whole Epistle doth declare the contrarie. For the incestuous Corinthian was in the Church, vntill he was excommunicated. And the Apostle there speaking of whoremongers, Idolaters. &c▪ sayth: 
                              Si quis cum frater appelletur fuerit s
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ortator. &c. If any whiche is called
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . Cor. 5. a brother, be a fornicatour, or couetous, or an Idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkarde, or an extortioner, with suche one eate not. By the name of brethren were those onely then called, whiche did professe themselues to be Christians, and were so accounted to be. And master Caluine speaking agaynst the like errour of the Anabaptistes, after that he had spoken of hypocrites in the Churche, addeth and sayth: 
                              Nonnunquàm etiam admixti
                              Caluin aduers. Anabap. 
                              contemptores dei vitae dissolutae, & flagitiosae, aut qui sibi cauebunt, ne reprehendantur ab hominibus, sed interim ostendunt se nullo dei timore, nulla reuercntia tangi: Oftentimes also there are mingled contemners of God, men of dissolute and wicked life, or suche as wil be sure to keepe them selues out of daunger of mens reprehension, when as notwithstanding they shewe themselues not to be touched with any feare or reuerence of God.
                        
                        If you meane that place. 1. Cor. 5. where S. Paule sayth: 
                              Si quis cum frater appelletur. &c. If any man which is called a brother. &c. and thinke that thereby they are secluded from the externall societie of the Churche, you take the words of S. Paule amisse, as the Anabaptistes did: to whome (obiecting that place) M. Caluine answered in his booke written agaynst them, in this maner: 
                              Quòd autem vetat Paulus cum his cibum sumere
                              Ibidem 
                              qui sunt vitae dissolutae, id ad priuatam consuetudinem pertinet, nō ad publicam cōmunionem. VVheras Paule forbiddeth that we should eate with them which are of a dissolute life and behauiour, that perteyneth onely to priuate familiaritie, and not to the publike cōmunion. Nowe if we ought to receyue the Communion with them, we ought also to accompt them in the externall societie of the Churche. But why do you thus séeke to shifte of those matters, whiche you can not answere? Is it not certayne that there is in the externall societie of the Churche a farre greater number of suche, than there was in the Apostles time? whiche if it be true (as it can not be denied) then do I still affirme that the election of the minister can not be safely committed to the people.
                        It is wel that you take vpō you to prescribe vnto the Magistrate how to deale with such as be not in the Church: I pray you where finde you any such maner of dealing towards them, appoynted vnto the ciuill Magistrate? if you haue any scripture for it, why do you not alleage it? if you haue none, what presumption is entred into you, thus imperiously to prescribe lawes vnto Magistrates? But what if there be playne scripture, that they ought not to be admitted to the hearing of the worde, if they beMath. 7. dogges and swine: what say you to this? Giue not that which is holy to dogges: neither cast ye your pearles to swyne.
                        
                        Your distinction betwixte the Churche and the common wealthe, if it were in Neroes

or Dioclesians time mighte be admitted withoute exception, but in my opinion it is not so fytte in thys tyme, and especially in this kingdome. Maye he be a member of a Christian common wealth, that is not in the Church of Christ? if you had sayde that he maye be in the power, and at the wyll and pleasure of a Christian Magistrate, that is not in the Churche of Christe, I coulde well haue lyked of it: but it can not yet synke into my head that he should be a member of a Christian common wealth, that is not also a member of the Churche of Christ, concerning the outwarde societie. M. Musculus in my iudgement speaketh truely agaynst this distinction of yours betwixte the Church and a Christian common wealth in his com. pla. 
                              
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 it. de magistra. Let the Ethnikes and Infidels liuing not in the vnitie of truth, but in the confusionMusculus. of errors, haue diuerse Magistrates and lawmakers, some prophane, and some holy, bycause their lyfe is altogether prophane, and their Religion nothing else but superstition. Christian people are in euery respecte holy, and consecrated vnto the name and glory of Christ, not in temples onely, and ecclesiasticall ceremonies, but in all their lyfe, in euerye place, at all times, in all things, actions and studyes: that according to the Admonition of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 10. whether he eateth or drinketh, or whatsoeuer he doth, he doth it to the glorie of God. &c. wherfore that distinction of ecclesiasticall and prophane lawes, can haue no place in it, bycause there is nothing in it that is prophane, seyng that it is a holy people vnto the Lorde God, and the Magistrate is holy and not prophane, his authoritie holy, hys lawes holy. &c. be it therefore farre from the Church of Christ that it should be partly holy, partly prophane. &c. But all this from the purpose, and you make to many friuolous digressions from the matter which compelleth me also in following you, to doe the lyke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 45. Sect. 2.
                     Fiftly, in the Apostles time there was no Churche established, beingIn the Apostles time no church established, and no christian Magistrate. then no Christian Magistrates, and therefore the state of the Church was popular: nowe there is Christian Magistrates, and a Church established, and subiect to rulers. &c.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 35. Sect. 1.
                     If there be no churches established, bycause there were no Christian Magistrates, then the churches of the Apostles were not established. And it is absurde to say that the Ministers nowe with the helpe of the Magistate, can laye surer foundations of the churche, or builde more cunningly or substancially, than the Apostles could, which were the maister builders of the church of God, and as for the consūmation of the body of the church, and the beautie of it, seyng it consisteth in Iesus Christ, which is the head, that is alwayes ioyned vnseparably in all times of the crosse, and not the crosse wyth his body, which is the church. I can not see why the churches vnder persecution should not be established, hauing both the foundation and the nethermost partes, as also the toppe, & hyghest parte of the churche, as well as those which haue a christian Magistrate. If in deede the Magistrate, whom God haue sanctified to be a 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ourse vnto his churche, were also the head of the same, then the churche coulde not be established without the Magistrate, but we learne that althoughe the godly The Magistrat is head of the common wealth, and but a mēber of the Church by T. C. his iudgement. Magistrate be the head of the common wealthe, and a great ornament vnto the churche, yet he is but a member of the same. The churche may be established without the Magistrate, and so that all the worlde, and all the deuils of hell can not shake it, but it can not be in quiet, in peace, and in outwarde suretie, without a godly Magistrate. And therefore the churche in that respect and suche lyke prayseth God and prayeth for the Magistrate, by the which it enioyeth so singular benefites. Therevpon you conclude, that the churche was then popular, whiche is as vntrue as the former parte. For the churche is gouerned wyth that kynde of gouernment, which the Philosophers that wryte of the beste common wealthes, affirme to be the best. For in respecte of Christe the head it is a Monarchie, and in respecte of the auncientes and pastoures, that gouerne in common, and wyth like authoritie amongst them selues, it is an Aristocratie, or the rule of the beste menne▪ and in respecte that the people are not secluded but haue theyr interest in

Churche matters, it is a Democratie, or a popular estate. An image whereof appeareth also is the pollicie of this realme, for as in respecte of the Queene hir Maiestie, it is a Monarchie, so in respect of the most honourable Councell, it is an Aristocratie, and hauyng regarde to the Parliament, whiche is assembled of all estates, it is a Democratie. But you shoulde haue shewed howe thys difference of hauing a Christian Magistrate, and hauing none, oughte to bryng in a diuersitie, in the choyse of the Pastor by theyr churche: it were not harde if one woulde spende his tyme so vnprofitably, to fynde out an hundred differences, betweene a persecuted Churche, and that whiche is in peace, but seeyng you can shewe me no reason, why the Churche maye not choose her ministers, as well vnder a godlie magistrate, as vnder a tyrant, I wyll be bold to shewe you, howe that if it were lawefull to breake the order of God, it were meeter in the tyme of persecution, that the election shoulde be in some others, discreate and learned persons handes, to bee made without the consente of the churche, than in that tyme when there is a godlie magistrate, and that it is then most conuenient to be chosen by the churche.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There was then no Churche established in any Ciuill gouernment, bycauseHow the Church was not established in the Apostles time. the Magistrates did then persecute, and not defende the Churche. The Churche in the Apostles tyme was established in doctrine moste perfectly: in discipline, gouernment, and ceremonies, as was conuenient for that tyme, and as the Church maye be in tyme of persecution: but the tyme was not yet come, wherof the PropheteEsay. 49. sayde: Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Princes shall be thy nursing mothers: therfore it was not established in any ciuill gouernment, neyther did it so publikcly and openly shewe it selfe. The Gospell and the Church was in Queene Maries tyme here in Englande, but it was persecuted, not established, not maynteyned, not allowed of, nor professed by the publike magistrate, and the lawes of the lande: and therefore of necessitie a greate difference betwixte the gouernmente of it then, and the gouernmente of it nowe: the outwarde shewe of it then, and the outward shewe of it nowe: the placing of Ministers then, and theT. C. often offendeth in ignorance of the Eiench▪
                            placyng of them nowe. My meanyng and my woordes be playne, you needed not to haue offended agayne (as almoste contynually you doe) in the ignorance of the Elench whylest you doo not reason nor answere ad idem.
                        
                        If you speake of the Churche, as it is a communion and societie of the faithfull and elect onely: and of the gouernment thereof, as it is onely spirituall, then is it moste certaine, that the Churche is as thoroughly established, as perfectely gouerned, as gloriously decked and beautified in the tyme of persecution, as it is or can be vnder the ciuill Magistrate: But if you speake of the externall societie of the Churche, which comprehendeth bothe good and euill, and of the outwarde gouernment of it, then neyther it is, nor can be in suche perfecte state, nor so thoroughly established, or outwardly adorned in the tyme of the Crosse, as it is and may be vnder a Christian Prince. The ignorance of thys distinction of the Church, and of the gouernment thereof (of the whiche I haue spoken more at large in anTract. 2. other place) causeth you to fall into so many and so grosse erroures concernyng the same.
                        You saye, that if the Ciuile Magistrate were the head of the Churche. &c. ChristeThe Prince head of the Church. onely, and properly is the head of the Churche, for it is hys body, but yet in the respecte of the externall societie of the same, and the Supreme authoritie that is gyuen of GOD to the Prince, ouer his people in all causes, he maye bée also in that respecte called the head of the Churche. &c.
                        
                           Chrysostom. in Epistol. ad Philip. Homel. 13. gyueth thys name to certaine women,Chrysost. of whome he sayeth thus: 
                              Videntur mibi istae mulieres caput fuisse Ecclesiae quae illic erat: These women seeme to mee to haue bin the head of the Churche which was there. And therfore a learned mā answering Hosius, who reproued Vergerius for mouing yt kingIaco. Andraea▪
                           
                           
of Polonia to take vopen hym to be the head of that Churche, sayeth on thys sorte: As the Churche of Christ in earth is but one bodie, so hathe it but one head (as the Apostle teacheth) which is Iesus Christe, who is always present with his Churche, and gouerneth it with his holie spirite &c. but bicause this Church being visible, is not onely ruled by the worde, but by the sworde of the magistrate also, appointed by God, therefore wee saye, there are so manie heades of Churches, as there are gouernours of countreys. So that you sée the magistrate to be the head and chief gouernour of a particular church in this respect, that it is a visible societie, and must haue besides the spirituall, an externall gouernment also: whereof bicause the ciuill Magistrate is the head and chief, therefore it can not be therin established without the ciuil magistrate. Your spare speches for the authoritie of the Magistrate in the gouernment of the Church, I will note in a seuerall place by themselues, and therfore doe I the lyghtlyer passe them ouer in this place: In the meane tyme this is no good argument to saye, that the Magistrate is but a member of the Churche, therefore he is not the heade and chiefe gouernoure thereof in earth: for the head though it be the chiefe, yet is it a parte of the bodie. But you still confounde the visible and inuisible Churche of Christe, the spirituall and externall gouernment of the same, which confusion maye make you seeme to say something, to suche as doe not diligently consider it, when in very déede you say nothing, to the ouerthrowe of any thing that I haue answered.
                        The Churche may be established without the magistrate touching true faith, and the spirituall gouernment of it by Christe in the hearte and conscience of man,How yt church may be established without a Magistrate. but not touching the visible societie, and the externall gouernment. Upon this confusion also is that grounded whiche followeth, that the Churche in the respect of Christ the head is a Monarchie. &c. For when I sayde that the state of the Churche was popular in the Apostles tyme, I spake of the outward forme, shewe, and gouernment of it: which therefore I call popular, bycause the Churche it selfe, that is the whole multitude, had interest almost in euery thing, especially whylest the Churche yet remained at Ierusalem.
                        I knowe that all these thrée kyndes of gouernmentes maye bée mixte together after dyuers sortes, but yet the state of gouernment is named according to that whiche moste ruleth, and beareth the greatest sway: as when matters are moste commonly gouerned by the consent of the more parte of the people, the state is called popular: when by diuers of the best and wysest, it is called optimorum status, when by one it is called a Monarchie: as in thys Realme in the Courte of Parliamente, althoughe all the states be represented, yet bycause the iudgemente, confirmation, and determination resteth in the Prince, therefore the state is neyther Aristocratie, nor Democratie, but a Monarchie: Euen so in the Apostles time, (especiallye, as I haue sayde, whylest the Churche remayned at Hierusalem) thoughe they myghte be counted Optimates, yet bycause moste thyngs in gouernmente were doone by the consente of the people, therefore the state for that tyme was popular.
                        You saye, that I shoulde haue shewed howe thys difference of hauyng a Christian Magistrate, and hauyng none, oughte to bryng in a diuersitie in the choyse of the Pastor by the churches: I haue shewed you before the reasons of it: And nowe I adde this, that for as muche as the Magistrate is the chiefe and principall Gouernoure of the Churches vnder Christe, and oughte to haue a speciall care and regarde to and for the same: It is not méete that anye thyng touching the gouernmente of the Churches, or any publyke function perteyning therevnto, shoulde bée otherwyse doone, than he shall thynke conuenient and profitable for the present state of it. And therefore well sayeth M. Musculus in his common places, 
                              titu. de verbi ministris,
                              Musculus. It is not conueniente that those thinges whyche are publikely to bee doone, or which concerne the people subiecte vnto them, or to bee shorte, are suche as concerne Religion, and in that respecte perteyne vnto them (excepte wee will saye with the fantasticall Anabaptistes, that Christians may not bee Magistrates) should be done without the

consent and knowledge of the ciuile Magistrate. And againe, wherefore for the condition of tyme, necessitie required, that the Magistrates and Princes by the meanes of a fewe men, which were of excellent iudgement, and had a care that the Church of Christ should be prouided for, might herevnto be induced, that they might appoint faithfull and learned Pastours ouer their subiects. And titulo de magistratibus,
                            speaking of the Ciuil magistrate he sayth, Firste, that he shoulde place ministers of Churches where they are wanting, whether he chooseth them himselfe, or confirmeth them whiche are chosen of others by his commaundement: For it is not conuenient, that any man should take vpon him anye publike offices in the Church, without the authoritie of the publike magistrate. But (you will saye) it was otherwise in the primitiue Churches, in whiche the prelates of the Churches were chosen of the ministers and the people: I answere: Suche was then the state of the Churches, that the ministers were not otherwise to be chosen, bicause they had not a Christian magistrate: if you call backe the manners of those tymes, first call backe the conditions and state of them also. The Prince hath to sée that all thyngs be doone in the Churche orderly, and profitably, and therfore hath he the altering and changing of suche elections.
                        Your offering of an hundreth differences betwene a persecuted Churche, and that whiche is in peace, shall goe with that bragge whiche you vsed 
                              Fol. 22. where you offered twentie to one. &c. But to what purpose make you this offer? the more differences there are betwéene them, the more is my cause iustifyed. But you will be bolde to shewe meehow that if it were lawfull to breake the order of God. &c. and I will also be as bolde to answere your reasons seuerally.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 36. Sect. 1.
                     In the tyme of persecution a churche chooseth an vnlearned minister, or one that is wicked in lyfe, howesoeuer it be, he is vnfit, the Churches rounde aboute by their ministers or Elders, admonishe this churche of her faulte, and moue to correcte it, the Churche will not by no meanes be admonished, what can now the other churches doe in the tyme of persecution? if they excommunicate the whole churche, it is a harde matter, and yet if they maye doe that, there is all they can doe: the euill is not remedied, which may be easily taken away, where there is a godly Magistrate, and the Churche (as is before sayd) compelled to a better choyse. So you see that there areThis is but one and yet none in deede: for the case you put is verie vnlikely se the tyme you speake of. inconueniences in the choosing of the Pastor and other the gouernours of the churche, by the churche, in the tyme of persecution, which are not in the tyme of peace, vnder a christian Magistrate.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is your only reason, to proue that in a Churche persecuted, it is méeter for the Minister to be chosen without the consent of the Churche, than in a Church béeing in prosperitie. And surely it is euen lyke to your reasons in other matters: for first, that whiche you saye of the Churches rounde aboute (for admonishing, correcting, or excommunicating that Churche, that shall choose an vnméete minister) is not to bée founde in all the Scripture, either in commaundement or example, and it is a méere deuise of your owne head.
                        Secondly, it is moste vnlyke, that the Church in the time of persecution should choose an vnméete or a wicked minister: bycause those that be persecuted themselues be godly, and well disposed, and carefull to haue suche a one, as they may safely committe themselues vnto. For thoughe in the tyme of persecution there maye bée some hypocrites, that will for a tyme ioyne themselues with the Godlie, yet the moste parte doe of a conscience that whyche they doe, else woulde they not endure persecution: wherefore if euer the election of theyr minister may safely be committed vnto them, it may then so be especially. Lastely, in the tyme of persecution, they haue no Magistrate, they be all equall, neyther is one bounde to

obey another by any ciuill lawe, none hathe chiefe and speciall care ouer the rest, as Magistrate to compell: wherfore it can not be otherwyse then, but that suche offices and functions should be chosen by a common consente, neyther can there be therein, in that tyme, the halfe parte of inconuentences that are in the same, in tyme of prosperitie, as any man of any consideration may euidently perceyue.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the seuenth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 36. Sect. 2. 3.
                     Nowe I will shewe you Where find you that I thinke so. whiche thinke that the consent of the Churche in their minister, can not stande with the time of a christian magistrate, that it hath not onely stoode, but hath bene confirmed in their tymes and by them. In codice Iustiniani it is thus written, following the doctrine of the holie Apostles The words of this constitution are craftily suppressed. &c. we ordeyne, that as often as it shall fall out, that the ministers place shall be boyd in any citie, that voyces be gyuen of the inhabiters of that citie, that he of thrce (which for their right faith, holynesse of life, and other good things are most approued) should be chosen to the Bishoprike which is the most meete of them. Also Carolus Magnus, which was the first Germaine(a) He was Fran corum non Germanorum primus Imperator: for Conradus his nephwe, & Otho did fyrst trāslate the empire from Fraunce to Germanie▪ as some thynke. Emperoure in. 63. distinct. sacrorum canonum saith, being not ignorant of the holy Canons, that the holy Church in ye name of God should vse hir honoure the freelyer, we assent vnto ye ecclesiasticall order, that the Byshops be chosen by election of the Cleargie and people, according to the statutes of the canons of that diocesse.
                     In the. 63. distinction it appeareth, that Ludouicus Carolus his sonne decreed, that he shoulde be Byshop of Rome, whome all the people of Rome should consent to choose.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Where do I say that the consent of the Church in the choise of their minister, cannot stande with the time of a Christian magistrate? I haue said that howsoeuer in the Apostles time, that kind of electing ministers was conueniente, now in thys state of the Churche it were pernitious and hurtfull: whiche to be moste true, the differences of the times before by me alleadged, do proue. The ciuill magistrate may committe this election to such as he liketh best, and may vse that maner and kind of choise, which he thinketh to be most conuenient for that Church, whereofThe proofes of T. C. improue his purpose. he hath the chiefe care next vnto God: And these proofes that you here bring in to iustify your cause, in my opinion do quite ouerthrow the same. For it appeareth to haue bin in the power of Emperours and ciuill magistrates, to appoynte the maner and forme of suche elections: why else shoulde they haue néeded to make any lawes or constitutions for that matter? It is true that Musculus Lo. com. tit. de magistra.
                            speaking of the ciuill Magistrate sayth, 
                              Prudenter autem & magna. &c. But he muste wisely and verieMuscul. warilye order the election of ministers, seeking nothyng else but that the flock of the Lorde might be prouided for. He shall choose not only suche men as are holie, but such as are also able to teach. He shal flee simonie more than a dog or snake But he shal vse that maner of election, which may be most profitable for the Churches: And, for somuche as hee is not able of himselfe to doe all things which perteine herevnto, he shall vse the helpe, and aide of faithfull men, and of those that feare God, vppon whose shoulders he may laye the care or burthen, whether they bee within the order of the ministerie of the woorde or of an other profession, but notwithstanding in suche sorte, that he him selfe doe know them whiche are chosen, and if they seeme meete do by his authoritie and power confirme them.
                        
                        But to come to your authorities. The words that you do alleadge in codice Iustiniani,
                           T. C. subtilly concealeth the words of his author that make agaynst hym. must somewhere else be sought for, I thinke your authoure Illiricus is deceyued in quoting that place: for surely I cannot vnderstand that they are to be founde in that booke. But from what authoure soeuer they come, you haue subtillie left out the words that expound his meaning and make directly against you. Wherefore I will recite them worde for word as they are reported in Illiricus, the authoure, out of whome you haue borowed them: 
                              Sequentes igitur doctrinam. &c. Folowing the doctrine

of the holy Apostles, in that, that most pure and vncorrupt Priests ought to be chosen, which are appoynted for that cause chiefly, that by their prayers they might obtayne the fauoure of the most mercifull God towardes common wealthes: we do decree by this present constitution, that as often as it shall happen the roome of any priest to be voyde, the inhabitants of the same citie shall giue their voyces of three, which in true faith, holynesse of life, and in all other good things are approued and allowed of, that of these, he whiche shall be moste meete, might be chosen Byshop. The Emperoure saith that he followeth the doctrine of the Apostles in this, that they prescribe what maner of men are to be chosen (sci
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 integerrimi & incorruptissimi most pure and most vncorrupt.) not in the maner or kinde of electing, as you would séeme to make the Reader beléeue in noting these words only (folowing ye doctrine of the holy Apostles) and leauing out that which foloweth, & declareth wherein he meant to folow their doctrine, namely (de eo quòd debeant eligi integerrimi: in that that they whiche are most pure ought to be chosen. &c.) For else why dothe he adde and saye, 
                              sancimus we haue decreed: and not rather, they haue decréed? But the words that follow are most playne: 
                              quoties sacerdotalem sedem &c. as oft as it shall happen that the roome of a Priest shall be voyd, the inhabitants of that citie shall giue their voices of three. &c. for where did the Apostles euer appoint, that thrée should stand in the election? or what example haue you of it in the whole scripture? so that you sée héere no one prescript rule or example of the Apostles in all poynts folowed, but that order to be taken, and law made by the Emperoure, whiche he thought for that state and time of the Church to be most conuenient.
                        
                           In Nouellis he séemeth to declare what is meant by the inhabiters of that citie: forConstitutio
                                 〈1 line〉
                               123. thus it is written: 
                              Sequentes igitur ea. &c. Folowing therefore those thinges whiche are decreed in the holy Canons, wee make this pragmaticall lawe, by the whyche we decree, that as ofte as it shall be necessary to ordeyne a Byshop, the Cleargie and primates of the citie, for the whiche the Byshop is to be ordeyned, shall assemble togyther, and the Euangelies being layde before them, shall agree and determine vppon three persons: And euery one of them shall sweare by the holy word of God (and that to be enrolled with their determination) that they haue not chosen these men, eyther for rewarde, or for promise, or for friendship, or fauour, or for any other affection, but only bycause they know them to be of the true and catholike faith, and of honest conuersation, and that they are aboue fiue and thirtie yeares olde. So that it is plaine, that by the inhabitants of the citie, he meaneth the Cleargie, and the chiefe persons of the citie. It followeth in the same constitution: 
                              Vt ex tribus illis personis, quae d
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 cretis hoc modo eliguntur, melior ordinetur, electione & iudicio eius, qui ordinandi ius habet. That of those three which are in this sort chosen, the best may be ordeyned, by the election and iudgement of him, that hath the authoritie to ordeyne. And this last clause may be an interpretation also of the meaning of that constitution, ex codice: that is, that the inhabitants choose thrée, of whome the Metropolitane should choose one to be Byshop: for it is euident that the Metropolitane had ius ordinandi, and that lawe in codice, differeth not one whit from this constitution.
                        The words of Carolus Magnus, make with me rather than against me, for in that he saith 
                              secundùm statuta canonum de propria dioecesi: according to the statutes of the Canons of that diocesse; he plainly signifyeth that in sundry diocesse, there be sundry kinds and maners of elections, else would he haue said, 
                              secundùm statuta canonum Apost. according to the statutes of the canons of the Apostles, or 
                              sacrae scripturae, of the holy scripture, or such like. But that which followeth in the same law maketh the matter manifest. 
                              Praecipimus etiam omnibus. &c. we will also and commaund all those which are subiect to our iurisdiction, that no man attempt to spoyle the priuiledges of the Churches, Monasteries, or the Churches themselues. &c meaning no doubt touching elections.
                        That of Ludouike dist. 63. declareth also that it was in the Emperoures power to alter the manner of elections, or to establishe them: for else, to what purpose were these lawes and Confirmations made? All this verifyeth my assertion, and proueth playnely, that the manner and forme of calling and electing Ministers, is, and hathe bene, in the power of the ciuill Magistrate to order,

as shall be moste expedient for the present state of the Churche: if the Prince thinke it conuenient that the people shoulde haue voyces in suche elections, they maye so haue: if not, there is no lawe of God dothe bynde them to it: and that doe all those lawes of Emperours manifestly proue.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the eight Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 36. Sect. 4. 5.
                     Platina also in the lyfe of Pope Adrian the seconde, writeth that Ludouike the second by his letters An yntruth, for he only com mendeth them for so doing, he doth not commaund them to do 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o. commaunded the Romains that they should choose their owne bishop, not loking for other mens voyces, which being strangers could not so well tell what was done in the common weale where they were strangers, and that it apperteyneth to the citizens.
                     The same Platina witnesseth in the lyfe of Pope Leo the. 8. that when the people of Rome were earnest with the Emperour Otho the fyrst, that he would take away one Pope Iohn yt liued verie licentiously & riotously, & place an other, the same Emperor answered, that it perteined to the clergie and people, to choose one, and willed them that they should choose, and he would approue it: and when they had chosen Leo, and after put him out without cause, and chose one Pope Bennet, he compelled them to take Leo againe. Wherby appeareth, that in those estates where Magistrates were Christian, and where the estate was moste of all Monarchicall, that is subiecte to ones gouernmente, and also when the Church put out any without good cause, that then the Magistrates should compell the Churches to doe their dutie. In deede the Bishop of Rome gaue the election then into the Emperou
                           〈1 line〉
                         his handes, bycause of the lightnesse of the people, as Platina maketh mention, but that is not the matter, for I doe nothing else here but shew that the elections of the ministers by the Churche were vsed in the times of the Emperours, and by their consentes. And seyng that Otho confessed it perteyned not vnto him, it is to be doubted, whether hee tooke it at the Bishop his handes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue not truly reported the wordes of Platina in the first place, for he sayth
                              Platina falsifyed by. T. C not that the Emperour Ludouike did commaund the Romains that they should choose their own Bishop, but that he commended them for their godlie and sound choise. His wordes be these: 
                              Superuenere à Ludouico Imperatore literae, quibus Romanos admodùm laudat, quòd summum
                              Platina in vita Adriani. 2. 
                              Pontificem sanctè & integrè creassent, There came letters from Ludouike the Emperoure, wherin he praiseth the Romans very muche, bicause they had holily and syncerely created the high Priest. &c. But Platina declareth how tumultuous an election that was, and howe iniuriously the Emperours Embassadors were secluded from the same, hauing therin interest: and although the Emperoure was contente to put vp that iniurie, and to commend that election (peraduenture for some worldly respect) yet it is manifest, that then the Bishops of Rome began to vsurpe vppon the authoritie of the Emperour, and to seclude him from hauing any interest in their elections. M. Bale
                           Bale. speaking of this election sayth: 
                              Vi enim eligendi pontificis potestatem, ad se tunc rapiebant Romani, For the Romaines then tooke by force vnto them selues power to choose their Bishop.
                        
                        The second place of Platina argueth the vndiscretenesse of the people both in placing and displacing their Bishop, and the authoritie of the Emperour in taking this authoritie of placing and displacing from them, when they doe abuse it: for here hée put out Benet whom they had chosen, & placed Leo whom they had displaced, wherby it appeareth, that there was not then any one suche prescripte forme of electing the Bishop of Rome, but that it was in the authoritie of the Emperour, to abrogate, alter, or chaunge it. All this is nothing to the improuing of my assertion, for I denie not, but that the people had interest in elections of Bishops, in diuers places, and especially in the Church of Rome, a long tyme: But this dothe not proue, that there is any prescript rule in Scripture, for the election of ministers whiche maye not be altered, and chaunged from tyme to tyme, as shall be moste conuenient for the presente state of the Churche: naye whatsoeuer ye haue hitherto sayde, proueth the contrarie.
                        
                           Platina doth not write that Otho coufessed that the election of the Byshop of 
                              〈◊〉
                            did not perteyne vnto him: you should haue a care to report the words of the author truly: it is one thing to say, that the election of the Byshop perteyneth to the Cleargie and people, another thing to say, that it perteyned not to him: for it might perteine to them al. And the same Platina in the life of Io. 13. saithe, that after Iohn was condemned by a councell, and therefore fled away, the Emperoure Otho, at the request of the Cleargie, did create Leo Byshop of Rome: his words are these: 
                              Hanc ob causam Otho persuadente
                              Platina in 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  ta Ioan▪ 13 
                              clero, Leonem Romanum ciuem Lateranensis ecclesiae Scriniarium Pontificem creat. For thys cause Otho by the perswasion of the Cleargie, chooseth Leo a Citizen of Rome, and keper of the monuments of the Church of Laterane, to be Byshop. He further in that place declareth, how the people after the Emperours departure deposed Leo, and placed Benet, and how the Emperoure by force compelled them to place Leo agayne.
                        That Otho the Emperoure did take this graunt at the Byshops hands, that the election of the Byshop should be in him, and not in the people, M. Bale testifyeth in manifest words, in the life of Leo. 8. where he saith thus. After, he tooke from the Cleargie and people of Rome, the power of choosing their Byshop, whiche Carolus Magnus had gyuenBale in vita Leon. 8. vnto them before, and by a Synodall decree did commit the same to Otho the Emperoure, for the auoyding of seditions whiche were wont to be in these elections, and Otho receyuing this graunt thankfully, that he mighte shewe himselfe agayne beneficiall towards the Sea of Rome, restored all things which Constantine is feyned to haue giuen. &c. In the which words also it is to be noted yt this libertie of choosing their Byshop, was granted vnto the people and Cleargie of Rome by Carolus Magnus, the which not only M. Bale testifyeth in this place, but M. Barnes also, in these words. Leo the. 8. vnderstanding the wickednesse of the Romaines in obtruding their friends to the Church, by bribes, threatnings, and other wicked deuises, did restore the interest of choosing the Byshop to Otho the Emperoure. Whereof I also conclude, that it is in the power of the ciuill magistrate to take order for elections of ministers, and that the consent of the people is not of any necessitie required therevnto.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 36. Sect. 6.
                     And if the Emperours permitted the election of the Byshop to that Citie, where it made most for their suretie, to haue one of their owne appoyntment, as was Rome, whiche with their Byshops did oftentimes put the good Emperoures to trouble: it is to be thought, that in other places, both cities, and townes, they did not denie the elections of ministers to the people, besides that, certaine of those constitutions are not of Rome, but of any citie whatsoeuer. And these Emperours were, and liued betwene. 500. and odde yeares, vntill the very poynte of a thousande yeares after Christ, so that hitherto this libertie was not gone out of ye Church, albeit the Pop
                           〈1 line〉
                         which brought in all tyrannie, and went about to take all libertie from the Churches, was now on horse back, and had placed himselfe in that Antichristian seate.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In that the Emperours did but permitte such elections to the people, it is manifest, that the interest was in them, else why should they be said to haue permitted it. In déed true it is, that the Emperours so long did remitte of their interest in suche elections, that afterwards when they would haue claymed their right therein, they coulde not obteyne it, but by violence were shut from all, as the histories manifestly deelare.
                        Hitherto you haue proued nothing in question, neyther haue you reasoned ad ide m:
                           T. C. hath not reason
                                 〈1 line〉
                               ad idem. for you shoulde either haue proued that the election of ministers dothe of necessitie perteyne to the people, or that the same manner of electing is conueniente for thys Church of England in this time, and state: both which I haue improued, and do still vtterly denie, neyther dothe any thing that you haue alleadged, proue eyther of them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 6. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 45. Sect. 3.
                     Therefore this diuersitie of the state of the Church requireth a diue
                           〈1 line〉
                        s kinde of gouernmente, and another kinde of ordeyning ministers. For this cause in Concilio Laodicensi, whiche was Anno. 334. it wasConcil. Laodic. decreed that the election of ministers shoulde not be permitted to the people.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 37. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Those that write the Centuries This is vntrue as shall appeare. suspect this canon, and doubt whether it be a bastard or no, considering the practise of the Church: But heere or euer you were aware, you haue striken at your selfe. For before you sayd, that this order of choosing the minister by voyces of the Church, was An vntruth, for I said not so. but in the Apostles time, and during the time of persecution. And the firste time you can alleadge this libertie to be taken away, was in the. 334. yeare of our Lord, which was at the least. 31. yeares after that Constantine the great began to reygne. I say at the least, bycause there be good authors that say, that this councell of Laodicea was holdē Anno. 338. after the death of Ioninian the Emperoure, and so there is. 35. yeares betweene the beginning of Constantines reygne, and this councell. Now I thinke you will not say, that the Church was vnder The Churche was vnder persecution in Constantines time by the space of 13. yeares, for Maxentius and Licinius did then persecute. persecution in Constantines time. And therefore you see you are greatly deceyued in your accompt.
                     Now if it be as lawfull for vs to vse M. Caluins authoritie, which both by example and writinges hath always defended our cause, as it is for you to wring him and his words, to things which he neuer inent, and the contrary whereof he continually practised, then this authoritie of yours is dashed. For M. Caluine saith, whereas it is saide in that councell, that the election shoulde not be permitted to the people, it meaneth nothing else but that they should make no election, without hauingVpon the Acts. 16. some ministers or men of iudgement to direct them in their election, and to gather their voyces, and prouide that nothing be done tumultuously, euen as Paule and Barnabas were chefe in the election of the Churches: And euen the same order would we haue kept in elections continually for auoyding of confusion, for as we woulde haue the libertie of the Churche preserued, whiche Christ hath bought so deerely, from all tyrannie: So do we agayne condemne and vtterly abhorre the barbarous confusion and disorder.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Where do those that write the Centuries suspecte that Canon? why note you not the place? there is not one worde tending to that end, in that place where they speake of this Councell. Neyther as I thinke are you able to shew any suche thing affirmed by them, and it is the first time that euer I either red or heard it doubted, whether thys were a Canon of that councell or no. In the. 4. Cent. col. 435. I find these words: 
                              variant ab 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ac consuetudine, mirum qua veritate, constitutiones Concilij Laodiceni, quae ordinationes iudicio multitudinis fieri probibuerunt. The constitutions of the Councel of Laodicea, which forbadCent. 4. the ordeyning (of ministers) to be done by the iudgement of the multitude, do varie from this custome (of electing by the people) it is maruel by what truth. But no mā can hereof gather that they doubt whether this Canon be a bastard or no. Only they doubt whether this decrée was made according to the truth. The general Councel at Cōstantinople, which is called 
                              Synodus. 6. did both allow this councell, and ratifye it.
                        It is not greatly materiall at what time this Councell was holden: Neyther dothe it follow that bycause this decrée was now made against such elections of the people, therefore the people had before this time in al places interest, in electing of ministers: for it may be that some claimed this interest, and moued the people to contende for it then, as you do now: and therefore the Synode might vpon that occasiō make this determination: as the like might be made at this time in this Churche of Englande, against such parishes as take vpon them the election of their Pastors, as you before affirmedPage. 3. some to do: and yet we could not therevpon truly conclude, that before the time of this prohibition the election of ministers was either generally, or orderly cō
                           mitted to the people in this Church of England.
                        
                           I haue not in any place said that this order of choosing the minister by the voyces of the Church was but in the Apostles time, and during the time of persecution, neither yet, that they could clayme it of dutie in either of these times, or that it was then generall, and in all places: for I haue before shewed the contrary.
                        And where you thinke that I will not say the Churche was vnder persecution in ConstantinesThe Church in persecution in Constantines time. time (though it be not materiall) yet must I tell you that I thinke it was: for euē then Maxentius and Licinius did persecute, and continued in persecuting by the space of. 13. yeares after Constan. began his reygne: and it is saide of Licinius that he killed many thousandes of Christians.
                        I haue not at any time wrung M. Caluines words to any other sense, than he hymselfe hath written them: if it be otherwise, make it knewne: for I haue delt playnely and set downe his words, so haue not you. In his Institutions 
                              cap. 8. Sect. 63. thus he writeth of this Councell: 
                              Est quidem & illud fateor. &c. And surely I confesse, that it wasCaluine of the Councell of Laodicea. vpon great reason decreed in the Councell of Laodicea, that the election shoulde not be permitted to the multitude: for it scarcely at any time happeneth that so many heads shuld with one consente determine any thing: And that saying is almost true, that the vnstable multitude is deuided into contrary factions. &c. Then doth he tell what order was obserued in elections: firste the Cleargy only did choose, then did they offer him whome they had chosen, to the magistrate, or to the Senate, and chiefe rulers, who after deliberation, did confirme the election, if they liked of it: if not, then did they choose another whome they thought to be more méete. In the ende, the matter was propounded to the multitude, rather to know their desire, and require their testimonie, than to gyue them any interest either of choosing or refusing: this is the summe of Caluines meaning, and this he saith, was the meaning of that Councell: which I say is in 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ffect, to take away the election from the people.
                        Your note in the margent must be corrected, for Caluine hath no suche thing vpon the. 16. of the Acts: but the like he hath vpō the. 14. howbeit the words of the Councel be playne, 
                              quòd non sit permittendum turbis electiones eorum facere, qui sunt ad sacer dotium prouebendi:
                              Concil. Laodicen. Can. 13. That it ought not to be permitted vnto the multitude, to make elections of them, which should be preferred to the ministerie. And there can be no doubt of the meaning of the Councell, bycause it appeareth in the. 12. Canon that they would haue Byshops preferred to ecclesiasticall dignitie, by the iudgement of the Metropolitane and otherCan. 12. Byshops.
                        Libertie and tyrannie be too common in your mouth. It is no tyranny to restraine the people from that libertie that is hurtfull to themselues, and must of necessitie ingender contentions, tumults, and confusion.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 37. Sect. 3.
                     But if Councels be of so great authoritie to decide this controuersie, thē the most famous Councell of Nice wil strike a great stroke with you, which in an Epistl that it writeth vnto the Church of Egipt (as Theodoret maketh mention) speaketh thus. It is meete that This is 
                              〈◊〉
                            of the Clearg
                              〈1 line〉
                           , not of the people. you should haue power both to choose any man, and to giue their names which are worthy to be amongst the Cleargy, and to do all things absolutely according to the law and decrees of the Church, and if it happen any to dye in the Church, then that those which were last taken to be promoted to the honoure of him that is dead, with this condition, if they be worthy, and the people choose them, the Byshop of the citie of Alexandria togither giuing his consent and appoynting him.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Councell in that epistle, first declareth what was done with Arius: then what became of Melitius, how he was deposed from his Bishoprike, and yet suffered to remayne in his owne citie, but to haue no authoritie of choosing or ordeyning ministers either in the prouince, or in any other citie. After it sheweth that such as were ordeyned and made ministers, or promoted by him, shoulde kéepe their ministerie and honoure, but not haue any authoritie in elections, or in preferring of any to any degréeThe. li. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . cap. 9. of ministerie, wherevpon it by and by followeth, 
                              qui verò Dei gratia. &c. but those

that by the grace of God and your prayers, haue not bin factious and scismaticall, but kept themselues vndefyled in the Catholike and Apostolike Church, it is meete that they should haue authoritie and power, both to choose any man, and to giue their names whiche are worthy to be of the Cleargy: And to do all things according to the lawes and decrees of the Church. Their meaning is euident, that suche only of the Cleargy shoulde haue to do in electing or preferring any to the ministerie, whiche haue not bin schismaticall and factious in the time of heresie: for these words of the Councel are not spokē of the people, but of the Cleargie, as the circumstance of the place doth declare: which thing Iacobus Grinaeus noteth in the margēt, in these words: Iura Clericorum qui ortbodoxi manserunt. That which followeth and if it happen any to dye in the Church. &c. dothe argue that the people had a consent in those Churches, according to the orders whereof the Councel would haue them to procéede: but it maketh no new law for it, neyther doth it decrée any thing as concerning it. And it is euident that their order herein was not generall, but particular to those Churches: for it followeth after in the same epistle,This order was peculiar to Egypt and Alexandria. 
                           Haec propriè & peculiariter ad Aegyptum, atque sanctissimam Alexandrinam ecclesiam pertinent. So that it is manifest that the meaning of the Councel was not to bind all Churches to this order. But al this laboure of yours is lost, for you go about to proue that which no man denieth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the twelfth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 37. Sect. 4.
                     Another of the famousest councels, called the Councel of Constantinople, which was gathered vnder Theodosius ye great (as it is witnessed by the Tripartite story) in an epistle which it wroteLib. 9. cap. 19. to Damasus the Pope, and Ambrose and others, saith thus: we haue ordeyned Nectarius the Byshop of Constantinople with the whole consent of the Councel, in the sight of the Emperoure Theodosius beloued of God, the whole citie togyther decreeing the same. Likewise he saythe that Flanian was appoynted by that Synode byshop of Antioch, the whole people appoynting him.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The words in that epistle both as the Tripartite histo. and as Theodoret himselfe reporteth them 
                              lib. 5. cap. 9. signify, that the whole citie was well pleased, that Nectarius was chosen to be their Byshop, and consented vnto it: But it dothe not therefore follow that the whole citie did choose him. In Theodoret I find these words. 
                              Reuerendissimum
                              T
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 e. li. 5. cap. 9 
                              & dei amantissimū Nectarium episcopū praeposuimus in generali nostro Cō
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ilio, & praesente amantissimo dei Imperatore Theodosio, cum omnium clericorum, ac totius ciuitatis approbatione. VVe haue placed or ordeyned the most reuerend, and louing Nectarius, in our generall Councel, both Theodosius (the Emperoure most beloued of God) being presente, and also with the approbation of all the Cleargie and the whole citie.
                        
                        They saye we haue placed or ordeyned Nectarius. &c. and they whiche say so were Byshops. Moreouer Theodoret in the chapter that goeth before, saith plainly that the Pastors and ministers did choose him Byshop. But be it that the whole citie did giue their voyces: that is no proofe, that at all times it must of necessitie be so.
                        The same answer I make to your example of Flauianus.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the xiij Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 37. Sect. 5. 6. 7.
                     Likewise in the councell of Carthage where Augustine was, holden about Anno Domin
                           〈1 line〉
                        .Needelesse proo fes. 400. in the first Canon of the Councel it is sayd, when he hath bin examined in all these, and found fully instructed, then let him be ordeyned Byshop by the common consent of the Clearks, and the lay people and the Byshops of the prouince, and especially either by the authoritie, or presence of the Metropolitane.
                     And in the Toletane councell, as it appeareth in the. 51. distinction, it was thus ordeyned. Let not him be counted a Priest of the Churche (for so they speake) whome neyther the Cleargie nor people of that citie where he is a Priest, doth choose, nor the consent of the Metropolitane and other

Priests in that prouince had sought after.
                     Moreouer Concilium Gabilonense whiche was holden Anno domini. 650. in the tenth Canon hath this. If any Byshop after the death of his predecessor be chosen of any but of the Byshops in the same prouince▪ and of the Cleargie and citizens, let another be chosen, and if it be otherwise let that ordinatiō be accompted of none effect. Al which Councels proue manifestly, that as the people in their elections had the ministers round about, or Synods and councels directing them, so there was none came to be ouer the people, but by their voyces and consents.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This which is affirmed of these Councels, is confessed to be true, but not to the purpose: for the question is not whether the peoples consent were required at any time or no, but whether it must be required at all times.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. xiiij. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 45. Sect. 4.
                     This alteration of gouernment and orders in the Church of Christ is well set out by Ambrose in the. 4. to the Ephe. vpon these wordes, Et ipse dedit. &c. where he saith on this sort, that the number of ChristiansAmbrose. might encrease and be multiplyed, in the beginning it vvas permitted to euery one to preach the gospell, to baptise, and to expound the scriptures, but vvhen the Church vvas enlarged there vvere certayne parishes appoynted, and gouernoures and other officers ordeyned in the Church. &c. Therfore the vvritings of the Apostles do not in all things agree vvith the orders that are novv in the Church. Thus farre Ambrose.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 38. Sect. 1.
                     Indeede if you put such darke colours vpon the Apostles Church as this is, it is no maruell if it ought not to be a patrone to vs of framing and fashioning our Church after it. But O Lorde who can paciently heare this horrible disorder, ascribed to the Apostles Church, whiche heere you attribute vnto it, that euery one hand ouer head preached, baptised, and expounded the scriptures, what a window, nay, what a gate is opened heere toThe Anabaptists glory of the same calling that you c
                              〈…〉
                            for. Anabaptists, to confirme their fantasticall opinion, wherein they hold that euery man whome the spirite moueth may come, euen from the plough tayle, to the pulpit, to preach the word of God. If you say it is Ambrose saying & not yours, I answer, vnlesse you allow it why bring you it, and that to proue the difference betweene the Apostles times and these? For if it be false (as it is most false) then there is no difference heere betweene the Apostles times and ours. Doth not the whole course of the scriptures declare, and hath it not bin proued, that there was none that tooke vpon him the ministerie in the church, but by lawfull calling? what is this but to cast dust and dirt of the fairest and beautifullest image that euer was, to make a smokie, disfigured, euill proportioned image to seeme beautifull, to ouerthrow the Apostles buildings of golde and siluer, and precious stones, to make a cotage of wood, strawe, and stubble, to haue some estimation, which could haue none the other standing. For in effect so you do, when to vphold a corrupt vse that came in by the tyrannie of the Pope, you go about to discredite the orders and institutions whiche were vsed in the Apostles times, and that with suche manifest vntruthes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is a very slender answer to Ambrose, whose authoritie both for his excellentAmbrose vnworthyly r
                                 〈…〉
                              
                              ted. by T. C. learning, and vertue, and also for his antiquitie, is not to be so contemptuously reiected. The selfesame word and to the same effect doth Georgius maior in his commentaries vpon the first to the Philip. recite out of one Rabanus Byshop of Moguntia, who also borowed them as it should séeme, of Ambrose. Maior alloweth well of them, and maketh no suche exclamations as you do, and yet a man knowne to be learned, and sound in religion, as his works declare. Likewise the authors of the Centuries. 4. Cent. cap. 7. alledge this same place of Ambrose, and allow of it: and therefore the matter is not so heynous as you make it.Anabaptistes pretende a kind of calling by the 
                                 •
                              eople.
                        
                        The Anabaptists glory of the same calling that you nowe contend for, as it appeareth in the. 3. booke of M. Bullinger aduer. Anabap. cap. 4. whose words be these, 
                              suam verò
                              
                              vocationem &c. They affirme that their calling is iust, bycause they be called and sent of their
                                 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . Churches: but our vocation to be vnlawful, which is made of the magistrate, and therefore, that they are sent of God, but we of the world and of men. You know that this was one of the first things that the rusti
                              〈1 line〉
                           all Anabaptists moued sedition for, and that they required it of the magistrates, as Sleydan declareth 
                              li. 5. ex his postulatis,
                            saith he, 
                              primū erat, vt
                              
                                 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . 
                              ipsis liceret ecclesiae ministros eligere, qui verbum dei purè doceant: Of those requests, the firste was, that they might choose ministers of the Church, which might teach the worde of God purely. You sée therefore that the Anabaptists many of them, require a vocation, and one not much vnlike that which you striue for in this place, and at this time. When Ambrose saith that it was permitted to euery man to preach the Gospell. &c. he dothe not say that it was permitted vnto them withoute some kinde of calling: if you will vewe the place well, and consider it at large, as it is in Ambrose, your heate will be something quenched I doubt not.
                        It is no derogation at all from the Apostolicall Church, to haue the orders of it in diuers points altered: for though suche were most conueniente then for that state, time, and persons, yet are they not so now in respect of this state, time, and persons, so that the forme of the Apostolicall Churches was then perfyte, and absolute, though now it admitte (in the respect of diuers circumstances) alteration.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 45. Sect. vlt.
                     
                        Musculus also in his common places answering to this question,Musculus. why that ministers of the word are not chosen now by the ministers and the people, as they were in the primitiue Church, but appoynted by the Magistrate, saith thus: 
                           talis tum ecclesiarum erat status, vt aliter nō essent eligendi ministri, quia Christiano magistratu destituebantur. Si reuocas temporum illorum mores, primùm conditiones & statum quoque illorum reuoca. Such vvas then the state of Churches, that they coulde choose their ministers no othervvise, bycause they had no Christian Magistrates. If thou vvouldest haue the manners and customes of those times obserued, then must thou call backe their conditions and state.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 38. Sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. vlt. &. Sect 39. Sect. 1 2.
                     The place is to commō which you assigne, you had I am sure the booke before you: you might haue tolde where the place was, and in what title. But that place of Musculus in the title of the magistrate, is answered by himsel
                           〈1 line〉
                        e in the same booke, where he entreateth of the election of the ministers. For going about (as it seemeth) to satisfie some of their ministers, whiche were brought in do
                           〈1 line〉
                        bt of their calling, bycause they were not chosen by their Churches, speaking of the vse of the Church in choosing their minister he sayth thus.
                     First it must be playnly confessed, that the ministers were in times past chosen by consente of the people, and or
                           〈1 line〉
                        eyned and confirmed of the seignioures.
                     Secondarily that that forme of election was Apostolicall and lawfull.
                     Thirdly, that it was conformable to the libertie of the Church, and that thrusting the Pastor vpon the Churche, not being chosen of it, doth agree to a Church that is not free, but subiecte to bond
                           〈1 line〉
                        ge.
                     Fourthly, that this forme of choise by the Churche maketh much both to that that the minister may gouern his slocke with a good conscience, as also that the people may yeld themselues to be easlier ruled, than when one commeth against their willes vnto them.
                     And to conclude all these, he sayth that they are altogyther certeyne, and such as cannot be denyed. After he sayth that the corrupt estate of the Church and religion driueth to alter this order, and to call the election to certayne learned men, which should after be confirmed of the Prince. And that it may yet more cleerely appeare that his iudgement is nothing lesse than to confirme this election, he setteth downe their election in Bernland, whiche he approueth and laboureth to make good as one which although it doth not fully agree with the election of the primitiue Churche, yet commeth very neare vnto it: As that not one mā, but al the ministers in the citie of Berue do choose a Pastor when there is any place void.
                     Afterward he is sent to the Senate, from the which, if he be doubted of, he is sent agayne to the ministers, to be examined, and then if they find him meete, he is confirmed of the Senate (whiche

standeth of some number of the people) and by the moste parte of their voyces. By these things it appeareth, that this election of the Minister, by the people, is lawfull and Apost
                           〈1 line〉
                        like, and confe
                           〈1 line〉
                        sed also by him, that those that are otherwise, bring with them subiection vnto the Church, and seruitude, and carya note and marke of corruption of Religion.
                     Laste of all that he go
                           〈1 line〉
                        h about to defende the election vsed in the Churches where he was Minister by thys, that it approched vnto the election in the primitiue Churche. Nowe what cause there may be, that we should bring the Churche into bondage, or take awaye the order whereby bothe the Minister maye be better assured of hys calling, and the people maye the willyngiyer submitte them selues vnto theyr pastors and gouernours, or what cause to departe from the Apostolyke forme, of the choyse of the Pastor beyng lawfull, I confesse I knowe not, and woulde be gladde to learne.
                     To assigne the cause hereof vnto the Christian Magistrate, and to saye, that these things can not be hadde vnder hym (as you vnder Maister Musculus name doe affyrme) is 
                           〈1 line〉
                        o doe greate iniurie vnto the office of the Magistrate, whyche abridgeth not the libertie of the Churche but defendeth it, diminisheth not the Pastor his assurance of his calling, but rather encreaseth it, by establishyng the ordinarie callyngs onely, whiche in the time of perse
                           〈1 line〉
                        ution some tymes are not so ordinarie, withdraweth not the obedience of the people from the Pastor, bu
                           〈1 line〉
                         vrgeth it where it is not, and constrayneth it where it is not voluntarie? And seeyng that also Musculu
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ning 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         Musculus sayth, that these forced elections are remedyes for corruption of Religion, and disordered states, what greater dishonour can there be done vnto the holy institution of God in the ciuill gouernour, than to saye that these forced elections wythout the consent of the people, muste be where there is a Christian Magistrate: as thoughe there coulde be no pure Religion vnder him, when as in deede it maye be easily vnder hym pure, whiche can hardly, and with greate daunger be pure withoute hym. And when as it is sayde, that the Churches consente shoulde be hadde in the election of the Minister, Here you ar
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           one 
                              〈◊〉
                            from your Apostolica
                              〈1 line〉
                            forme. we doe not denie the confirmation of the elections vnto the godly ciuill Magistrate and the disanulling of them, if the Churche in choosing, and the Ministers in directing, shall take any vnfitte man, so that yet, he doe not take away the libertie from the Church, of choosing a more conuenient man.
                     So that you see, that by Musculus your witnesse reasons, thys enforced election withoute the consente of the people, is but corrupte, and so oughte not to be in the Churche. And that although it hath bene borne withall, yet it must be spoken against, and the lawfull forme of election laboured for, of all those that loue the truth, and the sinceritie therof.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Turpe est doctori. &c. you haue before tolde vs, what Iustinian sayth Pag. 36. Sect. 2. 
                           in codice: AlsoT. C. tripped in that wher
                                 〈1 line〉
                               he findeth fau
                                 〈1 line〉
                               with other. ofPage. 37. Sect. 3. an Epistle sent from the councell of Nice vnto the Churche of Egipt, as Theodoret maketh mention: of the councell of 
                           Page. 37. Sect. 5. Carthage, of Ibidē sect▪ 6 Toletane councell, and afterwarde you tell vs what Pag. 4
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Sect. 2. Augustine Pag. 72. Sect. 3. & Gratiā say, and wil, that Pag. 71. Sect. 6. the centuries should be seene. &c. & yet you neither tell vs in what part of Iustinians Code, in what booke of Chap. of Theodoret, in what coūcel of Cartharge, or of Toledo, in what tome of Augustine, or part of Gratiā, in what centurie, or booke of centuries, which all require much more tyme to search out, than this of Musculus, & especially your law, which (for any thing that I can perceiue) asketh so long a searche in codice Iustiniani, that I thinke it will neuer be founde there. But it is no great marueile for you reporte them as the Author doth of whom you borowe them, without any further searche or tryall. But to put you out of doubt, this place of Musculus is titulo de Magistratibus.
                        
                        Musculus in déede confesseth that in the Apostles tyme, ministers were choosen by the people, and ordeyned and confirmed by the elders. And after that he hath shewed this manner of election to haue béene vsed t
                              〈1 line〉
                            Cyprians tyme, he addeth and sayth: 
                              Ad hunc itaque
                              Tit. de ve
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 b▪ ministris. 
                              modum eligebantur. &c. After thys manner in tymes paste were Ministers, Byshoppes, and Deacons elected: the whyche forme also of electing, Churches reteyned vnto the tyme of Christian Princes and Magistrates, whose consent was required in the election of Byshoppes, and that worthily, for it is not meete that those things whiche are to be done publikely, and concerne the people whiche be their subiectes, and perteine vnto them in respect of Religion (except we wil say with the Anabap. that Christians ought not to be Magistrates) shoulde be done without their consent.
                        
                        After this, he declareth how the Bishop of Rome in the end, spoyled the Magistrate and the people also of this libertie: and when he hath spoken against the abuses of the Romane Church in that matter, he maketh an obiection of such Churches as professe the Gospell, saying, but some peraduenture wi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              l obiect that those Churches whyche in our time will seme to haue reformed Religion receiue their ministers of the Magistrate, &
                           
                           not by any election of the people: to this obiection he sayth that he is compelled to answere for their sakes: who though they faithfully labour in the word of the Lord, yet do they doubte whether their vocatiō be lawfull or no, bicause they were not elected & ordeined according to the Apostolicall forme: And hauing confessed those points yt you here set downe, he maketh this resolutiō. 
                              Verū si consideres diuersū ecclesiae statū. &c. If thou shalt consider the diuers state of the Church, thou must confesse, that that which in it self is Apostolicall, lawful, & vsuall, & conuenient for the libertie of the Churches, primis quidē ecclesiae tēporibus prodesse potuisse, nostris vero non ita: might wel profit the Church in the beginning, but not so in our time. For thē there was not such a multitude of Christiās, but that the minister without tumult, might by cōmon consent be chosen, which thing at this day were very hard to be done. Moreouer thē the mindes of the faithfull were not so generally infected with cōmon errors, nor so blinded with false worshippings, but they remained as yet in the doctrine & Religion which they had receiued of the Apostles: wherfore it might well be, that a true minister might be chosen by their cōmon suffrages. But after that the number of Christiās was encreased to an infinite multitude, & first schismes, then generall ignorance, blindnesse, & sundry kinds of superstitiō inuaded the Church, &c. there could no longer any true & sincere minister be elected by the generall consent of the people &c. wherefore for the conditiō of the time, necessitie it self required, that Princes & Magistrates should commit this matter to certaine wise mē carefull for the Church, by whose meanes meete pastors might be placed, &c. then he addeth: that for the circumstāces of time, as in all Churches the Apostolicall forme of electing & ordeining cannot be restored▪ so is there no cause, why the minister of Christ, being called to preach the Gospell by a godly Prince, & Magistrate, shuld doubt of his calling, whether it be right & Christian or no. But he must remēber that where the state of the Church, & of Religiō is corrupt, another way must be found out to remedie the same, than that which was vsed in the Churches, when all things was safe and sound. In the end he declareth what maner of electing & ordeining Ministers is vsed in ye church of Berne. Neyther doth he in that place or any other that I knowe, goe aboute to defende the election vsed in the Church where he was Minister, by this, that it approched vnto the election of the Primitiue Church, as you report him to do. Thus haue I truely reported Musculus his wordes in that place, and his order: than the whiche what can be more directly spoken to my purpose? whiche is to proue that no one certaine maner and forme of electing Ministers, is anywhere appointed to be generall, and perpetuall, but that the same may be altered accordyng to place, tyme, and persons: and that the manner vsed in the Apostles time, is not méete and conuenient for this time. All this I saye Musculus hath plainely, and by good reasons héere proued, whyche he doth also as manifestly confirme in the title de Magistratibus. For after that he hath declared that it perteineth to the Magistrate to appoint Church Ministers, he sayth dices: at secùs factum est in primis ecclesijs, in quibus à ministris & plebe eligebantur ecclesiarum antistites, respondeo, talis tum ecclesiarum erat status. &c. as it is in my answere.
                        For the subiection and bondage of the Church which you so often talke of, this is my answere in few words: that subiection to lawful Magistrates in matters lawful, is no bondage to any, but to such as thinke dutifull obedience to be seruitude & bondage, as the Anabaptistes do. Why the people are debarred from electing (which you call the Apostolicall forme of the choise of the Pastor) you may learne by that which hath béen hetherto spoken, if you be so desirous to learne, as you would séeme to be.
                        That the minister may be well assured of the lawfulnesse of his calling, thoughThe minister may be assured of hys calling though he be not chosen by the people. he be not called of the people, you haue also hearde of Musculus, who of purpose answereth that doubte. He that is sure of an inwarde calling néede not to doubt of hys outward calling, if it be according to the manner and forme of that Church wherein he is called.
                        That the people doe as willingly now submit them selues to their Pastors and gouernours, (though they haue no interest in electing of them) as they did then, experience teacheth in all places, where there be good and vertuous pastors, except onely in such as you and yours haue set on fire with contention and contempte. You saye to assigne the cause hereof to the Christian Magistrate. &c. We giue vnto the Magistrate

that which of duetie belongeth vnto him in the respecte that he is a Christian Magistrate, and hath the chiefe gouernment of the Church in all causes, & ouer all persons: and you desirous of popularitie, withdraw from the Magistrate that which is due vnto him, giuing the same to the people, and vulgar sort.
                        You counte it an abridging of the libertie of the Church, a diminishing of the pastors assurance of his calling, a withdrawing of the people from the pastor, to be shorte, a brynging of the people into bondage, for the Magistrate to mainteine his right in vsing that kinde of appointing Ministers, which he thinketh to be most profitable for the Churche committed vnto him: and is not this to doe great iniurie to the office of the Magistrate? Why doe you not plainely say that the Quéenes Maiestie abridgeth the libertie of the Church, diminisheth the pastors assurance of his calling, withdraweth the people from their pastor, vrgeth and constraineth them to that which is voluntarie, & bringeth them into bondage, bicause she will not suffer them to haue fredome in the elections of their Bishops, and Pastors? for this is your plaine meaning. But temper your popular and vndutifull speaches: the trueThe true libertie of the Church. libertie of the Church, which is libertie of conscience, and fredome from false doctrine, errors and superstitions, and not licence for euery man to doe what himselfe liweth, was neuer more in any Church: pastors neuer had better cause to be assured of their calling: the people at no time more bound to cleaue to their pastors: neuer lesse cause to complaine of vrging constraint, seruitude, or bondage, than they haue at this daye vnder hir Maiestie: but you go about to perswade them to the contrary, which where vnto it tendeth, would be in time considered.
                        Musculus saythe, that this manner of ordering Ministers (for he doth not call itT. C. transfei reth yt corruptions of mens myndes, to the gouernment. forced elections) is a remedie against corrupted states, not in respect of laws, gouernment, Magistrate, or Religion by authoritie established, but of menues myndes that are corrupted with errors, contentions, and sinister affections, and this is no dishonor to the ciuill gouernor. For if in a kingdome there be many wayward and disordered persons, the fault is in themselues, and not in the Magistrate, nor in the kind of gouernment, but a great commendation rather, when as by the diligence of the Magistrate, and profitable kinde of gouernment, such disordered persons be corrected and reformed, or at the least kept vnder and restrained. Is it a dishonor to the Prince, that where as she founde the whole Realme corrupted in doctrine, now it is otherwyse, though not in the heartes of many, yet in externall forme, and publike regiment? Wherefore you do but subtilly, (I will not saye contemptuously) transfer that to the Magistrate and kynd of gouernment, which Musculus meaneth of the corrupt mindes and affections of the common sort of men.
                        You adde that when it is sayd, that the Churches consent shoulde be had in the election ofT. C. vrgeth the Apostolicall forme, and yet bringeth in that which is not Apostolicall. the minister. &c. but how shall we know that you meane as you speake? for you haue no warrant so to doe in any Apostolicall election, or in any forme vsed in the Apostles time. Wherefore either you must breake that rule which you would haue both to be perfit, and perpetuall for all times, and states, or else doe you but dissemble with the Magistrate, and minde nothing lesse than that you say you would do.
                        But as good neuer a whit, as neuer a deale the better: for the Magistrate musteThe absurdities of the deuise of T. C. confyrme them, or reiecte them, if he be godly, and take not from the Churche hir libertie in choosyng. First, what if the Magistrate be vngodly? or who shall iudge whether he be so or no? or howe shall the Magistrate knowe when the Churche in choosing, and the Ministers in directing shall take any vnfitte man? who shall complayne to the Prince of his vnfitnesse, if both the Ministers and people thinke him fitte? or who shall iudge of hys fitnesse? or what priuiledge shal the Magistrate haue hereby, when he muste haue one of the peoples electing whether he will or no, or else muste the Church the distitute? Surely the Magistrate should haue a good office, to be so troubled with suche elections in this Churche of Englande. In good sadnesse tell me, doe you not sée the absurdities of these youre fonde and troublesome deuises? or are you so blynde, that you perceyue not how farre you would swarue from the forme,

which you saye was vsed by the Apostles, when you giue to the ciuill Magistrate the confirmation of ministers, which they in their time kept to themselues?
                        
                           Musculus hath in most playne manner taught the selfe same thing, that I haue done, as it may appeare to all those that will vnderstand: but you of purpose woulde blind both your selfe and others.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               That Byshops haue authoritie to admitte and ordeyne Ministers.
               
                  Chap. 7. the firste Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Nowe that authoritie is giuen into the handes of the Bishop alone, who by his sole authoritie thrusteth vpon them suche, as they many times, as well for vnhonest life, as also for lacke of learning, may, and do iustly dislike.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 46. Sect. 1.
                        That Bishops haue authoritie to admitte Ministers (which is heere denyed) it is plaine by that which is written. 1. Tim. 5. manus citò ne cui imponas, Lay thy handes rashely on none. These wordes Ambrose, Chrysostome, and all learned wryters, for the moste part, doe say to be an Admonition to Timothie, that he oughte to be circumspecte in appoynting of Ministers. And to Titus chap. 1. Paule saythe that he left him at Creta, 
                              vt constituat oppidatim presbyteros, that he shoulde appoynt Ministers in euery towne. This Hierome and others doe expounde of the authoritie that Titus had in placing ministers in euery Church.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 39. Sect. 3. 4. & Pag. 40. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Nowe you woulde proue A wilfull de prauing of the Answere. that this election of Ministers by one man was in the Apostles tyme. But you haue forgotten your selfe, whiche sayde a little before, that this election by the Churche, was not onely in the Apostles tymes, but also in the time of Cyprian: nowe you saye otherwyse. And if the election of the minister by the Churche agree so well with the tyme of persecution, and when there is no christian Magistrate, howe commeth it to passe, that in those dayes when persecution was so hotte, and there were no suche Magistrates, that Saint Paule woulde haue the election by one man, and not by the Churche. Besides that, if Who hath sayde so 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         this be Saint Paule hys commaundement, that the Byshop shoulde onely choose the Minister, why doe you make it an indifferent thing, and a thing in the power of the Churche to be varyed by tymes, for this is a flat commaundement. Thus you see you throw downe wyth one hande, as fast as you build with the other. But to answere directly to the place of the fifth of the first to Timothie.
                     I saye first, that Saynt Paule writeth to Timothie, and therefore instructeth him what he shoulde doe for his parte in the appoynting of the Minister. If he had written to the whole churche of Ephesus, he woulde lykewise haue instructed them howe they shoulde haue behaued themselues in that businesse. If one doe write vnto his friende, that hath interest in any election, to take heede that he choose none but suche as are meete, shall anye man conclude therevpon, that none hathe to doe in that election, but he to whome that letter is written? Then I say further that Saynt Paule attributeth that vnto Timothie, that was common to more with hym, bycause he beyng the director and moderator of the election is sayde to doe that whiche many doe: whyche thyng I haue proued by diuerse examples bothe oute of the Scripture, and otherwise before. And euen in thys imposition of handes, it is manifestly to be shewed. For that whereas Saynt Paule2. Tim. 1. sayth in the seconde Epistle that Timothie was ordeyned by the putting on of hys handes vpon hym, in the firste Epistle he sayth, that he was ordeyned by the putting on of the handes of the1. Tim. 4. eldership. So that that whiche he in one place taketh to him selfe alone, in the other he communicateth wyth moe. Agayne, it is a fault in you, that you can not distinguishe or put difference betwene the election, and imposition of handes.
                     Last of all I answere that althoughe thys mighte agree to Timothie alone, as in deede it can not, yet it followeth not that euery Byshop maye doe so. For Timothie was an Euangelist, which was aboue a Byshop, as hereafter shall better appeare. And it is an euill argument to saye the greater maye doe it therefore the lesse maye doe it. The superiour, therefore the inferiour. If you were at any coste with producing your witnesses, you shoulde not be so wyse to be so lauishe of them, as to cite Ambrose and Chrysostome, to proue a thing that none hath euer denyed

for who denyeth that Sainte Paule doth not gyue warnyng to Timothie to be circumspecte? if you meane to vse theyr testimonie to proue that he onely made the elections, they saye neuer a word for you, if there be any thing, cite it. To the place of Titus, I answere as to that of Timothie, for there is nothing there, but agreeth also to this place. And as for Hierome, he hath nothing in that place, as he hath in no other, to As if there were any 
                              〈◊〉
                            thing affirmed. proue that to the Byshop onely doth belong the right of the election of the Minister.
                     I haue shewed you reasons before, why it can not be so taken of the sole election of the Byshop, the Churche beyng shut out. If authorite woulde doe any good in thys behalfe, as it seemeth it ought, seeing that all your proofe throughout the whole booke, is in the authorities of men, (whiche Aristotle calleth 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , vncunning proofes) I coulde send you to M. Caluine which teacheth, that it is not to be thought that S. Paul woulde permit to Titus to ordeiue Byshops & ministers by his owne authoritie, when he himselfe would not take so much vpon hym, but ioyned his with the voyces of the Church. But he peraduenture sauoureth not your 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ast, and yet you would make men beleeue sometimes, that you make muche of him, if you can get but one worde An vntrue accusation. vnioynted, and racked in peeces from the rest, to make good your part. If he weigh not with you, you haue M. Musculus, whome you take to be a great patron of yours in this cause,Musculus in his com. pla. in his title of the election of ministers which doth with greater vehemencie affirme the same thing that M. Caluine sayth, asking whether any man can beleeue that Paule permitted in this place to Titus, or in the place before alleaged to Timothie, that they should ordeine of their owne authoritie, & by themselues, when as Paul would not doe it but by the voyces and election of the Church.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Admonition in the sixt article colorably, but in the. 7. plainely affirmeth, thatBishops may admit ministers. the right of ordering ministers doth at no hande apperteine to the Bishop: this doe I improue in this place, and proue that the right of ordering & electing Ministers, doth apperteine to the Bishop: but I haue contented my selfe with the fewer proofes, bicause theyr assertion is so absurde, that it can not but discredite their learnyng with all learned men. And what so euer T. C. hath hetherto sayd, manifestly declareth it to be vntrue: yet now it is his pleasure to glosse vpon my words, and to say that I woulde proue this election of Ministers by one man, to haue bin in the Apostles time. &c. Whereas in déede my words be plaine, and my meaning is to proue that the electing and ordering of ministers doth apperteine to Bishops: I do not say only to Bishops.
                        When you say that the election of the Pastor doth apperteine to the people, doe you meane that it only perteineth to the people? But bicause you thinke yt to be so great a matter, to say that in the Apostles tyme the election of Ministers was by one man, seing that I haue sayd before that this election by the Church was in the Apostles time and after, I will say now more than I sayd before, that they be both true: that is, that in theDiuers kinds of ordeining & electing ministers in the Apostles time. Apostles time there was diuerse maners of ordeining & electing Ministers. For some time one alone did choose, and ordeine, sometimes many, sometimes Ministers onely, and sometime the people also: as it may euidently be gathered, both by that which is spoken before, and by this also that I doe say in this place. Zuinglius in his booke called Ecclesiastes sayth thus, VVe reade in olde time of three kindes of elections: someZuinglius. were chosen by the common and generall consent of all the faithfull gathered together in one place: Other some were elected and sent by the Apostles onely: Other some we maye finde, whom one onely Apostle did choose and send, as Titus whome Paule lefte at Creta, committing vnto him, the care of that Church. The like sayth M. Bullinger Lib. 3. aduersus
                              Bullinger. 
                              Anabap. cap. 4. there is another calling of those, whiche are also called of God, but by men, which choose & sende according to gods ordinance, as when Peter sent Marke, and Paul
                                 〈1 line〉
                               both called and sent Timothie, Titus & Luke. Thus you sée that it is counted no straūge matter to haue diuers kinds of calling & electing ministers, euen in the Apostles time. And therfore in saying now, that Bishops haue authoritie to admit ministers, I saye nothing contrary to any thing that I haue saide before, neither yet if I affirme that Timothie and Titus had this authoritie to themselues alone.
                        The election of the Minister by the Church is fittest for the time of persecution: but that doth not seclude from the same time, election and calling by one man: neyther is this the question, whether choosing by the common consent of the people, or calling & sending by one man, be meetest for ye time of persecution: but whether election made by the multitude, is fitter for the time of persecution, and when there is no christian Magistrate, than for the tyme of prosperitie, and vnder a Christian Magistrate: and therefore you doe but incumber the Reader wyth false suppositions. Elections by the multitude, or by one onely, maye be vsed in the tyme of persecution,

and at other times also, as shall be most expedient for the Church.
                        Where doe I saye, that it is Paules commaundemente that the Byshop shoulde onelyT. C. peruerteth the sayinge of the Answerer. choose the Minister? vndoubtedly this is no true or diuine dealing, wyllingly and wittingly to peruert a mans saying, neither can it come of a good conscience, and you haue faulted in it very oft. I proue by that which S. Paule said to Timothie 1. Ti 5. (Lay thy handes rashely on none) that a Bishop hath authoritie to admitte1. Tim. 5. Ministers, bycause Timothie to whom these words were spoken, was a Bishop: and learned interpreters do say, that Saint Paule by these words did admonishe Timothie, that he ought to be circumspect in appointing of ministers: Therfore this is not Paules commaundemente, that a Bishop onely should ordeine ministers, but this he giueth in charge to all Bishops, in the name of Timothie, that they lay their handes rashely on none: whereby also he plainely signifieth that the ordering and electing of Ministers doth apperteine vnto them, which is denied by the Admonitiō. Here is then nothing throwne downe that was before builded, but you cast snow balles at ye windowes of the building, which may for a tyme darken them, till your snowe be melte away with the Sunne.
                        Touching your direct answere, (as you call it) to the place. 1. Tim. 5. thus I briefely replie, that it is but deuised of your owne head, not grounded vpon any good authoritie, nor consonant to the circumstance of the place, or course of the Epistle. Both Ambrose and Chrisostome and other learned writers (as I haue sayd) doe vnderstand it to be ment of the authoritie that Timothie had in ordering Bishops and ministers. The whole Epistle, and the circumstance of this place doe plainely testifie, that thys was spoken to Timothie, onely in the respect that he was a Bishop. The preceptes that be conteined in this Epistle, the most of them, and in this Chapter especially, are suche as properly perteyne to Timothie in the respecte that he was a Byshop, and a Minister of the worde. To conclude, if the election of a Byshop had of necessitie perteyned to the people, Paule woulde not haue written in this manner to Timothie as he hath done, describing vnto him what qualities he that is to be elected Byshoppe oughte to haue, but he woulde rather haue written the same to the people, or willed Timothie to declare it vnto them. Neyther doth he any where in any of hys Epistles wryte to any Church, to gyue them any instructions in this so necessarie a matter: but onely wryteth of the same in those Epistles to Timothie and Titus beyng Byshops, which maye be an argument that the ordering of Ministers doth properly apperteyne to a Bishop, and that thys also, manus citò. &c. is spoken to Timothie in that respect.
                        A man mave wryte to hys friende that hath interest in an election, but Paul doth not onely write vnto Timothie as to one that hath interest, but as to one in whom the whole interest consisteth. When you say that Paule attributeth that to Timothie, that was common to him wyth moe, if you meane moe Bishops, then it is true, for it is a rule for all Bishops to follow: but if you meane other of the people, then doe you but shifte of the matter with ghessing.
                        To your proofes of that phrase and kynde of speache I haue answered before, it is but a starting hole to flie vnto, when you are foyled by the playne and euident woordes of the Scripture. That whiche is by you alleaged. 2. Ti. 1. and 1. Ti. 4. maketh for my purpose: for you haue before confessed, that imposition of handes was not byFol. 31. Sect. 4. the Churche and people, but by the Elders and Ministers: and you alleage these places 1. Timo. 4. and 2. Timo. 1. to proue the same. And therefore I muche maruell to what ende you nowe alleage them, excepte it be to proue your phrase, for they cannot proue anye election made by the people, vnlesse you will say and vnsay at your pleasure.
                        But to put you out of doubt, 
                              imponere manus, to lay on hands, somtimes signifieth theTo laye on hands, is diuersly taken. Bullinger.
                            ceremonie only of laying on of hands, and somtimes the whole maner & forme of ordering. And in this second signification it is taken. 1. Ti. 5. &. 2. Ti. 1. Bull. expoundyng this place. 1. Ti. 5. sayth, 
                              manus enim imponere aliud non est, quā ecclesiae aliquē praeficere & ordinare, To lay on hands is nothing else, but to ordeine & appoynt one ouer the Church.
                           
And interpreting yt also. 2. Ti. 1. he saith: 
                              Paulus in praesenti per donū dei, prophetiae donū intellexit & functionē Episcopalē ad quam vocarat Timotheū dominus, sed per ministeriū Pauli, qui ideò nunc▪ dicit donum illud in Timotheo esse per impositionem manuum suarum: Paul doth heere vnderstande by the gifte of God, the gifte of Prophecie, and the offyce of a Bishop, vnto the which the Lord had called Timothie, but by the ministerie of Paule, who for that cause nowe sayth, that that gift was in Timothie by the imposition of his hands. And M. Caluine Institu. Cap. 8. Sect. 50. decideth this matter fully in these wordes: 
                              Sed Paulus ipse alibi se
                              Caluine. 
                              &c. But Paule himselfe in another place, doth testifie that he, and no moe, did lay his hands vpon Timothie: I admonishe thee (sayth he) that thou stirre vp the grace which is in thee, by the imposition of my handes. For where it is sayde in the other Epistle of the laying on of the handes of the eldership, I do not so take it, as thoughe Paule spake of the Colledge of Elders: but in this name (videlicet presbyterij) I vnderstand the ordination it selfe: as if he should say, endeuour thy selfe that the grace be not in vayne, which thou hast receyued by the laying on of hands, when I ordeyned thee a minister. Agayne vpon this. 1. Tim. 5. he sayth thus: 
                              Impositio manuum ordinationem significat, signum enim pro re ipsa capitur, The imposition of handes signifieth the ordering, for the signe is taken for the thing it selfe. For what is it to appoynt, but to call, elect, & ordeyne? Moreouer that which Paule sayth to Titus, Vt constituas. &c. dothe expounde this to Timothie, manus citò. &c. and therefore in déede I make no difference in this place, betwixte election, ordeyning, and imposition of handes.
                        Last of all (you say) that you answere, though this mighte agree to Timothie alone. &c. If it agreed to Timothie alone, it must néedes followe that it may agrée to other Bishops also: for Timothie was a Bishop, as it shall be by better reason proued, than youTract. 8. are able to shewe any to the contrarie: This that you speake of his Euangelistship, and of his superioritie in that respect, is onely spoken without reason or authoritie: but you shall haue store of bothe to the contrarie (God willing) when I come to that place.
                        I am not so lauishe of my witnesses, as you are of scornefull and vnséemely tauntes and speaches.
                        Bothe Ambrose and Chrysost. doe not say, that Paule héere warneth Timothie onely to be circumspect, but to be circumspect in appoynting of Ministers: and if it were not so, I doubt not, but that I shoulde heare of it. The words are spoken to Timothie in respecte that he was Bishop, neither hath the Apostle giuen any suche like Admonition to any Church, in any of his Epistles, as I haue before noted. And therfore Ambrose in his exposition of this place to Timothie (after that he had shewed what circumspection the Apostle would haue to be vsed in ordeyning of Ministers) concludeth thus: 
                              Haec Episcopus custodiens, castum se exbibebit religioni: A Bishop obseruingAmbrose. these things, shall shewe himselfe pure in religion. Whereby he signifieth that this precept is properly perteyning to a Bishop. Chrysostome also in the. 1. Tim. 4. vponChrysostome. these wordes, Cum impositione manuum presbyterij, sayth, 
                              Non de presbyteris hoc loco, sed de Episcopis loquitur▪ non enim profectò presbyteri ipsum ordinarunt: He speaketh not of priests in this place, but of Bishops, for certaynely priestes did not ordeyne him. And Oecolam
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                           
                           Oecolampad. vpon the same wordes: 
                              Presbyteros dicit Episcopos, ne
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  enim presbyteri Episcopum ordinabant, He calleth Bishops Priestes, for Priests did not ordeyne a Bishop. Whereby it playnely appeareth that these auncient fathers thinke this precept, 
                              manus citò ne cui imponas: lay thy handes sodenly on no man, to be giuen onely to Timothie in the respect that he was Bishop, and therefore also to apperteyne vnto Bishops onely to ordeyne Ministers.
                        
                           Hierome vpon that place to Titus sayth: 
                              Audiant Episcopi qui habent constituendi
                              Hierome. 
                              Presbyteros per vrbes singulas potestatem, sub quali lege ecclesiasticae potestatis ordo teneatur: Let Bishops which haue authoritie to appoynt Ministers in euery citie, heare in what lawe the order of ecclesiasticall authoritie dothe consist. And a little after (speaking also of Bishops) VVhereby it is manyfest that those whiche contemning the Apostles rule, will not bestowe the ecclesiasticall degree vpon any for desert, but for fauour, to doe agaynst Christe. &c. Hierome héere taketh the Bishop onely to haue authoritie to ordeyne

and appoynt Ministers. And Chrysostome vpon the same place sayth that Paule dydChrysost. in 1. Tit. those things himselfe that required greatest labor and trauell: but lefte other things of honour and commendation to Titus, as ordeyning of Bishops. So sayth Theophilact likewise. Thus then you sée howe euidently bothe those places of scripture, and also these auncient fathers do ouerthrow that saying of the Admonition, that the right of ordering ministers dothe at no hand apperteyne to a Bishop. And how manifestly also the same haue iustified that whiche I haue sayde, that is, that Bishops haue authoritie to admit ministers: for these be my very words.
                        Nowe how corruptly you haue dealt with me héere in this place, I would wisheThe corrupte dealing of T. C. the indifferent Reader to consider: where I saye, that Bishops haue authoritie to admit ministers, you make me to say, that the election of ministers by one man was in ye Apostles time. And where I say, yt these words of Paul to Timothie (manus citò ne cui imponas. &c.) be an admonition to Timothie, that he oughte to be circumspect in appoynting of ministers: you make the reader beléeue that I say, that it is a commaundement giuen by Paule to Timothie, that the Bishop onely shoulde choose the minister. And where I say that Hierome and others do expounde these wordes to Titus (vt constituas oppidatim. &c.) of the authoritie that Titus had in placing ministers in euery Churche: you report them, as thoughe I shoulde saye, that Hierome proueth the righte of the election of the minister to belong to the Bishop onely: where I haue ordeyning, there you haue election: And where I saye, belongeth to the Bishop, there say you, belongeth to the Bishop onely. Is this your sinceritie? dare you accuse other men of corruption, béeing guiltie of it your selfe almoste in euery lyne? True it is, that I am persuaded that bothe Timothie and Titus, and consequently other Bishops, haue authoritie to ordeyne and appoynt ministers alone, which I haue also partly proued before, and shall do partly hereafter, as I haue occasion: But yet all men that be not blinde may sée, that I haue affirmed no suche thing in that part of my answere to the Admonition.
                        I haue always greatly estéemed the iudgemēts & opinions of learned men, & howsoeuer you are persuaded of your own excellencie, and dexteritie of wit, yet am I content to submit my selfe to the opinions of other, to whome I am in no respect comparable: and then do I thinke my selfe to haue reason sufficient, when I haue good authoritie of the scriptures, and of learned writers.
                        Aristotle spake as a heathenish Philosopher, of such prophane sciences, as be grounded not vpon authoritie, but vpon naturall and humaine reason: but that that we professe is of an other nature, for it is grounded vpon authoritie, and for the authority sake to be beléeued, what reason soeuer there is to the contrarie. And surely I maruell what you meane so often to quarell with me, for the alleadging of the authoritie of learned writers: except it be bicause you haue not red so many your selfe, or else that you would séeme your selfe to be the Author & inuentor of those reasons, which you haue borrowed of them: which in déede, is to winne the prayse of a good wit vnto your selfe, and to robbe the learned writers of their iust commendation. Therfore to answere you briefly in this matter, I thinke authoritie in diuine matters to be the bestAuthority the best proofe in diuine matters. reason, whether it be of the scriptures thēselues, or of such learned men as do rightly interpret ye same. And I déeme it to be much more honestie in vsing their authorities to expresse their names (that they may haue their iust cōmendation, and the matter the more credite) than vsing their authorities, & suppressing their names, vaynely & arrogantly to vsurpe as my owne, that which I haue borrowed out of them.
                        I know Master Caluines interpretation vpon that place, & likewise what Musculus sayth of the same in his Common places, titu. de electione ministrorum: but the words of the texte be playne. And forasmuche as you make a distinction betwixte electing and ordeyning, and saye, that electing perteyneth to the people, and ordeyning to the Bishop:Pag. 41. lin. 4. Likewise that the Apostle in this place speaketh of ordeining, and not of electing, you muste of necessitie confesse, that by saying 
                              sicut tibi ordinaram, as I appoyntedTit. 1. thee, he meaneth onely imposition of handes and prayer: as thoughe he shoulde say,

                           
                              vt constituas opidatìm presbyteros suut tibi ordinaram. sci. per impositionem manuum & orationem: That thou shouldest ordeyne Ministers in euery citie as I appoynted thee (that is to saye) by laying on of handes, and by prayer. And thus doe learned Interpreters also expounde this place: Neither is Musculus his meaning muche otherwyse, as it may appeare to those that well consider his wordes: especially if your distinction betwixt electing & ordeyning holde, and if Paule speake héere of ordeyning onely: for in ordeining of Ministers the Apostles vsed laying on of handes as a ceremonie, they prayed alsoAct. 14. and fasted. But if you will haue the Apostle héere to speake of electing also, then dothe he expounde him selfe, when he sayth: 
                              Si quis est inculpatus. &c. If any by vnreprouable,Tit. 1. the husbande of one wyfe. &c. For howe can you otherwise make those wordes aptly to hang togither? No doubt the Apostle gaue Titus an especial charge in ordeyning of Ministers, to haue respect vnto these qualities: of whiche charge he putteth him in minde when he sayth, that he lefte him at Creta, to ordeyne Ministers in euery citie, as he appoynted him, that is, suche as be vnreprouable. &c.
                        I knowe there be some that expounde this place thus also: that for as muche as Paule when he lefte Titus in Creta, did will him to ordeyne Ministers in euery citie, nowe he putteth him in minde of the same by his letters, and willeth him to doe according to his appoyntment, that is, to place Ministers in euery citie: and surely this interpretation hathe good reason: for béeing absent, we commonly vse to put them in minde by letters, to whome we haue committed any thing to be done, of such things as we willed them to do, when we were present with them.
                        I reuerence Master Caluin as a singular man, and worthy instrument in Christes Churche: but I am not so wholly addicted vnto him, that I will contemne other mens iudgements that in diuers poyntes agrée not fully with him, especially in the interpretation of some places of the Scripture, when as in my opinion they come néerer to the true meaning and sense of it in those poyntes, than he dothe.
                        I did neuer cleaue to Musculus, or to any other man so, that for his or their sakes I derogate any thing from suche as be comparable to them, and haue deserued singular commendation for their writings. If any one, or mo learned men be of my iudgement, though all be not, I am not ashamed to vse their testimonie in that poynte, though in some other poyntes I do not consent vnto them.
                        If I either vnioynt or racke in peeces from the rest, any worde or sentence of Master Caluines, make it knowne, set it open, that I may iustly beare the blame of it: but if I deale truly and faythfully with him, if I set downe his owne words, whole sentences, whole sections, and (as you say) whole leaues, without adding, altering, or diminishing, then howe can you excuse your so vntrue and vniust charging of me? Which, if it were not so common and vsuall with you, might the better be tollerated.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 7. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 46. Sect. 1.
                     It is the generall consent of all the learned fathers, that it perteyneth to the office of a Bishop to order and electe Ministers of the worde. In this sayth Hierome in Epist. ad Euagrium, A Bishop dothe excellHierome. all other Ministers, in that the ordering and appoynting of Ministers dothe properly perteyne vnto him. And yet these men saye, that the righte of ordering Ministers dothe at no hande apperteyne to a Bishop. But for the order and manner of making Ministers, peruse the booke made for that purpose, and as I sayde before, so I say agayne, if thou hast any iudgement thou canst not but lyke it, and allowe of it.
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 40. Sect. 3. 4. 5.
                     In the ende you saye it is the generall consent of all the learned Fathers, that it belongeth to the Bishoppe to choose the Minister. Because you acquaynte my eares with suche bolde and vntrue affirmations, I can nowe the more paciently heare you thus baunting your self, as though you had all the fathers by hearte, and carried them aboute with you, wheresoeuer you wente, whereas if a man would measure you by the skill in them, which you haue shewed heere, he would hardly beleeue that you had red the tenthe parte of them.
                     Are all the learned Fathers of that minde? I thinke then you would haue bin better aduised, than to haue set down but one, when as you know a matter in controuersie wil not be tried but by two or three witnesses, vnlesse the Lorde speake him selfe: and therfore you giue me occasion to suspecte that bicause you cite butI had cited Am brose and Chrysostome before. one, you knowe of no more. Nowe let vs see what your one witnesse will depose in this matter.
                     And fyrst of all, you haue done more wisely than simply, in that you haue altered Hieromes wordes. For where he sayth, wherein dothe a Bishop differ from an Elder, but onely in ordeyning: you saye, a Bishop dothe excell all other Ministers. &c. I reporte me heere vnto your conscience, whether you dyd not of purpose chaunge Hierome his sentence, bicause you woulde not let the Reader vnderstande what oddes is betweene S. Hieromes Bishops in his dayes, and betweene our Lorde Bishops. For then the Bishop had nothing aboue an Elder, or other mininister, but onely the ordeyning of the Minister. Nowe he hathe a thousande Parishes, where the Minister hathe but one. For the matters also of the substaunce of the ministerie, the Bishop nowe excommunicateth, whiche the Minister can not. Besides diuers other things, whiche are meere ciuill, whiche the Bishop dothe, and whiche neither Bishop nor other Minister oughte to doe. I saye, I reporte me to your conscience, whether you altered Hieromes wordes to this ende, that you woulde keepe this from the knowledge of your reader, or no. For answere to the place, it is anIt is your argumēt, it is none of mine: my wor des importetio such thing. euill argument to saye, the Bishop had the ordeyning of the Minister, Ergo he had the election of him. The contrarie rather is a good argument: the Bishop had the ordeyning of the Minister, therefore he had not the election of him. For ordination and election are dyuersDiuers mem bers of the whol may concurre in one, and the self same person, though one of them can not be verified of an other members of one whole, whiche is the placing of the Pastor in his Churche, and one member can not be verified of an other, as you can not saye your foote is your hande. I will not denie, but that sometimes these wordes may be founde confounded in Ecclesiasticall writers, but I wyll shew you also, that they are distinguished, and that the election perteyneth to the people, andThen haue you al this while striued in vay ne. ordeyning vnto the Bishop.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Shew me one Father that denieth that, which I héere affirme: if you neyther doe, nor can, then may my skill in the Fathers, and reading also be as muche (for any thing héere to the contrarie) as you thinke I woulde haue it séeme to be. But I will not followe you in your vayne of gybing. I had cited before Chrysostome and Ambrose, for the same purpose, so that my witnesses be thrée, and therefore sufficient, except you wil make some lawfull exception agaynst them: but bicause you may vnderstande that I haue plentie and store sufficient, I will rehearse but one sentence vnto you of M. Caluines, in his 
                              Institu. Cap. 8. Ordinari Episcopos à suis Metropolitis, iubent
                              Caluine. 
                              omnes veteres Synodi: All auncient Synodes do commaund that Bishops should be ordeyned of their Metropolitanes.
                        
                        What cause shoulde I haue thus to reporte Hieromes words, to proue such difference betwixte the Bishop and other Ministers, séeing that dothe not perteyne to this place: and agayne, considering that I haue at large proued the same in another place? Are you so dull of vnderstanding as you would séeme to be? doe not bothe the wordes that goe before, and those that followe also, declare my purpose in vsing that place? I doe not translate Hieromes wordes, but I declare Hieromes meaning: and if the offence be in this, that I say a bishop doth excel al other ministers, then dothe your owne Author Illiricus (out of whome you haue verbatim borrowed so muche) and the other writers of the Centu. offende also: for thus he sayth: 
                              Ordinatio ministrorum propria erat Episcopi, quo solo iure caeteris sacerdotibus praestantiorem esse Episcopum
                              Centu. 4. ca. 7. 
                              Hieronymus scripsit ad Euagrium: The ordeyning of Ministers was proper vnto the Bishop, by the whiche (as Hierome wrote vnto Euagrius) a Bishop onely excelleth other priestes: out of whom as I haue borrowed this worde excell, so haue you borrowed also this word onely: for the words of Hierome be these: 
                              quid enim facit excepta ordinatione
                              Hie. ad Euag. 
                              Episcopus, quod presbyter non facit: VVhat dothe a Bishop, whiche a Minister dothe not, excepte ordination? Whereby he manyfestly affirmeth as muche as I in

this place require: that is, that the right of ordering Ministers doth apperteyne to the Bishop. The same also Chrysostome in the lyke wordes wryteth in. 1. Ti. 3.
                        Touching the difference betwixt a Bishop and a common minister, of the superioritie of Bishops, and of their iurisdiction (for auoyding of confusion, where vnto you héere prouoke me) I will speake when I come to that part of this booke.
                        You saye that this is an euill argument, The Bishop hath the ordeyning of the Minister,Election and ordinatio may concurre in one person. 
                           Ergo he hath the election of him. &c. I thinke it is a very good argument, and that you are greatly deceyued when you saye election and ordination can not concurre in one, and the selfe same person, althoughe they maye be distinguished the one from the other. Had not the Master of the Colledge interest in the electing of you when you were chosen to be fellow, and dyd he not also admitte you? was there not then bothe election and admission in one man? And is not the lyke in other degrées of learning? Hathe not he authoritie to electe, that hathe authoritie to admitte, that is, to ordeyne? or haue you an example of any lawfully placed in the ministerie, without the election and admission of the Bishop? Haue you forgotten what you alleagedT. C. forgetteth him selie▪
                            before out of the Councell of Carthage, the Councell of Toledo. &c. where it is sufficiently expressed, that the election of Ministers dothe aswell perteyne to the Bishops, as it dothe to the people? And doe not all the examples and places of scripture that you haue alleadged for your purpose, verifie the same? Wherefore thoughe election and ordination so differ the one from the other, that the one can not be sayde to be the other, yet maye they well be ioyned togither in one subiecte: as Prudence, Iustice, Temperance and Fortitude are, béeing notwithstanding members of one whole. But this hathe deceyued you, that you thinke, bicause dyuers membersAn ouersight of T. C. of one whole, can not be confounded among themselues, and one verified of an other, therefore they maye not méete togither in one and the selfe same person, whiche is a grosse ouersighte of yours: for take your owne example: althoughe your foote is not your hande, yet (I am sure) you woulde be sorie if one man mighte not haue bothe féete and handes.
                        But what neede I labour any thing in prouing this: for you your selfe confesse more than I affirmed, and as muche as I require, that is, that election and ordination are sometymes confounded in Ecclesiasticall wryters: And therefore the one taken for the other. I doe not denie but that sometymes also they be distinguished, althoughe the Admonition in this place that I doe nowe confute, dothe vtterly confounde them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 7. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 41. Sect. 1.
                     Upon the sixte of the Actes, the glosse hathe, that that whiche was done there of the twelue Apostles, in willing the brethren to looke out fitte men, was done to giue vs example, and muste be obserued in those that are ordeyned: for saythe the glosse, the people muste choose, and the Bishop muste ordeyne. And that S. Hierome muste be so vnderstandes, it appeareth not onely that it hathe beene so expounded: but also it maye be easily proued, for that S. Hieromes sentence and iudgement appeareth in other places, that he woulde haue nothing heere done without the people, as in his Epistle ad Rusticum monachum, heHieromes words 
                              〈◊〉
                           . willeth that the people shoulde haue power and authoritie to choose their Clearkes and their Ministers. And in his Epistle to Neopotian, of the lyfe of the clearks, he hath this distinction manifestly:An vntruthe▪ proceeding of grosse ignorance for these are Musculus his words, and not Hieromes. They runne, sayth he, vnto the Bishops suffraganes, certayne times of the yere, and bringing some summe of money, they are annoynted and ordeyned, beeing chosen of none, and afterwarde, the Bishop without any lawfull election, is chosen in hugger mugger, of the Canons and Prebendaries onely, without the knowledge of the people. And so you see, that althoughe that S. Hierome saythe, that the Bishop had the ordeyning of the Ministers, yet he had not the election, for the ordeyning was nothing else but an approuing of the election, by putting on of handes, and consequently, hauing made your vaunt, that all the learned Fathers were of this iudgement, that the Bishop shoulde elect the Minister, you shewe not so muche as one.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What glosse sayth so? where shall a man finde it? or where is it? this is to large a scope that you take vnto your selfe. But I muste pardon you, for Illiricus; of whom you haue borrowed it, dothe not otherwyse quote the place. Nowebeit the wordes as Illiricus dothe reporte them (whiche I thinke are taken out of 
                              glossa ordinaria) make nothing agaynst any thing that I haue sayde: for if you will thus reason: The Bishop must ordeyne, Ergo, he may not elect? I denie your argument, the reason I haue shewed before, one man may bothe ordeyne and elect.
                        
                        You haue vtterly falsified Hieromes wordes ad Rusticum monachum, and mucheT. C. falsifieth Hierome. more declined from the true interpretation of them, than I woulde haue suspected, especially séeing you woulde be thoughte to haue intrapped me in the like not long before. For the wordes of Hierome be these: 
                              Cum ad perfectam aetatem veneris, si tamen
                              Hier. ad Rustic. Monachum. 
                              vita comes fuerit, & te vel populus, vel Pontifex ciuitatis in clerum elegerit, agito quae clerici sunt: VVhen thou shalte come to perfecte age, if thy lyfe be answerable, and eyther the people, or the Bishop of the Citie shall choose thee into the Cleargie, doe suche thinges as belong to a Clearke. He dothe not héere will that the people shoulde haue authoritie to choose their Clearks and their Ministers, as you saye, but he saythe vnto Rusticus the Monke, that if eyther the people, or the Bishop of the Citie choose him to be Clearke, that then he must doe those thinges that perteyne to a Clearke. He sayth, vel populus, vel Pontifex. &c. signifying that it was a thing indifferent to be chosen eyther by the people, or by the Bishop: which maketh for me against you, for I say that a Bishop may choose a minister, and you denie it.
                        The place that you alleage out of the Epistle of Hierome, 
                              ad Nepotianum de vita
                              T. C. fathereth that vpon Hierome, whi che is not to be founde in him, but is in Muscuins. 
                              Clericorum,
                            is not to be founde in Hierome. They be Master Musculus his owne wordes, Titu. de verbi ministris. And bicause that he dothe adioyne them to a place whiche he hathe alleaged out of Hierome, therefore you thinke them to be alleaged of him as Hieromes wordes, whyche is a grosse ouersighte, and argueth that you haue not redde the Authors them selues. Oh, howe woulde you haue triumphed if the lyke coulde haue béene espyed in my booke. There is a manyfest place to the contrarie in that Epistle to Nepotian, for thus he saythe: 
                              Gloria patris est filius sapiens:
                              Hierome ad Nepoti. 
                              gaudeat Episcopus iudicio suo, cum tales Christo elegerit sacerdotes: A wyse sonne is the glory of the father: lette the Bishoppe reioyce and be gladde of his iudgement, when he hathe chosen vnto Christe suche Priestes. Héere mighte I triumphe ouer you (bothe for corrupting of Hieromes wordes, and fathering that vpon him which is not to be founde in him) if I were disposed to deale with you so prophanely in a diuine and serious matter. Onely this I wishe, that by these grosse ouersightes, you woulde learne one poyne of wysedome, that is, to be modest, and to knowe your selfe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 7. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 41. Sect. 2.
                     Nowe will I shewe you the cleane contrarie of that you saye, not that I gladly trauayle this wayes, for if you hadde not constrayned me, you shoulde not haue hearde one voyce this waye. And woulde to God, that you woulde be contente, especially when you meete wyth those that wyll bee tryed by the Scriptures, to seeke no farther strengthe than they giue you. But I am lothe you shoulde oppresse the truthe, and make all men afrayde of it, by making them beleeue, that it is so desolate and forsaken of hir friendes, as you pretende. You confesse S. Cyprian is agaynst you heerein, and he was a learned Father, and a Martyr also, whiche did not onely vse this fourme of election, but also taughte it to be necessarie, and commaunded, and therefore me thinketh you shoulde not haue sayde all the learned Fathers without exception: you see

also We haue seen it, finally to your credite. S. Ierome is of another iudgement. S. Augustine also when he speaketh how he appoynted Eradius to succeede him, shewed, how it was the approued right and custome, that the whole Church should either choose or consent of their Byshop. And Ambrose saith that that is truly and
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Epistle. certainly a diuine electiō to the office of a Byshop, which is made of yt whole Church. Gregorius Nazianzene in the oration which he had at the death of his father, hath diuers things which proue that the election of the minister perteyned to the Church, and This is an vntruth, for he maketh no such confutation there. confuteth those thinges whiche should seeme to hinder it. These were learned fathers, and yet thought not, that the election of the Pastor or Byshop, perteyned to one man alone, but that the Church had also hir interest, therefore you see all the learned fathers are not of that mind, you say they are.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To Cyprian I haue answered before: the people gaue their consente in his time:Cyprian choo seth withoute the consent of the people. but yet was he bolde sometime to elect clearks without them, as it appeareth 
                              lib. 2. epist. 5. which he writeth vnto the Cleargie and people, signifying vnto them that it was not necessarie to haue their cōsent in choosing one Aurelius a Clearke: his words be these: In ordinandis clericis (fratres charissimi) solemus vos ante consulere, & mores ac merita
                              Cypri. lib. 2. epist. 5. 
                              singulorum communi consilio ponderare. Sed expectanda non sunt testimonia humana, cum praecedunt diuina suffragia &c. In the election of Clearks (beloued brethren) we were wont to take your aduise before, and to weigh with common aduise euery mans manners and deserts: But the testimonies of men are not to be loked for, when diuine suffrages haue gone before. In these words also it appeareth, what interest the people then had in electiōs,What interest the people had in Cyprians time. euen to beare witnesse and to testify of the good life and cōuersation of such, as should be admitted into the Cleargie.
                        
                           Ierome himselfe (whatsoeuer your counterfeyte Ierome dothe affirme) agréeth with me.
                        Did not Illiricus tell you where Augustine speaketh these words, neither in what tome, nor in what booke, nor in what epistle? Surely Augustines works are farre larger, than Musculus common places. But the treatise you meane of, is in his seconde tome among his epistles, in number 110. I would wish the learned reader to peruse it, then shall he soone perceiue, how little it maketh for your purpose, and how aptlyThe testimonie of Augustine cited by T. C. serueth not his purpose▪
                            it serueth mine. First he doth not shew that it was the approued right and custome, that the whole Church should eyther choose, or consent of their Byshop: if he do, lay downe his words: if you cannot, then hath Illiricus his collection deceiued you. Secondly, although it may there appeare that the people vsed to giue their consents, yet Augustine both by his owne act, and by the act of Seuerus byshop of Milleum; declareth that not to be so necessary, or such a right, but that it may be, vpon iust considerations, altered. Last of all, the words of Augustine be playne, which I will only set downe and leaue them to the consideration of the reader. Augustine shewing his reasons why he did appoint Eradius to succéede him, saith thus: 
                              scio post obitus episcoporum. &c. I know that ChurchesAug. 2. to. 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . vse after the deathes of Bishops, to be much troubled through ambitious or cōtentious persons: and it is my duetie (so muche as lyeth in me) to prouide for this citie, least that thing (whereof I haue often times had experience to my greefe) should happen. Then he shewethContention in popular 
                                 〈◊〉
                               lections. what a stirre there was alittle before in the Church of Milleum about their Byshop, at what time he was sent for vnto them, to appease the controuersie, and declaring how in the ende, they willingly imbraced him, whome Seuerus their Byshop,Byshopsappoynt their successors. whilest he was aliue, appoynted vnto them, he saith, 
                              minus tamen aliquid factum erat, vnde nonnulli. &c. Yet was there somewhat lesse done, whereby diuers were offended, bycause my brother Seuerus thought it sufficiente to appoint his successor in the presence of the Cleargie, and spake not thereof vnto the people: by occasion whereof some greefe was cō
                              ceiued. But what needes more words? it pleased God, the greefe was expelled, ioy came in place, and he was admitted Byshop, whome the predecessor had appointed. And it followeth immediatly, 
                              Ergo ne aliqui de me querantur, voluntatem meam, quam credo dei esse, in omnium vestrum notitiam profero, presbyterum Eradium mibi successorem volo. &c. Therefore least anye shoulde complayne of me, I doe heere signifye vnto you all my will (whyche I thynke to bee the wyll of God) I will haue Eradius the mynister to bee my successoure. &c. Lastlye he sheweth howe he hymselfe was

appointed Byshop, his predecessor being yet aliue.
                        Here it is to be noted, first, what stirre began to be in Augustines time about suchNotes out of the restunome of Augustine. elections made by the people, which was the cause why he and others appointed vnto themselues successors whilest they yet liued. Secondly, that Seuerus appointed to himselfe a successor, and thought it not necessary therein to require the consent of the people, which he would not haue neglected if it had bin either necessary or vsuall: Last of all, that Augustine pronounceth Eradius to be his successor in the presence of the people, that they might know his minde, but yet without asking their voyces, although they did willingly of themselues consent: for that which afterward he requireth them to subscribe vnto, was the petition that he made vnto them, no more to trouble hym with their ciuil matters, but that they would resort vnto Eradius his successor for such causes. When the reader hathe well considered these circumstances, which he shall better learne in the place itselfe, then let hym iudge how muche it serueth for your turne.
                        It may appeare by that Epistle of Ambrose, what contention there was in 
                              Vercellensi
                              Contention about popular elections. 
                              ecclesia
                            (to the which he wrote) about the election of their Byshop, for they had bene long destitute of one, as it there appeareth. Wherefore he exhorteth them to agrée▪ ment, by the example of their predecessors, who so well agréed in choosing of Eusebius, wherevpon he saith, meritò vir tantus (meaning Eusebius) euasit, quem omnis elegit ecclesia:
                              Ambro. epi. 82 
                              meritò creditum, quòd diuino esset electus iudicio, quem onmes postulauissent. He worthily proued a notable man, whome the whole Church elected: he was rightly thought to be chosen by gods appointment, whome euery one desired. And who doubteth but that he is called of God, whome the whole Church without suite, without sinister affection, without intent to mainteine factions and schismes, doth desire? this proues, that in Ambrose his time, in that Church the people desired their Byshop: which is not to be denied: but it also sheweth that in the same time, there were maruellous contentions about such elections: which is to be considered.
                        
                           Nazianzene in that oration, hath not one argument to proue that the election of the ministerNazianzene performeth not that for the which he is auouched. Contention in popular elections. doth perteyne to the Church, neyther doth he confute those things which should séeme to hinder it: for there is none alleadged: only he declareth what a maruellous stirre and sedition there was, at two sundry times, in the Church of Caesaria, about the election of the Byshop, what violence was vsed about the same, how the people were deuided among themselues first, and after against their ministers. Likewise how they suddenly misliked their owne choise, and would haue disanulled it, if they had not bin restreyned of their willes by Nazianzene, his father. How the Emperoure also, and the ruler of the citie, taking part with the factious company, were by him pacifyed. Surely this maketh very little to the commendation of popular elections: Nay in the second contention that he there reciteth, declaring who were the especiall authours of it, he saith, 
                              Ecclesiae enim a malo erant immunes pariter & opulentiores & potētiores, sed omnis
                              The common people especial authours of tumults in elections. 
                              impetus ac seditio inter plebem erat, ac precipuè vilissimam: For the churches (meaning the Cleargie) were cleare from that mischiefe, so were the richer sort also, and they which were of greater authoritie, but all the violence and sedition was among the common people, and among them especially, which were of the basest sort. And a little after, telling how his father pacifyed that sedition, he saith, that his father writ vnto them, admonished them, 
                              p
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 pulum, sacerdotes, necnon alios & quotquot qui ad gradum pertinebant, obtestabatur, eligebat, * calculum ferebat. &c. He humbly intreated the people, the priests, and others which perteyned
                                 
                                    〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                 . to that order, he elected, chose. &c. What is here spoken that maketh not rather against you, than with you, no man denieth but that the people at this time had interest in the election of the minister in diuers Churches, but that doth not proue that they ought to haue so nowe, or that the Byshop hath no interest in the same: nay inconueniences of popular elections did then manifestly appeare.
                        There is not as yet one authoritie brought in to proue that the ordering of ministersT. C. reasoneth not ad idem, and defendeth not the Admonition. doth at no hand apperteine to the byshop, whiche the Admonition affirmeth, and I haue improued: but you haue not replyed vnto it, kéeping your olde accustomed manner still, not to reason ad idem: for whereas you shoulde conclude thus:

the ordering of ministers doth at no hand perteyne to a Byshop, you conclude thus: The electionT. C. letteth slip ye which he shold proue and yet proueth not that which he would. The propositions that should haue bin defended of a Pastor or Byshop perteyneth not to one man alone. And yet you haue not proued that, only you bring in examples of popular elections: and so haue I broughte in both examples, and authorities for the sole election of the Byshop: for they be both true. But you ought to proue these two propositions, if you will iustify the Admonition: firste, that popular elections ought to be perpetuall: and secondly: that the ordeyning of ministers dothe at no hand perteyne to the Byshop. But you subtilly passe these ouer, and cast a mist before your readers eyes, in heaping vp, out of Illiricus néedelesse proofes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 41. Sect. 3.
                     And that this election continued in the Churche, vntill within a CCC. yeares, at what tyme there was more than Egyptiacall, and palpable darknesse ouer the face of the whole yearth, it may appeare in a treatise of Flaccus Illiricus, whiche he calleth an addition vnto his booke that he entituleth the catalogue of the witnesses of truth, of whome I confesse my selfe to haue bin Not only much, but almost altogither. muche holpen in this matter of the choise of the Church touching the ministers: especially in the Emperours edicts whiche are before cited. For lacking opportunities diuers ways, I was contented somewhat to vse the collection to my commoditie, for the more speedy furtherance, and better proceeding in other matters, which I will leaue of, bycause they may be there red of those that be learned, whome I wil also referre to the sixt & seuenth bookes, of Eusebius, where An vntruth: for there 
                              〈1 line〉
                           no such thing to be found in these bookes of▪ usebius. both the formes of the elections in those times are described, and where besides that the customes of the peoples choyse is set foorth, there are examples of the election of the people and Cleargie, which were confirmed by the This is vntrue, for Eusebi▪ us maketh not mention of confirmation of Elections by any Christian magistrate, nor of any Byshop of Constantinople▪
                         Christian magistrate, namely in the Byshop of Constantinople. And these may suffice for the other that haue not that commoditie of bookes, nor habilitie, nor skill to reade them, being in a straunge tongue, to know, that besides the institution of God in his worde, this manner of electing did continue so long, as there was any sight of the knowledge of God in the Churche of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Illiricus his treatise that you speake of, doth nothing preiudice the cause that I haue in hand, touching the authorities there alleadged: for the question is not whether it hath bin so or no, but whether it be conuenient and profitable for the Church to haue it so now. The reasons that Illiricus vseth, beside his authorities, are of no great force to proue either necessitie or conueniencie, of such elections in this Church, as the state is now.
                        You do well to confesse the help that you had by Illiricus, for it could not haue binThe reply of T. C. consisteth of other mens collections. vnespyed, séeing you haue almost verbatìm drawen all the authorities, and reasons that you vse in this cause out of him. And truly I maruell with what face you can so opprobriously obiect vnto me, other mens collections, and lacke of reading the ancient writers, when as it is euident that your whole booke consisteth of other mens notes, and collections: and that you your selfe haue scarce read any one of the Authours that you haue alledged, 18. authorities at the least you haue borrowed of Illiricus, in this cause, besides certayne other reasons.
                        You referre the reader to the. 6. &. 7. booke of Eusebius, where you say both the formes of elections in those tunes are described, and the customes of the peoples choise set foorth, and diuers examples of the elections of the people and Cleargie. &c. But the reader shoulde haue bene something beholding to you, if you had named the Chapters as well as you haue done the bookes: Howebeit you do very politikely, to referre youre readers to the whole bookes, which you are sure the most of them cannot, and of those that can, many willT. C. sendeth his reader to Eusebius for that which he shall not find in him. 
                                 Euse. lib. 6. cap.
                               10. not peruse: but you haue not dealt faithfully, for it is not to be founde in any parte of these two bookes, where the customes of the peoples choyse is set foorthe, or any example of the people and Cleargies election confirmed by the Christian Magistrate. Nor yet any example of any Byshop of Constantinople. The contrary rather may be collected in sundrye places. In the sixte Booke Eusebius declareth that in the absence of Narcissus (bycause it was not knowne where he was) The gouernoures of the Churches
                           
                           adioyning, ordeyne another Byshop.
                        
                        And after Narcissus retourne, bycause he was aged, the story saith: 
                              dictum Alexandrum alterius paroeciae &c. That the ordinance of God called the said Alexander, being Byshop of another parish, to vndertake that charge with Narcissus, according to a vision which was in the night reuealed vnto him: And in ye next chapter he sheweth how that those of Hierusalem receyued the said Byshop courteously, and would not suffer him to retourne to the place where he was Byshop before, they being admonished by a vision in the night, which signifyed vnto them, that they should go out of the citie gates and receiue their Bishop appoynted vnto them by God: which thing they also did by the consent 
                              vicinorum Episcoporum, of the Byshops adioyning. What for me or manner of electing can you gather of this place? except you will admitte visions, and call them from one Byshopricke to another, to helpe some, that is growen in age. Neyther is here any mention made of the electiō of the people: for this that he saith Hierosolomitani went out. &c. it may rather be vnderstanded of the ministers and deacons of Hierusalem, than of the people.
                        In the. 7. booke 
                              cap. 30. it appeareth that the ministers and Pastors had then authorite to choose Byshops. Only in the. 6. booke ther is one example that may séeme something to make for your purpose vntill it be well considered. It is of one Fabianus who was chosen Byshop of Rome (as it is there reported) in this manner: 
                              cum fratres omnes
                              Lib. 6. cap. 29. 
                              ad ordinandum futurum Episcopum in ecclesia congregati essent. &c. The reporte goeth (when as all the brethren were assembled togyther in the Church, to choose him which should be Byshop, and many of them determined of diuers worthy and notable men, Fabianus hymselfe being present with the rest, and no man minding to choose him, that a doue falling from aboue (like as the holy ghost discended vpon our sauioure in likenesse of a doue) did lighte vpon his head, and so the whole people being with one spirite much moued, did togyther with great ioy and with one consent proclayme him woorthy to be Byshop, and immediatly tooke him, and placed him in the Byshops seate. Héere we may learne that Fabianus was miraculously chosen to his Bishopricke, and that the people moued with this miracle did burst out into commendation of him, and thought him worthy to be Bishop: dothe it therefore follow that they elected him? for it may be doubted whether those brethren that came togyther to ordeyne the Byshop, were of the Cleargy, or of the people.
                        It is not denied but at this time the people did sometimes, and in some places gyue their consents in the electing of their Byshop: yet doth not this example proue it, béeing (as it may appeare) extraordinarie: neither is there in these two bookes any forme of such elections described, nor any customes of the peoples choice set foorth: much lesse any examples of the elections of the people and cleargie which were confirmed by the Christian Magistrate, as you affirme. And surely I maruell what you meane to speake of any suche confirmation by the Christian magistrate, séeing it is manifest, that as yet, there was no Christian Magistrate mentioned by Eusebius, except only one Philip Emperoure of Rome, of whome he speaketh very little: and maketh no mention of any elections made in his time: so farre off is he, from expressing examples of any confirmation of such electiōs, by any christiā magistrate. Namely (you say) in the Byshop of Cōstātinople,A grosse oueright of T. C. & yet ther is no such example in either of those bookes, no not so muche as one word of any Bishop of Cōstantinople. And yt it may appeare how far you ar ouerséene in this place, you shal vnderstād that the last Emperour of whom Eusebius maketh any mē
                           tion in these bookes, is Dioclesian, who came to the Empire Anno. 288. but Constantinople was builded Anno. 335. So that by your assertion the Byshop of Constantinople was confirmed aboue. 40. yeares before Constantinople was.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. sixte. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 42. Lin. 2. &. Sect. 1.
                     I will adde only one place, which if it be more Part
                              〈1 line〉
                           riunt montes. &c. bitter than the rest, and cut the quicke more neare, you shall not be angrie with me, but first with those that were the Authors of it, and then

with him that wrote it.
                     Eusebius in the sixth booke speaking of Origen, which was admitted not of one Byshop, but of many Byshops to teach, sheweth how the Byshops were reprehended by the Byshop of Alexandria called Demetrius, bycause they had admitted himAn vntruth as will appeare. without the election of the Presbyterie of the Church, which were the chiefe in the election in euery Church, and vnto the whiche the Churches did committe the gouernment of themselues in euery seuerall towne and citie, and saith that it hath not bin heard, that 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         should 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         which is, that the lay men should teach when the Byshops were present. Whereby it is euident, that he counted him Vntruth, for O
                              〈1 line〉
                           gea was yet a lay man, and not admitted minister by any, a lay man which was only admitted by the Byshops, although they were many, not being first elected by the presbyterie of that Church, whereof he was the teacher.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The terrible preface that is here prefixed would make any man quake that is not acquainted with such vayne bragges. But soft man awhile, you do but dreame: for there is no such matter in that booke of Eusebius. Did you neuer heare tell of any thatT. C. smiteth at others, but woundeth himselfe. labouring to smite at another, haue deadly wounded themselues? I beléeue it will fall so out with you in this bitter and sharpe place, and then shall not I neede to be angry with you: you shall haue more cause to chafe with your selfe.
                        For answer to the place: I say it is altogither by you falsifyed, and most vntrulyEusebius fa
                                 〈1 line〉
                               sityed by T. C. alleadged: the only thing that Demetrius found fault with, was bycause Origen being a lay man did teache in the Churche, Byshops being present: for he saithe: it was neuer heard that lay mē should teach in the churches, Byshops being present. But what is sayde to this, 
                              nescimus quomodò. &c. wherein he affirmeth (we know not how) that thing which is notEu. li. 6. ca. 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 
                               true: seeing there may be found diuers, who when they were able to profyte the brethren, and that the holy Byshops had exhorted them to instruct the people, did after this sorte, teach in the Church. As Euelpis was required to do at Laranda by Neon: and Paulinus at Iconium by Celsus: and at Synada Theodorus by Atticus, whiche were all blessed brethren: And it is very likely that this thing was done also in other places, whiche we know not of. Yea Demetrius himselfe suffered him to do the like in Alexandria as it is manifest in sundry places of that booke: and euen in the end of the same chapter He retourneth to Alexandria, and doth againe employ himselfe to his accustomed diligence in teaching. But bycause this place is so confidently auouched, and so vntruly, I will set it downe as it is in Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 20. where he speaking of Origen saith thus: In the meane time (by reason of a greate warre begonne in that citie) leuing Alexandria, and thinking that he could not safely abide in Aegypt, he went into Palestina, and remayned at Caesaria, where also he was requested of the Byshops of that countrie, that he would dispute, and expound the holy scriptures before the whole Church, when as yet he was not ordeyned minister. The whiche thing is hereby manifest, for that Alexander the Byshop of Hierusalem, and Theoctistus Byshop of Caesaria, writing to Demetrius of him, do after this sort render an accompt of that deed: Furthermore he addeth this also in his letters, that it was neuer heard of, neyther yet at any time seene, that lay men did teach in the Church, Byshops being present: wherein (we know not how) he affirmeth that thing which is not true. &c. As it is set downe before. What one word is there here that sheweth how the Byshops were reprehended by the Byshop of Alexandria called Demetrius, bycause they had admitted Origen, without the election of the presbyterie of the Churche, whiche were the chiefe in the election in euery Church, and vnto the which the Churches did committe the gouernment of themselues in euery seuerall towne and citie. &c. as you affirme? Nay is there any thing sounding that way? the only cause why Demetrius reproueth them (as I haue said) is, bycause they suffered Origen in their presence to interpret the scriptures in the Churche, being as yetOrigen was then indeede a lay man, but a lay man. And yet you sée how Demetrius is reproued for that also, & how by sundry examples it is there shewed, that it is no rare thing for a lay man, to interpret the scriptures in the Church, the Byshop being present, if he be there vnto called by the Byshop.
                        Is this your bitter place? is this that terrible cutter? Indéede, it maketh your doings vncyphered, and shrewdly woundeth you, if you can well consider it.
                        
                           But to make the matter yet more plaine. Euseb. in the same booke and. 23. chapter sheweth how Origen afterwards 
                              accepit presbyterij gradum in Caesaria palestinae, ab eius loci
                              Euse. lib. 6. 23. 
                              Episcopis: was made minister in Caesaria Palestinae of the Byshops of that countrie. The which thing Demetrius misliked also, not for any iust cause, but only of malice: for although Demetrius at the firste esteemed well of Origen, and bare good will vnto hym, yet afterwarde when he saw him maruellously to prosper, and to become very famous and well accompted of, he then sought meanes, not only to discredite him, but those also which had preferred him to the ministerie: laying to his charge that which he had done being a boy, (that is, gelding of himselfe) as Eusebius doth at large declare 
                              lib. 6. cap. 8. You sée therfore how vntruly you haue reported Eusebius, and that there is no suche cause by him expressed, why Demetrius reproued the Byshops, as you feyne to be.
                        But I partly smell your meaning, which I suppose to be this: that all we whiche are admitted into the ministerie by the Byshops, withoute your presbyterie, are but lay men: whereby you would insinuate, that all those which haue bin baptised by vs, are not baptised: bycause you say, that it is of the substance or being of baptisme, whetherPa. 114. Sect. 1. he be minister or no that ministreth that sacrament, Pag. 114. And this is that mysterie, which you and your fellowes will not as yet openly vtter, but craftily dissemble, vntill you sée better oportunitie. The truth is, your intent is rebaptization, and flat Anabaytisme. But I haue declared sufficiently the vanitie of your collection in thys place: and the weakenesse of your reasons touching this matter, where you haue gyuen me more especiall occasion to speake of it. 
                              Tract. 9.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 42. Sect. 2. 3.
                     Seing then that the scripture doth teach this order, that there should be no minister thrust vppon the Churche, but by the consent thereof, and reason perswadeth that ways, and the vse of the Church hath bin so from time to time: both in peace and in time of persecution, both vnder tyrants, and godly princes, it cannot be without the high displeasure of almightie God, the greate hurt and sore oppression of the church, that one man should take this vnto him, which perteyneth to so many, or one minister which perteyneth to more than one, especially, where the aduise of learned ministers may concurre with the peoples election or consent.
                     Now if any man wil rise vp and say that this doctrine bringeth in disorder, and by this meanes children, boys, and women should haue their voyces: which is vnseemely, all men vnderstande that where the election is most freest, and most generall, yet only they haue to do, whiche are heads of families, and that this is but a meere cauill to bring the truth in hatred, which is vnworthy to be answered, and requireth rather a Censor, than a disputer to suppresse it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The scripture doth not teach any such order: it hathe examples to the contrary: it presribeth herein no certayne rule to be perpetuall: there is better reason to the contrary, if the diuersitie of the time and other circumstances be considered: the Church also hath not at all times nor in all places vsed one forme and manner of election: not in the Apostles time, as it hath bin declared: wherefore the Church is neyther hurte, nor oppressed, if the godly Magistrate alone do appoynt in it Byshops, and take such order for admitting other inferioure Pastors, as shall be thought to him most conueniente: Neyther is God displeased with them for so doing, if they séeke his glory therein, the godly peace and quietnesse of the Church, and haue respect to the end of the Apostles in appointing ministers. But he is greatly displeased with those, that make a necessitie where none is, and trouble the Churches with their owne deuises, and make contention for externall matters.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ It is not necessarie that the people should haue interest in the election of ministers, but the contrarie is conuenient.
               
                  Chap. 8. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     NOwe that you haue vttered all your authorities and reasons, to proue that the people ought to haue interest in the electing of their ministers, & that I haue sufficiently (I truste) answered the same: Lette it not be troublesome vnto you, if summarily I collect my reasons that moue me to thinke the contrarie.
                     
                        1. And fyrst I will proue that there is no certaine forme of electing prescribed in Scripture, but that the same is left frée for the Churches to appointe, as shall bée thought most conuenient for their states and tymes.
                        2. Secondly, I will shewe, that there hath bene greate diuersitie from tyme to tyme, vsed in the Churche, touching elections, and that the people at all tymes, and in all places, haue not bene admitted thervnto.
                        3. Last of all, I will sette downe the reasons why the people haue bene debarred from such elections, and why they ought still so to bée.
                     
                     
                        Touching the fyrst, these be my reasons.
                        1. Chryst (whose factes and déedes we ought especially to followe) did of himselfeMath. 10. Luke. 10. alone, without the consent of any, call, and choose his Apostles, and lykewise the 70. disciples whome he sent to preache.
                        2. The Apostles Acts. 1. altered this maner and forme: for they presented two, and the one of them was chosen by lotte.
                        3. In the. 6. of the Actes, they cleane altered this also: for the people presented seuen to the Apostles, and they were all chosen withoute lottes, the Apostles also layde on their handes vpon them.
                        4. In the. 14. of the Acts this forme is lykewise changed, for Paule and Bar
                              〈1 line〉
                           abas ordeyned ministers in euery citie, without eyther presentment by the people, or casting of lottes.
                        5. In the. 13. of the Acts it is manyfest, that Paule and Barnabas were sent onely by the Prophetes and Doctours, without any consent of the people, eyther giuen or required: reade the beginning of the Chapter, it is playne inough of it selfe.
                        6. Paule sent Timothie and Titus, and gaue them authoritie to ordeyne other:1. Tim. 5 2. Tim. 1. Tit. 1. So that it is certayne, that here is no prescripte maner and forme appoynted, to be obserued for euer: séeing that the Apostles themselues did not bynd or tie themselues to anye suche rule: which both M. Bullinger, Zuinglius, and Beza, doe lykewyse confesse, as I haue before declared. And therefore M. Caluine (as I tolde you before) sayth, that of that example in the first of the Acts no certayne rule can be gathered of electing and choosing ministers. And M. Beza is of the same iudgement both for that example Act. 1. and the other also of Deacons Act. 6. as I haue lykewise declared before. And in that booke of confession and. 5. Chapter, he hathe this saying worthie to be noted: Bycause the multitude is for the most parte ignorant and intractable, and theBeza lib. con
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  cap. 5. greater parte doth oftentymes preuayle agaynst the better, not in a popular state lawfully appoynted, are all things committed to the vnbridled multitude: but certain Magistrates are appoynted by the consent of the people, to rule and gouerne them: if this wysedome be in worldely affaires, muche more is a moderation to be had in those matters, wherein men be oftentymes blynded. Neyther is there any cause why any man of sounde iudgement should exclame that in such matters there is no place for pollicie, except he can shew this policie wherof I speake, to be repugnant to the word of God, whiche I thinke he can not: Hitherto M. Beza: and he speaketh of the electors of Ministers. And a little after he sayth, that wee must not alwayes looke what the Apostles did in Ecclesiasticall pollicie,Idem.
                              
or in the gouernment of the Churche, seeing there is so great diuersitie of circumstances, that a man can not without preposterous zeale reduce all things in all places and tymes, to one and the same forme: but it is sufficient, if respect be had to their ende and purpose, whiche is not variable, and that maner and forme vsed whiche leadeth therevnto. &c. Wherupon also I conclude, that in the Scriptures there is no certayne forme prescribedThe end of the Apostles in ecclesiasticall pollicie, must be regar ded, and not their deedes. Ibidem.
                            of electing ministers: and that the dooings of the Apostles in that matter, are not at all tymes of necessitie to be folowed: but it is sufficient to respect their ende and purpose, that is, that there be méete ministers: and therfore M. Beza sayth, No man may here prescribe any certayn rule, but if the conscience be good, it is an easy matter to determine what is moste expedient for tyme, place, and other circumstances.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 8. the second Diuision.
                  2 Touching the seconde, that is for the diuersities of elections afterwarde vsed inThat the people were not always admitted to the election of ministers. 
                           Eusebius. Zuinglius. Cyp
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ian. Concil. Ancy. Antiochen. Laodicen. Can. Apost. 1.
                      the Churche, and that the people were not alwayes admitted to the same, I referre you to that whiche hath ben spoken before, out of Eusebius and Zuinglius, of the Apostles appoynting of Iames to bée Bishoppe of Hierusalem: of Cypri lib. 1. Epist. 4. where he plainly confesseth, that, electing by the people was not then generall, in that he sayeth, Et fe
                           〈1 line〉
                        è per prouincias vniuersas tenetur, and dothe the contrary himselfe in choosing one Aurelius without the consent of the people 
                        Lib. 2. Epist 5. Lykewise of the 18. Can. of the Councell of Ancyrane. 18. Canon of the Councell of Antioche. 12. and 13. Can. Con. Lao diceni: All which Canons and Councels I haue alleadged before.
                  In the fyrste of the Canons attributed to the Apostles, it is decréed that a Bishoppe shoulde be ordeyned of two or thrée Bishoppes: and the Gréeke woorde is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  In the seconde of the same Canons, the ordeinyng of Priestes, Deacons, and other clearks is cōmitted to the Bishop alone, & the gréeke word there is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     Can. 2. lykewise.
                  In the. 35. or. 36. of the same Canons, it plainly appeareth, that Bishops were chosenCan. 35. 36. without the consent of the people.
                  In the. 4. Canon of the Councell of Nice, the election of Bishops is appoynted onlyCōcil Nicanū. Can. 4 Antioch. 19. to Bishops.
                  It appeareth plainly in the. 19. ca. Con. Anti
                           〈1 line〉
                        cheni, that only the Metropolitane and other ministers had interest in the ordeinnig and apointing of Byshops.
                  It is manyfest by Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 8. and 23. that Origen was admitted and ordeinedEus. li. 6. ca. 8. 23. Hieronymus Epist. ad Nepotian. Distinct. 62. Nulla. minister only by Bishops.
                  
                     Hierome in his Epistle ad Nepotianum, in the wordes before recited, signifyeth that the election of Priestes doth p
                        〈1 line〉
                     rteyne to the Bishop.
                  
                     Gratian distinct. 62. hath this Canon made by Leo who was Bishop of Rome. 
                        Nulla ratio s
                              〈1 line〉
                           it. &c. No reason permitteth that they should be accompted amōgst the Bishops, which are neither chosen of the Clearks, nor desired of the people, nor consecrated of the Bishops of that prouince, with the iudgement and allowance of the Metropolitane. The Glosse expounding what this is to be desired of the people, saythe, that it is to giue testimonie vnto them. And no man denieth but that suche as are to be admitted into the ministerie, ought to haue a testimonie of their lyfe & conuersation, and that it should be lawfull for any man to except againste them, if there be iuste cause: but yet the iudgement not to rest in the people.
                  And distinct. 6
                        〈1 line〉
                     . there is this lawe, 
                        Laici nullo modo se debent ins
                              〈1 line〉
                           rere electioni, The layeDistinct. 63. Laici. people ought by no meanes to thruste themselues into the election, or to meddle with the election. There are certain Canons collected out of the gréek Synodes by Martin Bracaren. Episco.
                      and they are to be founde 
                        to. Conci. 2. the firste of the Canons is this, theTom. 2. Con. whiche Gratian also hath 
                        distinct. 63. Non licet populo. &c. It is not lawfull for the people, to make the election of them which are preferred to priesthoode: but it is in the iudgement of the Bishops, that they should proue him, which is to be ordeined, whether he bee instructed in the word, and in faith, and in spirituall conuersation. The same may be also proued by the 2. and. 3. Canons folowing
                  
                     In the same distinc. there is this Canon taken oute of the. 8. generall Councell. Consecrationes & promotiones. &c. This holie and generall Councell agreeyng with former Councels, hath decreed and enacted, that the consecrations and promotions of Bishops should be made by the election of the Cleargie, and by the decree and Colledge of the Bishops.
                  Theodoret lib. 4. cap. 5. sayth, that when Auxentius béeing an Arian, was depriuedTheod. lib. 4. cap. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        . of the Bishoprike of Millain, Valentinian the Emperour called together the Bishops, and willed them to place such a one in that bishoprike, as he might safely commit himself vnto. &c. and when as they desyred the Emperour that he himself would choose one whome hée thought méete, the Emperour tolde them agayne, that it were much better for them to elect one, bycause they were best able to iudge of his metenesse. And although the people, béeing diuided tumultuously requested the Bishops, some for one, some for an other, and at the length all desired to haue Ambrose, yet it maye euidently appeare, that the interest of the election, was in the Bishops, and the confirmation and allowyng of the same in the Emperoure. And in that the Bishoppes woulde haue committed the whole matter to the Emperour, it may appeare, that it greatly skilleth not who doo choose, so that suche be chosen as be fit for the place.
                  In the. 63. distinct. of Gratian, it is also to be séene, that sometyme the electionDistinct. 6
                           〈1 line〉
                        . and allowing of Bishops was wholly giuen to the Emperour, as we may reade in the decrée of Adrian the Pope there mentioned: and in the decrée of Leo the first, where he sheweth, howe that the dissentions, heresies, and schismes that were in the Churche, was the cause why that both the election of the Romain Bishop, and of other also was committed to the Emperour.
                  Whereby it is euident, thal the people haue not at all tymes, nor in all places had interest in the elections of ministers. I knowe that Gratian in the same distinction sayth as muche in the behalfe of the people, but therby we maye gather, that this election hath bene variable, and from tyme to tyme vsed according to the place, tyme, and persons. For further proofe hereof, I coulde recite the varietie that nowe is, and heretofore also hath bene, euen in reformed Churches, but to auoyd tediousnesse, I referre that to euery mans owne searche.
                  This is moste certaine, that the forme prescribed in the second Admonition, and in this Replie of T. C. also, if it be considered, will appeare to haue in it 
                        nihil Apostolicum, nothing Apostolicall, but to differ as muche from any forme that was then vsed, as this doth that we retaine in the Churche of England at this day, and a great deale more.
               
               
                  Chap. 8. the. 3. Diuision.
                  The reasons why the people haue bene secluded from such elections, and so oughtWhy the people haue bene, & nowe ought to be debarred from the election. to be, are these.
                  1. Fyrst, the meruailous contentions that haue bin in suche kinde of elections, by the sinister affections of the people, béeyng easily moued to diuision and partes taking, vpon euery light occasion. Examples wherof there be infinite almoste in eueryeContention about the election of ministers. election, as it may enidently appeare to euery one, that hath but lyghtly runne ouer any Ecclesiastical historie.
                  When Damasus was chosen Bishop of Rome, there was one Vrsicinus a DeaconPlat. in vita Damasi. sette vp against him, and the contention was so vehement betwixte them, and the rage of the people so intemperate, that they fell from voyces to blowes, in somuch that there was many slaine, euen in the place of election.
                  What sedition was there moued in the election of Boniface the second, whenPlatina. 
                     Dioscorus contended with him for the Bishoprike, the people were so deuided, that the contention could not be ended but with the death of Dioscorus.
                  
                  The lyke brawle was in the elections of Conon, Sergius, Paulus. 1. Constantinus,
                     Platina. and almost in euery election made in that seate: as it is euident in suche stories, as especially entreate of the liues of the Bishops of Rome.
                  The lyke sturre there hath bin in other places also, especially after that the churches

were deuided with heresies and sects. At Constantinople, after the death of Alexander their Byshop, there was a maruellous vprore for his successor, some desiring to haue Paule a Catholike, and some Macedonius an Arrian: this contention was so vehement, that the whole citie was disturbed and many slaine on both parties, yea euen the Emperours officer that was sent to appease it. Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 4. &. 7.
                  
                  The strife that was in the same place, after the death of Atticus, (Philip, Prochis, and Sisinius, striuing for the Byshopricke at one time) Socrates testifyeth 
                        lib. 7. cap. 26.
                     Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 4. &. 7. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 26. Lib. 7. cap. 35. Sozom. lib. 4 cap. 28. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 9. the same doth he write also to haue bin betwixt Philip and Prochis, after the depriuation of Nestorius lib. 7. cap. 35.
                  
                  After Endoxius remoued from Antioch to Constantinople, there was in Antioch great strife for a successor, as the same Sozo sheweth 
                        lib. 4. cap. 28. where he addeth these wordes: as in such things it commeth to passe, that ther are diuers contentions and seditions betwixt the Cleargie and betwixt the people.
                  
                  
                     Socrates lib. 5. cap. 9. declareth the like tumultes to haue bin aboute the election of Flauianus: and he addeth, 
                        atque ita Antiochena ecclesia denuò, non propter fidem sed propter Episcopos scinditur. And so the Church of Antioch is agayne deuided, not for matters of faith, but for their Byshops.
                  
                  I declared before out of Nazianzene in his funerall oration at the buriall of his father,Nazianzene what great trouble and daunger was at Cesaria in his time, about the election of their Byshops. The same also I noted out of Augustine 
                        Epist. 110. it was the cause whyAugust in. tom. 2. epi. 110. both he and his predecessor in their life times, did prouide to themselues successors, as it is there manifest.
                  
                     Socrates lib. 6. cap. 11. declareth what contention there was at Ephesus, about the electionSocrat. lib. 6. cap. 11. of their Byshop, the people being deuided into sundry factions, in somuche that Chrysostome was himselfe enforced to appoint vnto them one Heraclis his Deacon.
                  The same Authoure 
                        lib. 7. cap. 7. testifyeth the like contention to haue bin in Alexandria,
                     Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 7. Euagrius li. 2. cap. 5. whilest some desired Timothie an Archdeacon, othersome Cyrill.
                  
                     Euagrius li. 2. ca. 5. writeth thus: 
                        Cum antem bic Proterius. &c. when this Proterius was placed in the Byshops seate of Alexandria, there arose a greate and intollerable tumult among the people, which were tossed with diuers sentences: for (as it often falleth out in such cases) some would haue Dioscorus agayne: others stucke stoutly to Proterius, so that many incurable mischieses were committed. For Priscus the Rhetorician writeth, that the gouernour of Thebes came the same time to Alexandria, and saw the people wholly to set them selues agaynste the magistrates, and that when the garison of souldiers woulde haue kepte backe the sedition, they beate them backe with stones into the temple, whiche was in times past called the temple of Serapis: then the people comming thither with speede, tooke the temple and burned the souldiers quicke. But whēthe Emperour vnderstoode herof, he sent thither two thousand new souldiers, who hauing a prosperous winde & passage, arriued the sixt day after at the great citie of Alexandria, and so raged against the wiues and daughters of the men of Alexandria, that much more mischiefe was now wrought than before.
                  
                  To what further inconuenience this intollerable contention came afterwards, the same Euagrius writeth 
                        cap. 8. where he also describeth the manners and conditions ofEuagrius li. 2. cap. 8. the people at large, and declareth how easely they are moued to contentions and tumultuous dealing, how willingly led by any factious person that pretēdeth liberty. &c. In the end he sheweth how villanously and cruelly they murdered Proterius appointed to be their Byshop.
                  What should I speake of that hurlyburly that was in Millains before the electionTheod. lib. 4. cap. 6. Chrysost. lib. 3. de sacerdotio. of Ambrose, whereof Theodo. speaketh 
                        lib. 4. cap. 6.
                  
                  I shal desire ye learned reader to peruse Chrysostome in the. 3. booke that he writeth de sacerdotio wher he speaketh of this matter plentifully, & declareth ye maruelous partialitie & the vntollerable cōtentiōs that ye people vsed, & was ye cause of, in such electiōs.
                  If I were disposed to heape vp examples, I could fill a large volume, but these (being almost in the best time of the Church, vnder Christian Princes) manifestly declare what intollerable inconuenience ensueth such elections, as are committed to the people, especially in these matters.
                  
                     2 My seconde reason is, that if suche elections shoulde be committed to the people, the 
                        〈1 line〉
                     iuill Magistrate (who hath the chéefe gouernment of the Churche, and to whome the especiall care of religion doth apperteine) should not be able to procure such reformation, nor such consent and agreement in matters of religion, as he is, when he hath himselfe the placing of Bishops, and such as be the chiefe of the Cleargie: for the peopleThe election of ministers by the people, an impedimēt to the ciuill magistrate in ecclesiasticall matters. (who are commonly be
                        〈1 line〉
                     t to nouelties, and to factions, and most ready to receyue that doctrine that séemeth to be contrary to the present state, and that enelineth to libertie) would vsually elect suche as would féede their humours: So that the Prince neyther should haue quiet gouernment, neyther could be able to preserue the peace of the Church, nor yet to plant that religion, that he in conscience is perswaded to be 
                        〈1 line〉
                     ncere. As for the authoritie of 
                        〈1 line〉
                     isalowing their elections, which you giue vnto him, it is but an intollerable trouble, and besides that he shall not vnderstand their doings: or if he doth, yet may he not depriue them of their libertie in choosing, so that you make his authoritie in effect nothing. Moreouer his Churches and whole kingdome shoulde be filled with Anabaptists, Libertines, Papists, Puritanes, and an hundreth sects mo, or euer he were aware: for who will complayne of him, whome the people do phansi
                        〈1 line〉
                     , be he neuer so vnméete a person?
                  3 My thirde reason is taken out of your owne booke Fol. 25. where you say that theIf the people should choose, the inferioure in gifts shuld be iudge of the superiour. 
                           Pag. 25. lin. 3.
                      Archdeacon may not be iudge of the aptnesse and ablenesse of the Pastor, bycause, he is inferi
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     re to the Pastor, both in calling and gifts: which if it be true, then surely may not the people haue any thing to do in the election of the Pastor, being in all respects much more inferioure vnto him, than the Archdeacon is: for to haue interest in electing, is to be admitted to iudge of his meetenesse and aptnesse, that is to be admitted.
                  4 It would be a cause why many Churches shoulde be longer destitute of theirPopular elections a cause of long want of pastors, &c Pastors than is conuenient, for if an vnméete man were chosen, and an appeale made to the next Pastours, and from them to the next Synode prouinciall, and then the parishioners that will not yéeld, excommunicated, and after excōmunication complayned of to the Prince, and then driuen to a new election and in the same peraduē
                     ture as wayward as they were before: whilest I say, all this were in doing (besides the maruellous schismes, contentions, brawlings, and hatred, that must of necessitie in the meane time be among them) two or thrée yeares might soone be spent: for all these things cannot be in due order well done in lesse time) al which time the parishes must be destitute of a pastor, & burne with those mischiefes that I haue before recited.
                  5 It would make the gouernment of the Church popular, which is the worst kindPopular election a cause of a popular gouernment. of gouernment that can be. For it is true that M. Caluine saith, 
                        cap. 20. Instit. Procliuis est à regno. &c. The fall from a kingdome into a tyrannie is very redy, and the change from the gouernment of the best, into the Factions of a fewe is not much harder: but the fall from a popular state into a sedi
                           〈1 line〉
                        ion, is of all other most easie.
                  
                  6 The people (as I haue said before) through affection and want of iudgement areThe people easily led by affection. easily brought by ambitious persons to giue their consent to vnworthy men: they are soone moued by the request of their frends, and of such as they eyther feare or loue, to do anything, as may appeare in sundry things cōmitted vnto thē of great importāce: yea sometime when by oth they are bound to deale without al affection, or parcialitie.
                  7 By this meanes they would thinke to haue their pastor bound vnto them, so thatA hindrance to the Pastor in doing his duty. they would take it disdainefully to be reproued by him, according as his duetie would require Againe the pastoure considering their good will in preferring of him, woulde not so freely 
                        〈◊〉
                      them, nor willingly displease them.
                  8 To conclude, the people are for the most part rude and ignorant, carelesse also inThe people vnfit to be iudges in such cases. 
                           Chrys. 2. in. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                           
                        
                      suche matters, and more me
                        〈1 line〉
                     te to be ruled, than to rule: For as Chrysostome de
                        〈1 line〉
                     eth, 
                        Populus est quiddam tumultus, &c. The people is a certaine thing full of tumult and sturres, consisting and rashly compacted for the most part of folly, oftentimes tossed with variable and contrary iudgement, like to the waues of the sea. &c.
                  
                  These and a great number mo reasons may be alleadged, why the people are to be s
                        〈1 line〉
                     uded from the election of their Pastors: and yet do I not so vtterly seclude them from such elections: but that if they haue any thing to obiect agaynste him that is to

be ordeyned, they might be heard: which order is prescribed in the booke of making ministers: and that is asmuche as can be required. Althoughe I doe not condemne those Churches, wherin this is safely committed vnto them: for I only speake of the present estate of this Churche of Englande.
                  The reason why I doe thinke the Bishops to be the fittest to haue both the allowing and ordeyning of such as are to be ministers, I haue expressed in my answere to the Admonition. And they are not as yet by better reasons confuted.
               
            
         
         
            Of ministers hauing no pastorall charge, of ceremonies vsed in ordeining ministers: of Apostles, Euangelistes and Prophetes. Tract. 4.
            
               Of ministers admitted, a place being not voyd.
               
                  Chap. 1. The first Diuision.
                  
                     The Admonition.
                     The seuenth. Then none admitted to the ministerie, but Act. 1. 25. a place was voyd afore hand, to which he should be called.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 47. Sect. 1. 2.
                        TO proue this you cite in the margent the first of the Acts, wher it is declared howe Mathias was chosen in the place of Iudas, to make vp the number of the. xij. Apostles. Surely this is but a slender reason: Mathias was chosen into the place of Iudas, Ergo, no man must be admitted into the ministerie, excepte a place before hande be voyde, to the which he should be called. Euery meane sophister will laugh at the childishnesse of this argument.
                        
                           Mathias was chosen to be an Apostle, and not to any certaine cure, and therfore this example proueth nothing.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 42. Sect. 4.
                     The reason is of greater force than you woulde seeme to make it, for as the. xij. place was to Mathias, so is a certain Church vnto a Pastor or Minister, & as the Apostles ordeined none vnto that place before it was voyd, so ought not the Bishop ordeyn any vntil there be a Churche voyde and destitute of a pastor. And as the Apostles ordeined not any Apostle, further than they had testimonieAct. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ▪
                         of the word of God, as it appeareth that S. Peter proceedeth by that rule to the election, so ought no Bishop ordeyn any to any function, which is not in the scripture appointed. But there are by the word of God, at this tyme no ordinarie ministers Ecclesiastical, which be not local, and tyed to one congregation, therfore this sending abrode of ministers whiche haue no places, is vnlawfull.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        As theyr reason is farre from good reason, so are your similitudes farre from prouing the same: & the Logitians say, Soluitur sunilitudo, ostensa dissimilitudine. First, ther is great difference betwixte the office of an Apostle, and the office of a Pastor, as you must néedes confesse. Then is there also difference in the number: for the Apostles whiche were chosen of Christe to be witnesses of his Resurrection, were twelue, and therfore the number certain: but the number of Preachers and Pastors is not limited, but the mo the better: Thirdly, there was one chosen in the place of Iudas, that the Scripture might be fulfilled as Peter saith Act. 1. but there is no such thing in the election of Pastors & other ministers. Moreouer it was the twelfth place in number that Mathias was chosen vnto, and not any locall place, such as pastors take charge of. Wherfore except you can make a certayn number, and no certain number: a local prescript and definite cure, and a generall charge without prescription of any certain place, all one, or at the least verie like: this argument, Mathias was chosen into the place of Iudas: ergo, no man muste bee admitted into the ministerie, excepte he haue a Cure,

muste of necessitie be a very childishe and fonde argument. And how ofte shall I tell you, that to reason 
                              àfacto ad ius, of an example to make a generall rule, is a very vnskilfull kinde of rasoning, excepte there be some generall rule and commaundement according to that example.
                        But was not Paule added to the number of the Apostles, though there were noSome admitted to the ministerie, a place beeing not voyde. place voyde? Were not also Barnabas Act. 14. Epaphroditus Phil. 2. Andronicus and Iunia, Rom. 16. called Apostles? I might therefore as wel reason thus, Paule, Barnabas. &c. were called to be Apostles when there was no place voyde, Ergo some maye be called to the preaching of the Gospell, though they haue no certayne cure. But let vs sée how you will iustifie this assertion, that there are no ordinarie ministers ecclesiasticall, which be not locall, and tyed to one congregation. &c. For I vtterly denie it, in that sense that you speake it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 42. Sect. 5.
                     And that it may the better appeare, that those functions doe onely remayne, whiche are appoynted to one certayne place, and that the Reader maye haue the clearer and playner vnderstanding of all this matter, all the whole ecclesiasticall function maye be well deuided: first into extraordinarie, or those that endured for a time, and into ordinarie, whiche are perpetuall. Of the firste sorte are the Apostles, and Euangelistes, whiche the Lorde vsed for a time, as it were, for chiefe Masons, and principall buylders of his Churche, as well to laye the foundations of Churches where none were
                           〈1 line〉
                         as also to aduaunce them to suche forwardnesse and height, vntill there might be gotten, for the finishing of the buylding and house of the Churche, fitte pastors, Elders, and Deacons. And that beeing done, they went from those places into others, which thing may be perceyued by the continuall storie of the Actes of the Apostles, and by diuers sentences which are founde in the Epistles of S. Paule. And therfore also when the Churches haue bin by Antichrist euen rased from the foundations, God hath stirred vp Euangelists, euen immediatly by his spirite, without any calling of men, to restore his Churches agayne: of whiche sorte was Master Wickli
                           〈1 line〉
                        e in our Countrey, M. Hus, and Hierome of Prage in Bohemia, Luther and Zuinglius in Germanie. &c. And after this sort God may at his good pleasure work, when he purposeth to set in his Gospell in any nation, where the whole face of the earth is couered with the darknesse of ignorance, and want of the knowledge of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Althoughe you can not warrant by the Scriptures this distinction of ordinarie andIn what respect the Apostolical function was extraordinary. extraordinarie ecclesiasticall functions, yet I thinke the Apostolicall function was extraordinarie, in respect that it had for the time certayne especiall properties, as to beare witnesse of the resurrection of Christ, and of his assention, whiche they dyd sée with their eyes: also to plant & to found Churches: Likewise to go throughout the whole worlde. These I say were temporall and extraordinarie, and so was the Apostleship in this respect, but yet ordinarie in respect of their chiefe function, which was to preache the Gospell, and to gouerne the Churches whiche they had planted. Likewise Euangelistes haue an ordinarie function, neyther is there any cause why it should be called a temporall office, but onely in respect of writing the Gospell, for there is none that thinketh the office of preaching to be eyther extraordinarie or temporall.
                        But I pray you let me aske you one question, why should not the office of Seniors be aswell extraordinarie and temporall, as the office of an Apostle, or an Euangelist? for as you saye: that the Apostleship and Euangelistship remayned, vntil there might be gotten for the finishing of the buylding and house of the Churche fytte Pastors. &c. So say I, that the office of Seniors and Elders might remayne in the Churche, vntill there were christian Princes and Magistrates, by whome the people of God might be kepte in peace and quietnesse, and the Churches of Christ more perfectly gouerned. And wel assured I am, that there are as good reasons for this, as there are for the other. For as in the place of the Apostles, Euangelistes. &c. are succéeded Bishops, Pastors, Doctors: so I may say, that in the place of Elders and Seniors, are come Christian Princes and Magistrates.
                        
                           As for this parte of the Apostles function, to visite suche Churches as were before planted, and to prouide that suche were placed in them, as were vertuous and godly Pastors: I knowe it remayneth still, and is one of the chiefe partes ofWhat part of the Apostles function remayneth. the Bishops function, as shall hereafter more at large appeare.
                        I graunte that Master Hus, Hierome of Prage, &c. were stirred vp euen by God, to preache his truthe, and open the doore of his worde agayne, yet were they called to some function of the Churche before, althoughe that function were for the moste parte, wicked, and the Church almost wholly corrupted with superstition and errors: But why you shoulde rather call them Euangelistes, than Apostles, Prophetes, Pastors, or Doctors, I knowe not: especially séeing some of them had ordinarie charges.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 43. Sect. 1.
                     Of this sorte of extraordinarie functions, are the Prophets also, which besides a singular dexteritie, and readinesse of expounding the Scriptures, had also the gifte of telling things to come, whiche, bicause it is not nowe ordinarily, I thinke there is none will denie, but it is an extraordinarie calling, for the other two of the Apostles and Euangelistes, it shall appeare more at large hereafter (by occasion giuen by M. Doctor) that they are but for a time.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you meane Prophetes, in the respecte of the gifte of telling thinges to come,Act. 11. suche as Agabus was, then be they temporall, but yet ordinarie for the tyme wherinProphetes in some respecte ordinary. they were: But if you meane Prophets in respecte of their dexteritie and readinesse in expounding the Scriptures, suche as Barnabas was, and Simon, Lucius,Act. 13. &c. and Saule. Likewyse suche as Iudas and Silas. Actes. 15. and suche as the ApostleAct. 15. S. Paule speaketh of. 1. Corinth. 14. I sée no cause why eyther the calling1. Cor. 14. should be extraordinary, or the 
                              •
                           ffice and gifte temporall, excepte you haue a libertie to make temporall and perpetuall, ordinarie and extraordinarie, what you please. But seeing you woulde haue all thinges proued by Scripture, I pray you proue this that you haue sayde, eyther of the Apos
                              •
                           les, Euangelis
                              •
                           s, or Prophetes by the Scripture, séeing you teache that of them, which seemeth to be contrary vnto the Scripture.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 43. Sect 2.
                     The ordinarie and continuall functions of the Churche are also deuided into two partes, for eyther they are they that gouerne or take charge of the whole Churche, as are those, which are called Elders, or they which take charge of one parte of the Churche (whiche is the poore of euery Churche) as are those which are called Deacons. Those agayne that be called Presbyteri, which we tearme Elders of the Churche, and haue to doe with the whole Churche, are eyther those, whiche teache and preache the worde of God, and gouerne too, or else whiche gouerne onely, and do not teache or preache. Of the first kinde are Pastors, and Doctors. Or the second are those, which are called by the common name of Elders, or auncientes. Of all this ordinarie function I shall haue occasion to speake, and of euery one shall appeare that (which I haue sayde before) that they are no vncertayne and vndefinite ministeries, but suche as are limitted vnto a certayne Churche and congregation. And first of all, for the Pastor or Bishop, whiche is heere mentioned, whiche name soéuer we consider of them, they doe foorthwith, assoone as they are once eyther spoken, or thought of, imply and inferre a certayne and definite ch
                           •
                        rge, beeing as the Logitians terme them, actuall relatiues. For what shepheard can there be, vnlesse he haue a flocke? and howe can he be a watcheman, vnlesse he haue some citie to looke vnto? Or howe can a man be a master, vnlesse he haue a seruaunt? or a father vnlesse he haue a childe? Nowe if you will saye that they haue a charge, and they haue flocks, and cities to attende and watche vpon, for a whole shire, or prouince, or realme, are their flockes, and their Cities, and their charges.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This diuision also is of your owne inuenting: neyther haue you any mention of Seniors, (as you call them) or of Deacons in that fourth Chapter to the Ephesi. whiche you would haue to be so perfecte a rulè of ecclesiasticall functions. As for Pastors and Doctors, you knowe that diuers bothe auncient and late writers, as namely Hierome, Augustine, Chrysostome, Musculus, and Bucer, &c. do confounde them, and the reason that Hieroine vseth can not be well denyed, because the Apostle sayth not as he dyd before of the other: 
                              alios Pastores, alios Doctores, some Pastors,Eph. 4. and other some Doctors, but he ioyneth them togither, and sayth: 
                              alios Pastores & Doctores, some Pastors and Doctors. M
                              〈1 line〉
                           reouer I sée not howe you can iustifie your diuision of Seniors by the worde of God, as I shall further declare in that place, whereTract. 17. you more largely speake of them: In the meane time, I sée no reason why your vnpreaching and vnministring Seniors, shoulde haue any perpetuitie in the Churche, more than Apostles, for the cause that I haue before alleadged: neyther haue you yet proued, that the Deacons office is onely to prouide for the poore: you haue examples to the contrarie, as I haue declared in my Answere. To be shorte, I vnderstande not howe you can make Doctors, gouernours of any seuerall parishes and Churches, except you will make them Pastors.
                        But bicause you onely speake héere, and proue nothing, I will differre a further answere, vnti
                              〈1 line〉
                           l I heare more sounde argumentes.
                        You saye, a shepheard can not be, vnlesse he haue a flocke. &c. all which is true: but he is also a shepheard that hath mo flockes, and he is a shepheard, that hathe a generall care and ouersight of many shepheards, and many flockes. For he that hathe many flockes, and many shepheards, may haue one master shepheard to sée that all the rest doe their duties, and that the shéepe be kepte in good order. And thoughe euery seuerall Citie haue seuerall watchemen whiche watche by course, yet maye there be one that hathe an especiall care ouer all, and is appoynted to see the rest do their duties: So one master maye haue many seruauntes, one father many children. Wherefore if you vse this reason to improue the office of a Bishop, it lacketh mighte: if to proue that a Pastour muste haue a flocke, no man dothe denie it: but if to conclude, that no man maye preache, vnlesse he haue a certayne flocke, there is no sequele at all in it: for first you muste proue that the onely office of a Pastor is nowe remayning in the Churche, and that no man can be minister of the words and Sacraments, except he be a Pastor of some certayne flocke, for that doe I constantly denie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 43. Sect. 3.
                     First of all in your reading ministers that is vntrue, for they goe not to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        eade in all Churches, but 
                           〈1 line〉
                        arrie till they be hyred in one. And therfore when the Bishop hath layde his hande ofPetitio principij. them▪ they are no more Ministers, than before his hande came vpon them, bicause they haue no charges, and therefore the patrone or person that hireth them to reade, and setteth them a worke are their Bishops, and make them ministers, and not the Bishop of the Diocesse.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be but words grounded vpon this false principle, that none oug
                              〈1 line〉
                           te to be admitted into the ministerie, but suche as haue a certayne cure and charge, which you are neuer able to proue, eyther by Scripture or good reason: but the contrarie is manyfest by bothe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chapter. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 43. Sect. 4.
                     Secondarily, for those that preache to haue a whole Diocesse, or Prouince, or Realme to be their flocke, or Citie to attende vpon, is contrarie to the pollicie or good husbandrie of all those that woulde eyther haue their Citie safe, or their flockes sounde. For who are they, whyche woulde appoynte one for the watche of a thousande townes or cities, when as all they, whiche loue their safetie, woulde rather haue for euery citie many watchemen, than for many cities one? Or what is he, that is so watchefull and circumspecte, whose diligence and watchefulnesse, one citie assaulted with enimies, will not wholly occupie and take vp? Or what is he, whose sighte is so sharpe, that he can see from one ende of the Diocesse, or Prouince, or realme, to the other ende thereof? Or what is he, that will committe the keeping of twentie thousande sheepe to one man, that looketh for any good or encrease of them? Howe shall all these heare his whistle, howe shall all knowe his voyce, when they can not heare it? Howe shall they acknowledge him, when they can not knowe him? howe shall they followe him, when they can not see him goe before? howe shall he heale their diseases, when he can not possibly knowe them? But some man will saye, that these are humaine reasons, and likelyhoodes, whiche may be ouerthrowne with other similitudes: These notwithstanding are Analogies drawne from the nature of those things, which the Ministers are likened vnto, and are of the moste parte vsed of the holy Ghost him selfe expressely.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is a great poynte of good husbandrie and pollicie also, to haue, besides the seuerall shepheardes ouer seuerall flockes, and sundry watchemen ouer sundry Cities, diuers other to féede the shéepe, as occasion serueth, and to admonishe the watchemen and the Cities of their dueties: else why dydde the Apostles after they hadde planted the Churches, and placed Shepheardes and watchemen ouer them, so diligentlye afterwardes vysite them, and so carefullye looke vnto them, as we reade Actes. 14. 15. 18? Was the watche thinke you the worse kepte, or the shéepe the negligentlyer looked vnto? The pollicie that Darius vsed Daniel. 6. when he appoynted a hundreth and twenty gouernours ouer all hys Realme, and ouer them thrée to ouersée them, and take an accompte of their doinges, is greatly commended: and why maye not this pollicie be necessarie in the Ecclesiasticall state also? But you héere runne smothely away with the matter, and suppose that there may not be for seuerall Cities, and seuerall flockes, seuerall watchemen and shepheardes, bicause there be some that haue a generall care ouer many flockes and Cities. If a thousande Townes or Cities haue a thousande watchemen appoynted vnto them, to haue the particular care ouer them, and also one, two, or moe to haue a generall care bothe ouer the watchemen, and ouer the Cities also, doe you not thinke that all shall be in better order, and in muche more safetie?
                        But your similitudes fayle maruellously in sundrie poyntes, whiche I musteSimilitudes are but weak arguments. admonishe you of, bicause you glorie so muche in them, and thinke that you haue reasoned strongly, when you haue vsed the weakest kinde of argument that can be, to proue any thing: for as the Logitians saye, 
                              Similitudo rem illustrat, sed non probat: A similitude maketh a matter playne, but proueth it not. And it is easely ouerthrowne by shewing the vnlikelyhoode: In this the similitude agréeth, that as euery Citie muste haue a watcheman, and euery flocke a shephearde, so euery Churche or Parishe muste haue a watcheman or a Pastour: and as the watchman and shephearde his office is to watche and to féede, and to haue a necessarie care ouer their charges, so muste also the Spirituall watcheman and shephearde haue a care ouer the people committed vnto them. All this is true, and neyther proueth nor improueth any thing that is in question. I mighte as well saye, that if the Citie be well watched, and the flocke carefully looked vnto, thoughe it be not by the watcheman or shephearde him selfe, but by his meanes and procurement,

there can be no iuste faulte founde with eyther of them. Likewyse, that when the shephearde hathe broughte his shéepe into a pasture where they maye bothe be sure from all daunger, and haue meate sufficient, then his presence is not so necessarie for them, so that he doe sometymes visite them. Also that there is no one watcheman, that eyther dothe or can watche continually, but muste of necessitie haue his reste, so that some other supplie hys absence: and likewyse, that there is no master shephearde, but that he hathe some vnder him, eyther boye, or man, to supply his absence whylest he is aboute other matters. To be shorte, that one shephearde hathe care ouer sundrie mennes shéepe, sundrie flockes of sundrie Townes and Parishes, &c. Dyuers other suche similitudes of shepheardes and watchemen mighte I also vse, to proue many thinges contrarie to your meaning. I mighte also shewe vnto you the dissimilitude betwixte a temporall shephearde. and a spirituall shephearde: vnreasonable shéepe that can not féede them selues, or by any meanes prouyde for them selues, nor haue any charge so looke to them selues, and reasonable shéepe, suche as God hathe endued with knowledge, to whome hée hathe lefte hys wóorde, whyche conteyneth in it suffyciente to saluation, whome he hathe charged to reade it, and to heare it: who shall also answere for them selues. &c. Finally▪ what difference there is betwixte temporall meate and drinke, whiche is soone digested, and therefore dayly to be renewed: and spirituall foode whiche continueth, and whereof he that hath once sufficiently tasted, shall not hunger or thirst. &c. These I saye, and a greate number of other dissimilitudes coulde I bring, to ouerthrowe all that you can buylde vpon these similitudes.
                        I mighte further saye, that in the Prophetes, and other places of the Scriptures, Kinges and mightie Princes that haue ample and large Dominions, be calledIerem. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . bothe shepheardes and watchemen, as namely in Ieremy. 2
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Ezechiell. 34. &c. andEzech. 34. therefore all those your reasons mighte aswell be alleadged agaynst them, and of them also mighte you saye, What is he, whose sighte is so sharpe, that he can see from one ende of the Diocesse, Prouince, or Realme, to another? For these names be as common, and as vsuall to Kinges and Princes, as they be to Ministers of the worde and Bishops. And truely if these similitudes sinke once into the peoples heades, and bée applyed vnto ciuill gouernment, (agaynst whiche they bée as forceable, as agaynst the ecclesiasticall) they will as easily, and farre more easily stirre them vp, to séeke alteration in that also.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 43. Sect. 4. 5.
                     But that there be no controuersie lefte in this poynte, what is No man douteth what a flocke is, and yet you haue inuented a straunge definition. a flocke? S. Paule defineth it playnely, when he saythe: appoynt Pastors, or Elders, or Bishops (for these wordes are indifferently vsed) throughe, not euery Shire, or Prouince, or Realme, but throughe euery Citie, or Towne. And least that any man shoulde heere take occasion to conclude, that then it is lawfull for one man to bee Bishoppe or Pastor of a whole Citie, suche as London, or Yorke. &c.
                     S. Luke in the Actes dothe declare the meaning of this place, where he sayth that they appoynted Elders throughout euery congregation, so that if the Citie or Towne be great, and the professours of the Gospell in it, be more than will make conueniently a congregation, then there muste bee, by the rule of God You haue no worde of God for this, and the practise of the primitiue Churche doth cōfute it, as it is proued Tract. 8. more Pastours and Bishops. Wherevpon it appeareth that bothe no Pastour or Bishoppe oughte to bee made without there be a flocke, as it were a voyde place for him, and that a flocke is not a Realme, or Prouince, or Diocesse (as we now call a Diocesse) but so many as may conueniently meete in one assemblie or congregation. And that this is the meaning of Sainct Paule, it appeareth by the practise of the Churches from tyme to tyme, whiche haue bothe decreed agaynst, and founde faulte wyth these wandering and rouyng ministeries.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is manyfest that S. Paule willed Titus to appoynte presbyteros (for thatTit. 1. worde he vseth) in euery Citie, for so dothe he also saye. But what can you heereof conclude? What sequele is there in this argument: Sainct Paule willed Timothie to appoynt Ministers in euery Citie, Ergo, there muste be none admitted to the ministerie of the worde, but suche as haue some certayne cure? or therefore one man maye not haue the ouersighte and direction of many cures? In déede if S. Paule had sayde to Titus, thou shalte appoynte no Ministers of the worde, or Seniors, but to a certayne cure, or admitte none to preache the Gospell, except he haue some one place certenly appoynted vnto him: then your reason had bin something. But now it hath no shew of any argument.
                        The place Act. 14. tendeth to the same purpose, neyther is there one worde there to proue that suche maye not preache the worde, as haue no certayne charge committed vnto them: but the contrarie rather: for Paule and Barnabas, thoughe they dyd appoynte in euery Churche Ministers, yet dyd they preache themselues also. And I heare no reason yet, why bothe these maye not be true, that euery Churche shoulde haue a Pastour, and yet that some may be admitted to preache the worde, that haue no seuerall churches. This I am sure was vsuall in the Apostles time, and it is nowe most profitable, neither is there one title in the whole scripture against it. And you your selfe haue bin in that case euer since you were preacher, and remayne so still for any thing that I knowe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 44. Sect. 1.
                     The great Councell of Calcedon decreed that no Eider or Deacon, or any other in the ecclesiasticallCap. 6. act. 1
                              〈1 line〉
                           . order shoulde be ordeyned 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        : that is, losely, and as it were let goe at randon whither he himselfe 
                           〈1 line〉
                        sted, whiche he also interpreteth by and by more playnely, when he addeth,The Councell of Calcedon maymed. that he shoulde not be ordeyned 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        : that is, vnlesse it be specially in a congregation of some citie or towne. And in the Councell of Urban (as Gratian reporteth, distinction. 70.) it was decreed that the ordination, that was made without any title, shoulde be voyde, and what that meaneth, is shewed by and by, when it is sayde, and in what Church any is intitled, there let him always remayne. And this is alsoYou stil stum ble vpon Hierome in steade of Musculus. S. Hierome hisAd Nepoti▪
                         complaynt, in that men were ordeyned vnto the ministerie, when they were chosen by no Churche, and so wente rounde about, hauing no certayne place. And therefore this, that none oughte to preache, vnlesse he haue some pastorall charge, oughte not to haue beene so straunge a thing vnto you, as you make it, if eyther the Scriptures, or the Councels, or the auncient Fathers, hadde beene so well knowne vnto you, as eyther your name requireth, or you take vpon you, whyche dare so boldely pronounce, that there can be shewed no texte of Scripture for the matter.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You are notable in falsifying and coruptly alleaging of the authorities of Fathers and Councels, and a singular grace you haue, bothe in ascribing that vnto them, whiche they haue not, and in otherwyse reporting that which they haue: as you doe nowe in this place deale with the Councell of Calcedon: for you say, that Councell decreed that no Elder or Deacon. &c. shoulde bee ordeyned 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : that is losely. &c. And you adde, that he interpreteth this more playnely, when he addeth that he shoulde not be ordeyned 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : that is, vnlesse it be speciallye in a congregation of some citie or towne. But you haue craftily lefte out that which maketh agaynst you, and playnely openeth the meaning of the Councel, which is this, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . &c.
                        
                           The whole Canon is this, 
                              Nullum absolutè ordinari debere presbyterum aut Diaconum, ńec quemlibet in gradu ecclesiastico, nisi specialiter in ecclesia ciuitatis aut pagi, aut in martyrio, aut monasterio, qui ordinandus est, pronuncietur. Qui verò absolutè ordinantur▪ decreuit Sancta synodus,
                              Con. Cbalced▪ cap. 6. act. 15▪
                               
                              irritam haberi 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 uiusmodi manus impositionem, & nusquàm posse ministrare ad ordinantis ignominiam.
                            Wherby it is plaine, that the meaning of the Councell is to haue none admitted into any Ecclesiasticall degrée, except he haue some thing to liue vpon, and not that he must of necessitie haue some cure: for then would not the councell haue sayd aut in martyrio, aut monasterio, for these be no pastorall charges: neither yet woulde it haue added 
                              aut Diaconum aut quemlibet in gradu ecclesiastico, Deacons or any other in ecclesiastical degree: bicause euery one admitted 
                              in aliquem gradum ecclesiasticum, into any ecclesiasticall degree, is not admitted to a cure. Wherefore the glosse in Gratian doth well interpret the meaning of this Canon, when it saith that nonc is to be ordeined 
                              sine titulo,
                              Dist. 70. 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . without a title, ne dicatur, mendicat in plateis infoelix clerious: least it be saide, an vnhappie clerke beggeth in the streates: and further addeth thus, 
                              colligitur etiam bic, ex eo quod dicit, siue possessionis, argumentum, quod si quis habet patrimonium sufficiens ordinari potest sine titulo: an argument may also here be gathered, in that it sayth (or of possession) that if any haue sufficient patrimonie, he may be ordeyned without a title. But these words, siue in martyrio siue in monasterio, do manifestly declare that the Councell would haue none admitted to any Ecclesiasticall function without some stay of liuing, either of some benefice, Monasterie, Colledge, Chappell, his owne possessions, or such like: as the practise of the Church vnder the Pope is at this day. And yet if any man should say, that out o this Canon there can be nothing gathered, but onely this, in what places those that are called to the ministerie are to be admitted and ordeined, I knowe not howe you could answere it, for the wordes of the Canon admit that sense most properly.
                        That decrée of Vrban hath the same meaning, and that which followeth, of remayning continually in that Church, in the which he is intituled, doth but signifie that he must be assured of his lyuing, whervnto he is intituled during his life: for the same Canon doth permit one man to haue two Churches, but yet that he ought not to be canonicus prebendarius, but onely of one Church wherof he is intituled. But I can not but marueile that you will vse the testimonie of this Councell of Pope Vrban, which was holden at the least an. 1090. after Christ, euen in the most corrupte time, when as Antichrist had fully possessed the sea of Rome, in the which Councell among other things Volater▪ & Bale. he confirmed the actes of Pope Hildebrand against Henrie the Emperour. This Vrban also was the confirmer of the superstitious orders of the Platina: in vita Vrb. 2. 
                           Cistercian friers, and Volateran: & Cent. II. ca. 10. 
                           Carthusian Monkes, he likewise deposed Distinct. 32 eos qui. Deacons that were maried, from their orders: And Matth. p
                                 〈1 line〉
                               risi. in vita VVilli. 2. forbad (by the Councell of the traiterous Archbishop Anselme) that any Clearke should receiue beneficiorum inuestituram, or any Ecclesiasticall dignitie, of any Prince or lay man, but Cent. 4. onely of the Pope. And that you may yet further vnderstand what a worthie patrone you haue gotten for your cause, this Vrban was he that was author P
                                 〈1 line〉
                              lid. de inuent. lib. 6. cap. 2. of the Canonicall houres, commonly called our Ladies Psalter.
                        
                        Certainly Hierome sayth no suche thing in that Epistle, you are disposed to father that of him that he neuer spake▪ His complaint was that much cost was bestowed vpon Churches in adorning and decking of them, and little regarde to the choise of Ministers, meaning that they had more care to haue gorgious Churches than good Ministers. But what is this to your purpose?
                        Thus haue you proued neither by Scripture, nor by Councell, nor Doctor (truely alleaged and vnderstanded) that none maye preache, vnlesse he haue some pastorall charge, and I still affirme that you haue not one texte of Scripture soundyng that way, where there are to the contrarie sundry examples, as I haue alleaged.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 77. Sect. 2.
                     If you had vsed moe reasons, I would haue answered them, what

certaine cure had Paule, Barnabas, Philip, Epaphroditus, Andronicus, Iunius, & yet they were not of the twelue Apostles? It is a straunge doctrine to teache that a man may not preache out of his owne cure: It is more straunge to say, that it is not lawfull for him to preache, except he haue some pastorall cure, beyng of him selfe able to liue, and not minding to be burdensome to the Churche? If you seeke for any text in the scripture to confirme this doctrine, you can finde none: if you seke for examples to the contrarie, you shall finde plentie.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 44. Sect. 2. 3. 4.
                     But you aske what place Paule and Barnabas had appoynted them. What meane you therby to conclude, that bycause Paule and Barnabas the Apostles had no place appoynted them, therfore a Pastor or Bishop shoulde not? when this is one difference betwene the Apostle and Byshop, that the one hath no certaine place appoynted, and the other hath. But I thinke I smell out your meaning, which is, that we may make Apostles also at these dayes, and that that function is not yet ceased, for otherwise your reason is nothyng worthe. Likewyse also you aske of Philip, which was an Euangelist. And so you thinke that these running Ministers are lawfull, bycause they are Apostles and Euangelistes, against which I shall haue occasion to speake shortly after in the. 50. Page. But if a manne be able to liue of hym selfe, and mynde not to be burdensome to the Churche, it seemeth vnreasonable vnto you, that he may not goe aboute and preache throughout all Churches.
                     Dyd you neuer reade any learned disputation, and that of learned writers in our dayes abouteP. Marty
                              〈1 line〉
                            vpon the 1. Cor. 9. thinketh it more expedient for one to take vvages of the Church although he be able to liue of him selfe. this question: whether (although it be lawfull) it be expedient that a man beyng able and willing to liue of him selfe, ought to take wages of the Churche, for inconueniences which mighte ensue of taking nothing? I doe but aske you the question, bycause you make so greate a wonder at thys, for I will not take vpon me heere the defense of it, bycause I will not multiple questions.
                     And why I praye you maye not that manne that is so able, and will be content to liue of him selfe, why I saye may not he teache and be the Pastor of some Churche? Doe you thinke that for hys forbearing the wages of the Churche, he may breake the What lawes & orders, where are they establi shed. lawes & orders that God hath established?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is a good reason to proue that there may be preachers of the worde, which haue no certaine cure, and doth cleane ouerthrowe your former answere to the place Acto. 1. for Paule and Barnabas were not chosen into any vacant place as Matthias was, and therfore that reason is no reason. I doe not say a Bishop or Pastor should not haue a place appointed vnto them (for I know Bishops and Pastors haue their cures limited) but this I saye, that some may be preachers and Ministers of the worde, which haue no certaine cure. Neyther is this true that all suche as be admitted to the preaching of the word, be either Bishops or Pastors.
                        Against Apostles and Euangelistes we shall vnderstande what you haue to saye, when we come to that place.
                        You aske me whether I euer read any learned disputations. &c. I mighte aske you the same question, for you vtter no great reading here, only you alleage Peter Martyr vpon. 1. Cor. 9. where he speaketh little of this matter. For the question is not whether a man hauing a Pastorall cure, and sufficient of his owne to lyue, may cease to take th
                              〈1 line〉
                            ordinarie stipend of his Church or no, which is that, that Peter Martyr handleth in that place, and wherof he maketh this resolution, that he should doe that therein, that maye most profitte the Church, and further the Gospell, and yet to be most expedient to take the accustomed stipend, although S. Ambrose Lib. 1. off. cap. 36. and diuerse other be of the contrarie iudgement. But this is our controuersie, whether a man hauing sufficient to lyue of by him selfe, may not be admitted to the preaching of the Gospell, excepte he haue some Pastorall cure. S. Paule in that Chapter gloryeth that he tooke nothing of the Corinthians, & Peter Martyr in the same place sayth that Paule would take nothingP. Martyr in 1. Cor. 9. that he might the more freely reprehend.
                        
                        You aske me also why that man, that is so able, and will be content, may not teach, and be the Pastor of a Church. &c. I answere, that he may and if he will. But I aske you agayne,

what if he be perswaded that he shall doe more good, by going to suche places, where there is greater want of preaching? What lawe or order is there established by God to the contrarie? where is that law or that order? Set it truely downe, and I yelde vnto it: else can I not but dissent from you, séeyng I sée manifest examples in the Scripture to the contrarie: and euē your owne example, also in your owne person, which ought to haue moued you to a publike confession, if you haue all this while vsurped an vnlawfull vocation: as certeinly you haue done, if this your assertion be true.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Ceremonies vsed in ordeyning Ministers.
               
                  Chap. 2. the first Diuision.
                  
                     The Admonition.
                     But now Byshops (to whome the right of ordering Ministers doth at no hand apperteine) doe make, 60. 80. or. 100. at a clappe, and sende them abroade into the countrey lyke masterlesse men.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 47. Sect. 3.
                        That the ordering of Ministers doth apperteine to Byshops properly,Ordering of ministers perteineth to Byshops. which you here vtterly denie, I haue proued before: they be beste able to iudge of mens abilitie to that function. It is their especiall charge to see that there be meete Ministers in the Churche, and therfore good reason that they should haue the chiefe stroke in ordering of them: & yet in that businesse they trust not themselues alone, they haue other godly and learned ministers to assist them in examining suche as are to be admitted: they also require a testimoniall of life and conuersation from that place, wherein those that are to be Ministecs haue bene latest and longest remaining.
                     
                     
                        Page. 48. Sect. 1. 2.
                        If such numbers as you say be admitted at one tyme, and sent abroade lyke maisterlesse men, that is the faulte of the person, not of the law: neyther is it a sufficient cause to debarre any learned, godly and meete man from the ministerie, able to lyue of him selfe, or hauing any other Ecclesiasticall liuing, as prebend, felowship in some colledge of eyther vniuersitie, or suche like, thoughe he haue no Pastorall charge and cure, neyther shall you euer be able to proue, but that a man disposed and able to doe good in the Churche of Christe, may be admitted into the ministerie, although he haue no ecclesiasticall liuing at all.
                        I mislike runnagates and masterlesse men, and such as are compelled to seke vp and downe to get them seruices aswell as you: and I hope the redresse thereof is alreadie determined.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 44. Sect. 4.
                     For the rest conteyned in those Pages touching the ordeining of Ministers or Byshops I haue before spoken at large.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue not answered to the most of this, that is in this portion conteined, and especially touching ordeining of Bishops and ministers.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the second Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The eyght. Then after iust triall and vocation they were admitted to their function, by laying on of the hands of the company of the1. Ti. 4. 14. eldership onely.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 49. Sect. 1. 2.
                        Of tryall and vocation I haue spoken before. To proue laying onOf laying on of handes. of hands. &c. is alleaged the first of Timothie the fourth Chapter, this is but a ceremonie, and it is now vsed: for the Bishop and other learned and graue Ministers there present, doe lay their hands vpon such as are admitted into the ministerie.
                        Now if you would knowe what is here ment by seniors, you may learne if you please of Oecumenius a learned and olde writer, who expoundeth this place of Timothie on this sort, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . By seniors he meaneth Byshops: and so saythe Chrysostome inlike maner.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 44. Sect. 5.
                     Oecumenius and Chrysostome say, that by Elders he meaneth Bishops An vntruthe, for Chrysostome maketh a manyfest distinction. not thereby to seuere th
                           〈1 line〉
                        se that had the gouernment of the Churche togither with the pastor and minister of the worde, which were called auncients, as you seeme to meane: but to put distinction betweene those which are Elders by age, and Elders by office, besides that it is before alleaged that it maye be, that the pastor or Bishop dyd in the name of all the Elders lay on his handes vpon him that was ordeyned. And lastly, you knowe, and can not denie, that S. Paule in one or two places confoundeth the Bishop and the Elder.
                     
                        Io Whitgifte.
                        The wordes of Chrysostome, and of Oecumenius be euident, as you might haue perceyued, if you woulde haue taken paynes to reade the places. For the wordes of Chrysostome be these: 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : HeChrysost. in 1. Tim. 4. speaketh not here of Elders, but of Bishops, 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : for certaynely the Elders did not ordeyne the Bishop. Howe say you, be not these wordes playne, that he meaneth Bishops, and not other Ministers? And M. Beza inBeza. his notes vpon this place sayth thus: 
                              Presbyterij. 1. ordinis presbyterorum, quo nomine probabile est coetum omnium illorum significari, qui verbo laborabant in Ep
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 esiorum ecclesia: Of the eldership: that is to say, of the order of Elders, by whiche name it is likely, that the companie of them, whiche laboured in the worde in the Churche of Ephesus, are signified. Vt Acto. 20. Wherby it is certayne that he secludeth your vnministring Seniors.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the third Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Nowe there is (neyther of these beeing looked vnto) required an Albe, a surplesse, a vestiA slaunderous vntruthe. ment, a pastorall staffe.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 49. Sect. 3▪
                        
                        In the booke nowe allowed of making Deacons & ministers, and consecrating of Bishops, there is neyther required Albe, Surplesse, vestiment, nor pastoral staffe: reade the booke from the beginning to the ending. And therfore this is a false and vntrue reporte.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     This is confessed by silence, and therfore here the Admonition conteyneth a manifest vntruth, and wanteth a proctor.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     The Admonition.
                     Beside that ridiculous, and (as they vse it to their new creatures) blasphemous saying, receiue the holy Ghost.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 49. Sect. 4. & vlt.
                        To vse these wordes (receiue the holy Ghost) in ordering of Ministers, which Christ him selfe vsed in appoynting his Apostles, is no more ridiculous and blasphemous, than it is to vse the wordes, that he vsed in the Supper: But it is blasphemie thus outrageously to speake of the wordes of Christ. The Byshoppe by speakyng these words doth not take vpon hym to giue the holy Ghost, no more than he dothe to remitte synnes, when he pronounceth the remission of synnes: but by speakyng these wordes of Christ, receyue the holy Ghost, vvhose sinnes so euer ye remitte, they are remitted▪ &c. he dothe shewe the principall duetie of a Minister, and assureth hym of the assistance of Gods holy spirite, if he labour in the same accordinglye.
                        You call them his new creatures, these be but words of s
                              〈1 line〉
                           urrilitie, to be hissed at, not to be answered.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page 44. Sect. vlt.
                     To say that the Byshop may as well say (receiue the holy ghost) as to say the wordes vsed in the Supper, or to say that the sinnes of those, which do beleeue are forgiuen, is 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , as farre as Yorke and London. For there are commaundementes to the Ministers to doe that, which they doe, and heere is none: and there the Minister doth not commaunde that the bread be the bodie of Christ, but he sayth that it is. Neither doth he commaunde that sinnes should be forgiuen, but pronounceth in the behalfe of God, that they are forgiuen. It is not lawfull also, that he with the congregation should make a prayer for the assistance or encrease of God his giftes vpon him, that is ordeined, but to commaund that he should receiue it, is meerely vnlawfull. For these wordes (receiue the holy ghost) are the imperatiue mode, and doe expressely signifie a commaundement. And so the Bishop may as wel say to the sea when it rageth and 
                           〈1 line〉
                        elleth, peace, be quiet, as to say receiue the holy Ghost. And if you thinke it so good reason to vse this in the making of ministers, bicause you vse the words of our Sauiour Christ, why may not you as well blow vpon them as he did? For seyng that our sauiour Christ confirmed his word there with a Sacrament, or outwarde signe, and you thinke you must therefore do it, bicause he did it, you are muche to blame to leaue out the outward signe, or Sacrament of breath, whereby the faithe of him that is ordeined, might be the more assured of such giftes and graces, as are requisite in his function. I heape not vp here the iudgement of writers, you knowe, I thinke, it might easily be done, if I liked to follow that waye.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Christ vsed these wordes (this is my bodye) in the celebration of his Supper, but there is no speciall commaundement that the Minister should▪ vse the same, and yet must he vse them, b
                              〈1 line〉
                           cause Christ vsed them: euen so, when Christ did ordeine his Apostles Ministers of the Gospell Io. 20. he sayd vnto them▪ 
                           receiue the holy G
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ost. &c. which words bicause they containe the principall duetie of a Minister, and do signifie that God doth poure his spirit vpon those whom he calleth to that function, are most

aptly also vsed of the Bishop (who is Gods instrument in that businesse) in the ordeyning of Ministers. S. Paule speaking to Timothie. 1. Tim. 4. saythe, Neglecte1. Tim. 4. not the gifte that is in thee, whiche was giuen vnto thee by prophecie, with the laying on of the handes of the eldership. In whiche wordes the Apostle signifieth, that God dothe bestowe his giftes and spirite vpon suche as be called to the ministerie of the worde, whereof imposition of handes is a token, or rather a confirmation: and therfore sayth M. Caluine, that it was not a vayne ceremonie, bicause God dyd fulfill with hysCal. 1. Tim. 4. spirite that consecration, which men dyd signifie by imposition of handes. And surely as that is no vayne ceremonie, though it be done by men, so these be no vayne words, though they be spoken by men.
                        Neither dothe the Bishop speake them as thoughe he had authoritie to giue the holy Ghost, but he speaketh them as the words of Christ vsed in the like action, who (as I sayde before) dothe moste certaynly giue his holy spirite to those whom he calleth to the ministerie. And surely if any patterne eyther in calling or ordeyning of ministers is to be followed, this of Christ is to be followed especially: and it is not vnlike but that the Apostles when they layde on their hands vsed the same words, bicause (as I haue sayde) laying on of handes is a signe, or rather a confirmation of the same. That which you speake of commaunding, is a méere cauill, you knowe in your conscience that there is nothing lesse ment.
                        To recite the wordes of Christ in the name of Christ, in the selfe same maner that Christ dyd speake them, is as lawful in this action, as it is in the Supper, for the bread is not the ministers body, but the sacramente of Christ his body, and yet he sayth, Take and eate, this is my body: So in reciting Gods commandements we say, Thou shalt haue no other Gods but me: and yet we meane not that we are their Gods, but we speake the words of God in his person, and in the selfe same maner & forme, that he hath lefte them vnto vs. But it is nowe no maruayle thoughe suche as wyckedly forsake their calling, doe also impiously deride and iest at the manner and forme thereof.
                        Christ when he sayde to the sea, peace, be quiet, shewed a myracle to confirme his diuinitie: but when he sayde, Receyue the holy Ghost. &c. he dyd institute a ministerie, which shoulde be vsed by man: and therefore there is no similitude betwixt these two. Christ when he breathed vpon them, dyd an action proper vnto him selfe, for he thereby signified that he had authoritie to giue vnto them his holy spirite, and that the same spirite dyd not only procéede from the father, but from him selfe also: when he spake these wordes, he made a perpetuall promise, that all suche should receyue his spirite, as from time to time were by him called to the office of the ministerie.
                        I thinke you woulde surely vse some authoritie of wryters héere, as you doe in other places, if you had any: but I suppose you haue not one that misliketh this forme, as it is vsed in this Churche of Englande. I knowe they doe iustly condemne the foolishe imitation of the Papistes, who followe Christ in breathing: But that there is any great misliking of these words, Receyue the holy Ghost (except only when they speake of the papisticall abusing of them) I can not perceyue.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Apostles, Euangelistes, and Prophets.
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     The Admonition.
                     The ninth. Then euery pastor Act. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           0. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           8. Eph. 4. 11. Titus. 1. 5. 1. Pet. 5. 1. had his flocke.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 50. Sect. 2.
                        To proue this you alleage the. 20. of the Acts, the. 4. to the Ephe. the first to Titus, the. 5. chapter of the. 1. of Peter: which places declare

that there were Pastors whiche had flockes: but they proue not that euery Pastor had a flocke: neuerthelesse howe so euer you proue it, true it is that if he be a Pastor, he must haue a certain flock, for therein doth a Pastor differ from the rest of the degrees of ministers in Christes Churche, mentioned in the fourth chapter to the Ephes. But you muste learne, that there bee not onely Pastors in the Churche, but also Apostles, Prophetes, Euangelistes, Doctors, Ephes. 4. 1. Cor. 12. who all are called ministers, and haue their place in the Churche of Christe, as it shall be proued if you denie it.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 45. Sect. 1.
                     This passeth all the diuinitie that euer I redde, that there are nowe Apostles, and Euangelistes, and Prophetes. You shall assuredly doe maruels, if you proue that, as you saye you wil, if any denie it: I denye it, proue you it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.Apostles.
                        
                        Then haue you not redde muche diuinitie: for if it be true that the Apostle Saincte Paule in the fourth to the Ephesians dothe make a perfecte platforme of a Churche, and a full rehersall of the offices therein conteyned (as you say he dothe) then can I not vnderstande howe you can make those offices rather temporall, than the office of the Pastors and Doctors. And forasmuche as you so greatly contemne authoritie, and woulde haue all thinges proued by Scripture, lette mée heare one worde of the same, that dothe but insinuate these offices to be temporall. The place it selfe séemeth to importe a continuance of these functions, vntill the comming ofEphes. 4. Christe. For he sayeth: He therfore gaue some to be Apostles, and some Prophetes, and some Euangelistes, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the gatheryng together of the Sainctes, for the woorke of the ministerie. &c. vntill wee all meete together in the vnitie of faithe and knowledge of the sonne of God vnto a perfecte man, and vnto the measure of the age and fulnesse of Christe. &c. I am perswaded that you can not shew any lyke place, whiche dothe so playnely importe the abrogatyng of them, as thys1. Cor. 12. &. 14. dothe make for their continuaunce. I haue besyde that place to the Ephesians, the twelfth of the firste to the Corinth. and the. 14. where he speaketh of Prophets, as of perpetuall ministers in the Churche of Christe.
                        I knowe that there were certayne thynges in the Apostles, whiche were proper vnto themselues, as theyr callyng, whyche was immediatly from God, their commission to goe into the whole worlde, the power of woorkyng miracles, to bée witnesses of the Resurrection and of the Ascention. &c. but to preache the woorde of God in places where néede requireth, (though the same be not peculiarly committed to them) or to gouerne Churches alreadie planted, I sée no cause why it shoulde not be perpetuall.Euangelists.
                        
                        Lykewise the office of the Euangelist, if it be taken for the writing of the gospell, then it is ceased. But if it be taken for preaching to the people playnely and simply, as Bull. in. 4. ad Ephes. 
                           Bullinger thinketh: or generally, for preaching the gospell: as Musc. Tit. de ver minist. in locis com. 
                           Musculus supposeth, in whiche sense also Paule sayde to Timothie. 2. Timo. 4. doo the worke of an Euangelist: Or for preaching more feruently and zealously than other, as Bucer in. 4. Ephes. 
                           Bucer sayeth: then I see no cause at all why it may not still remaine in the Church.
                        Moreouer Prophetes, if they be taken for suche as haue the gifte of foreshewyng things to come, then be they not in all tymes of the Churche: but if they beProphets, 1. Cor. 14. suche as Saincte Paule speaketh of. 1. Corin. 14. such (I saye) as haue an especiall gyfte in interpretyng the Scriptures, whether it bée in expoundyng the mysteries thereof to the learned, or in declaryng the true sense thereof to the people: I vnderstande not why it is not as perpetuall as the Pastor or Doctor.
                        
                           
                           Thus you sée that I haue bothe Scripture and reason on my syde: and to the ende you maye perceyue that I am not destitute of the consent also of learnedAmbrose. men in thys matter, I will sette downe the opinions of one or two. Ambrose vpon these wordes Ad Ephes. 4. Et ipse dedit quosdam quidem Apostolos. &c. sayeth thus: The Apostles are Bishops: Prophets be interpreters of the Scriptures, althoughe in the beginning there were Prophetes, as Agabus, and the foure Virgins Prophetesses, as it is in the Actes of the Apostles. &c. yet nowe interpreters bee called Prophets, Euangelistes beeBucerin. 4. Ephe. Deacons, as Philip: for althoughe they bee no Priestes, yet maye they preache the Gospell without a chaire, as both Stephanus and Philippe before named. Bucer vppon theFol. 42. sect. vlt. same place sayth that there bée Euangelistes nowe, and you your selfe fol. 42. confesse, that Hus, Ierome of Prage, Luther, Zuinglius. &c. were Euangelistes. Peter Martyr in hisP. Martyr. Commentaries vpon the. 12. to the Romaines sayth, that the Apostle there describeth those functions and giftes, whyche are at all tymes necessarie for the Churche: And in that place the Apostle mentioneth Prophecying. M. Caluine in his Institut.
                           
                           Caluine. 
                           cap. 8. doth confesse, that God hath stirred vp Apostles or Euangelistes since that tyme of the Primitiue Churche, and that hee hathe doone so lykewyse euen nowe in thys tyme.
                        M. Bullinger vpon the place of the fourth to the Ephe. sayeth, that the woordesBullinger. bee confounded, and that an Apostle is also called a Prophete: a Doctor, an Euangeliste, a minister, and a Bishoppe: and a Bishoppe, an Euangeliste, and a Prophete. &c. To bée shorte, it is thus written in the Confession of the Churches in Heluetia,
                           
                           Confess. Heluetica. The ministers of the newe Testament bee called by sundrie names: for they are called Apostles, Prophetes, Euangelistes, Byshoppes. &c. And (speakyng of Prophetes) it sayeth: The Prophetes in tyme paste, foreseeyng thynges to come, were called Seers, who were expounders of the Scriptures also, as some bee euen nowe a dayes. Euangelistes were wryters of the historie of the Gospell, and Preachers also of the gladde tydings of Christe his Gospell: As Paule bidde Timothie doe the woorke of an Euangeliste. &c. So that to saye, that there is in the Churche Apostles, Prophetes, and Euangelistes in suche sense as I haue declared, is no straunge diuinitie, to suche as bée diuines in déede. But let vs heare your reasons.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 45. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4.
                     And that you maye haue some thyng to doe more, than peraduenture you thoughte of, when you wrote these woordes, I will shewe my reasons, why I thinke there oughte to be none, nor can be none, vnlesse they haue wonderfull and extraordinarie callings. It must first be vnderstanded that the signification of this worde Apostle, when it is properly taken, extendeth it selfe not only to all the ministers of God, beeing sente of God, but to the Embassador of any Prince or noble man, or that is sente of any publike authoritie, and is vsed of the Scripture by the trope of Synecdoche for the twelue, that our Sauior Christ appointed to go thoroughout all the worlde, to preache the Gospell, vnto the which number was added Saint Paule, and as some thinke Barnabas, whiche are seuered from all other ministers of the Gospell by these notes.
                     First, that they were immediatly called of God, as S. Paule to the Galathians, proueth himGal. 1. selfe to be an Apostle, bycause he was not appoynted by men.
                     Then that they sawe Christe, whiche argument Saincte Paule vseth in the. 9. 1. Cor. Am I not an Apostle? haue I not seene Christe?
                     Thirdly, that these had the field of the whole world to tyll, whereas other are restrained more particularly, as to a certaine plough lande, wherin they should occupie themselues: wherevpon it followeth, that as we conclude against the Pope truly, that he can be no successour of the Apostles, not only bicause he neyther teacheth, nor doth as they did, but bicause the Apostles haue no successours, neyther any can succeede into the office of an Apostle: so may we lykewyse conclude against those that woulde haue the Apostles now a dayes, that there can be none, bycause there is none, vnto whome all these three notes doe agree: as that he is both sent of God immediately, or that he hath seene Christe, or that he is sent into all the worlde.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           M. Caluine vpon the sixtéenth to the Romaines sayeth, that this woorde Apostle, in proper and vsuall signification, dothe onely comprehende that firste order whyche

Chryste in the beginning did appoynt in his twelue disciples, whiche is directly con trarie to your saying.
                        I graunt that in suche respectes as you now put downe, there bée no Apostles: although Matthias was not immediatly called by God, as it appeareth Actes. 1. and you before haue confessed: neyther can you proue by the Scripture, that Barnabas was so called, but the contrarie rather dothe appeare in the. 11. of the Actes, and yet he was an Apostle. Sainct Paule in the firste to the Corinth. 9. doth not saye that he sawe Christe, to proue that he was an Apostle, but to declare that he was in that respect nothing inferiour to the reste of the Apostles. I haue before declared in what sense I say that ther be Apostles in the church: neyther is it a matter so strange séeing that M. Caluine sayeth as muche in the place before recited: 
                              Quanquam non nego, quin Apostolos postea quoque, vel saltem eorum loco Euangelistas interdùm excitarit Deus, vt
                              Cal. in. 16. Ro. instit. cap. 8. 
                              nostro tempore factum est, Although I doe not denye, but that God hath afterwardes also stirred vp Apostles, or at the least Euangelists in steade of them, as it is doone in oure dayes.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 45. Sect.. 5.
                     And although some Ecclesiasticall wryters doe call sometymes good ministers successors of the Apostles, yet that is to be vnderstanded bicause they propounde the same doctrine that they did, not bycause they succeeded into the same kind of function, which they could not do. S. Paule doth vse this word sometimes in his proper and natiue signification, for him that is publikely sent from any to other, as when he speaketh of the brethren that were ioyned with Titus, whiche were sent by the Churches with reliefe to the poore Church in Ierusalem and Inry, and where he calleth Epaphroditus an Apostle. But that is with addition and not simply, as in the first place he calleth the brethren the Apostles of the Churches, that is, not the Apostles of all Churches, or sente to all2. Cor. 8. Churches, but the Apostles which certayne Churches sent with the reliefe to other certaine churches: and Epaphroditus he calleth not an Apostle simply, but the Apostle of the Philippians, thatPhilip. 2. is, which the Philippians sent with reliefe to Paule, being in prison at Rome, as it appeareth in the same epistle.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The writers of ye 
                           Magdelb. historie cal Epaphroditus an Apostle in the same senseEpaphroditus an Apost. that they cal Paule, and the rest of the Apostles: & M. Caluine thinketh the name of anCent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 7. Apostle to be taken in that place generally, 
                              pro quolibet Euangelista: for any preacher of the gospell. Ambrose saith: 
                              erat eorum Apostolus à Paulo factus, dum illum ad exhortationem
                              Caluin. in. 2 Philip. 
                              eorum mittebat ad eos: he was made their Apostle of Paule, when as at their request he sente him vnto them. And Theodoret in plaine wordes doth call him an Apostle, bycause heAmbrose. in Philip. 2. was byshop of the Philippians. If these say true, as no doubt they do, thē is not Epaphroditus called an Apostle only in that signification, that you say he was. In that heTheo. 1. Tim. 3. & Phil. 2. calleth them Apostles with an addition of the Churches, not of all Churches, he confirmeth my saying, for it argueth that there may be Apostles though they haue commission but for one kingdome or prouince only, as Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the churches of the Philippians, bycause he was sent vnto them to preach. Thus doth both Ambrose, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Caluine, and others write.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 46. Sect. 1.
                     And as for Andronicus and Iunius whiche are by you recitedT. C. 
                              〈◊〉
                            off a direct answer with this (belike) belike to proue that we may haue more Apostles, bycause it is said of S. Paule that they were famous and notable amōgst theRom. 16. Apostles, it cannot be proued by any thing I see there, whether they had any function ecclesiasticall or no. For S. Paule calleth them his kinsfolks, and fellowe prisoners, and dothe not saye that they were hys fellowe labourers: and a man maye be well notable and famouse amongst the Apostles, and well knowne vnto them, whiche is no Apostle. And if the Apostles woulde haue had this order of the Apostles to continue in the Churche, there is no doubt but that they would

haue chosen one into Iames his roome, when he was slayn, as they did, when they supplyed the place of Iudas, by choosing Matth
                           〈1 line〉
                        s, and so euer as they had dyed, the other would haue put other in their places. So it appeareth that this function of the Apostles is ceased.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The foresayd authors of the storie called Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 7. 
                           Magdelburgica, do also recken these twoAndronicus & Iunia Apostles. among the Apostles, euen as they do Paule & Barnabas. Caluine in 16. Rom. M. Caluin vpon that place to the Romaines sayth, that the name of an Apostle there doth extende to all those whiche teache not one Churche onely, but many. &c. and séemeth to accompte Andronicus and Iunius such.Beza in. 16. Rom. 
                           M. Beza in the same place writeth thus: Inter Apostolos. &c. i quorum nomen inter Apostolos viget, vel qui & ipsi sunt insignes Apostoli, 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ic enim accipitur interdum 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              oc nomen in genere pro bis, qui Christi nomine funguntur legatione, That is, whose name is famous among the Apostles, or whiche are themselues notable Apostles: for so is this name sometyme generally taken for those, which are sent in embassage in the name of Christe. Bullinger doth think yt they wer in the number of the. 72. disciples. Peter Martyr vpon thatBull. in. 16. Rom. place, They are called notable amongst the Apostles: not bicause they were of the colledge of the twelue Apostles, but bicause (as it is credible) they had spread the Gospell throughMartyr in. 16 Rom. manie places, and had planted many Churches. And a little after speaking of your interpretation, he sayeth, This sense doth not displease me, if the wordes themselues bee not contrarie thervnto. So that he séemeth to doubte whether the wordes will beare your interpretation or no. Gualter and Bullinger also suppose it not to be vnlykely
                              〈1 line〉
                           ,Gualter in. 16. Rom. that they were the first planters of Christian religion at Rome. And I can reade of none that doubteth whether they had any function Ecclesiasticall or no, as you do.
                        I brought them in before 
                              pagina. 47. to proue that some may be chosen to preach the woorde whiche haue no certaine cure, and you to auoyde a direct answere, haue shifted them of to this place, and now you say, that belyke. I bring them in to proue that we may haue more Apostles, which thing in déede they proue manifestly, but I brought them in to declare that a man may be admitted to preach, though he haue no certaine cure, and to that you haue not answered.
                        There is nothing expressed in Scriptures, whether the Apostles did choose any into the roome of Iames or no: but I am persuaded they did not, neyther was it necessarie. For who euer sayd, that there muste continually be twelue Apostles, and neyther more nor lesse?
                        I tolde you before out of M. Caluine, that this worde Apostle, in his proper and vsuall signification comprehendeth only the twelue Apostles appoynted by Christe. Wherfore in this signification there are nowe no Apostles, neyther was there anye since that tyme: but it signifieth also generally such as preache the Gospel in sundry places, and although they go not through the whole worlde, as the twelue did, yet are they not bounde to any one place certainly. And according to this signification, there both hath be
                              〈1 line〉
                           e and are Apostles.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 46. Sect. 2. 3.
                     You aske further, that if a man shoulde not preache before he haue a pastorall charge, what they will answere vnto Philip and Epaphroditus, wherby your meaning is belike, that although they beno Pastours, yet they may be Euangeli
                           〈1 line〉
                        ts, whiche goe aboute the countrey here & there. But this office is ceassed in the Churche, as the Apostles is, sauing that sometymes the Lorde doth rayse vp some extraordinarily, for the building vp of the Churches, whyche are falne down, and pulled vp by the foundations, as I haue shewed somwhat before. And that it is ceased, it may appeare by these reasons.
                     Fyrst, for bicause all those that the Scripture calleth precisely Euangelistes (which are only Philipan
                           〈1 line〉
                         Timothie) had their callings confirmed by miracle, and so it is lyke that Titus and 
                           〈◊〉
                         and 
                           〈1 line〉
                        pollos, and if there were any other, had their vocations after the same manerAct. 8. 39. confirmed, but there is no suche miraculous confirmation nowe, therefore there is no suche vocation.1 Tim. I. 18.
                     
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue declared both before by Scripture, reason, & other authoritie, that though the name of an Euangelist bée chaunged, yet the office remayneth. The Scripture no where calleth Tunothie an Euangelist, onely. 2. Ti. 4. S. Paule willeth him to doe2. Tim. 4. the woorke of an Euangelist, whiche is, to preache the Gospell. But of this matter I haue at large spoken in an other place.
                        It passeth to sée howe boldely you doe abuse the Scripture. Where doe you reade that eyther 
                              〈◊〉
                            or Philippe, were ordeyned or confirmed Euangelistes, by miracle? There can be no such thing imagined: in the. 39. verse Acts. 8. the wordesAct. 8. be these: And as soone as they (that is Philippe and the Eunuche) were come oute of the water, the spirite of the Lorde caught away Philip, that the Eunuche sawe him no more &c. Was this the miracle that confirmed Philip an Euangelist? Lorde God what meane you? This was rather done to confirme the Eunuche: As for Philip it is manyfest that before this miracle he was an Euangelist: for in the same chapter we reade that before this tyme Philip had preached in Samaria, and conuerted them, béeing before seduced by Simon the sorcerer: and that he had also baptised them. Moreouer he had conuerted the Eunuch, and baptized him before this miracle was shewed: wherfore it could not be a confirming of his Euangelistship.
                        That in the. 1. Ti. 1. vers. 18. insinuateth, that dyuerse Prophecies had gone before of Timothie, whereby it was reuealed that he shoulde bée a woorthye Minister of the Churche, or as Caluine sayeth, which had commended him to the churche: although there be sundry interpretations of that place more lyke to bée true than that. But howe proueth it that hée was made an Euangelist, by miracle? First Timothie was nowe a Bishop, as hereafter is proued. Secondly, here is no mention made of any calling to an Euangelist ship. Thirdly, a Prophecie is not a miracle. Last of all, though this were true bothe in Philip and Timothie (as it is in neyther) yet dothe it not followe, that whosoeuer is called to be an Euangelist, must also be confirmed by miracle, for particular examples make no generall rule: Timothie was ordeyned minister of the Gospell, 
                              per impositionem manuum, by the laying on of handes,1. Tim. 4.
                            1. Ti. 4. 2. Ti. 1. And therfore his vocation was ordinarie, and néeded no such confirmation2. Tim. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . by miracle.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 46. Sect. 4.
                     Nowe agayne, if there shoulde be any Euangelist, who shoulde ordeyne hym? you will saye the Bishop. But I saye that can not be, that the greater shoulde be ordeyned of the lesse. ForHeb. 7. the Euangelist is a higher degree in the Churche, than is the Bishop or pastor. And if he be so, why hath he not his estimation here in the Churche about the Bishop or Archbishop eyther? for the Archbishop is but a Bishop, or why doth not he ordeyne Bishops as Tunothie and Titus did, which were Euangelistes, being one poynt of theyr office, as Eusebius declareth?Euseb. li. 3. cap. 27.
                     
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You doe but trie my pacience in so often offending in the petition of the principle: For neyther can you proue an Euangelist to be an higher degrée in the Church than is a Bishop, neyther is it true that Timothie and Titus were Euangelistes, and not Bishops, and in that poynt haue you all the writers both olde and newe, stories and other, one or two only excepted, flatly against you, besides the euident reasons that may be collected out of the Scripture.
                        I know not to what purpose you quote the. 7. to the Hebrues, except it be for thisHebr. 7. texte: The lesse is blessed of the greater: in whiche place blessing is not taken for ordeyning or consecrating: for Melchisedech did no suche thyng to Abraham. But it is there taken as it is Numer. 6. where the Priestes are commaunded to blesse theNumer 6. people, and therefore serueth not your turne for any thing here spoken.
                        
                           I vnderstand not to what ende you quote Eusebius in his third booke, and. 27. Chapter.Uaine quotation. For there is not in that place one woorde spoken of an Euangelist, or any part of his office.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 46. Sect. 5.
                     Agayne, if there be in euery Church a Pastor, as S. Paule cōmaundeth, what should the Euangelists do? for either that pastor doth his dutie, and then the Euangelist is superfluous, or if he do it not, then he is no lawfull pastor, and so ought he to be put out, and an other to be put in his steade. And where the pastor doing his dutie can not suffice, there the Scripture hath giuen him an ayde of the Doctour, which for bicause his office consisteth in teaching doctrine, to this end that the Pastor myght not be driuen to spende so much tyme in propounding the doctrine, but myghte haue the more tyme to employ in exhorting and dehorting, and applying of the doctrine to the tymes and places, and persons, it is manyfest that he also is tyed to a certaine Church. For how coulde he be an ayde vnto the pastor to whose helpe he is giuen, vnlesse he were in the same church where the pastor is? And that the Euangelistes office hath bene to taken as a function that enduredLib. 5. cap. 10. but for a tyme, it may appeare first by that which Eusebius writeth speaking of Pantenus: for sayth he, there were vntill that tyme Euangelistes. &c. which was aboute the yeare of our Lord. 162. Wherby he giueth to vnderstand, that aboute that tyme they ceased, and that in his tyme there was none, when notwithstanding there were Bishops or Pastors, and EldersLi. 1. offic. 1. and Deacons. And Ambrose sayth, that there be no Apostles, but those whiche Christe himselfe did appoynt: wherby it appeareth, that of all the Ecclesiasticall functions that preach the woorde there are but the Pastor and Doctor only lefte vnto vs, and the same also restrayned to particular charges.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        But what if there be not in euery Church suche a Pastor, neyther can be, is the Euangelist then necessarie? you must of necessitie confesse that, for the people muste not be depriued of the worde, when by suche meanes they may haue it. Howebeit, though euery Churche had his Pastour, and euerye pastour dyd his duetie, yet might preaching by other doe good, as well for the confirmation of the Doctrine, and the more frequent preaching, as also for that it pleaseth God sometymes to woorke that by one, that he dothe not by an other. But what Scripture haue you to proue that the Doctor is added to the Pastour, as an ayde, or that the Doctor is tyed to a certaine place? you haue no licence to coyne newe Scriptures, and in the olde I am sure you can not fynde it. As for youre bare woorde, it is but a verye bare proofe.
                        I tolde you before, that Hierome, Augustine, Chrysostome, Musculus, and dyuerse other vppon good reason confounde Pastour, and Doctor, and thynke them to bée but diuerse names of one office. And whereas you saye, that the Doctours office consisteth in teaching doctrine, to this ende, that the Pastour myghte not be dryuen to spende so muche tyme in propoundyng the doctrine. &c. I woulde gladly knowe whence you learne that. Ambrose sayeth, they be suche as see good rule kepte in the Churche, or suche asAmbrose in 4. Eph. teache children.
                        
                        
                           Eusebius woordes speaking of Pantenus be these: There were as yet at that tyme manie Euangelistes, whyche were prest and readie to this, that they myght wyth a godlie zeale accordyng to the Apostles example, promote and plante the woorde of God. Whyche proue, that there were then Euangelistes good store, whyche were zealous. &c. But there is no mention made of any ceassing of their office: it rather proueth a continuance of the same, béeing so long after the Apostles tyme. There is nowe no suche Euangelistes as goe from kyngdome to kyngdome, or thoroughe theLib. 5. cap. 9. worlde, bycause the miraculous gifte of tongues is nowe ceased. Neyther is anye nowe lawfully called to any suche Ecclesiasticall function, but by man, and therfore they must goe no further than his authoritie extendeth that hath called them.
                        
                           Ambrose sayeth truly, if he should say that there are no Apostles but such as Christ himselfe appointed, if we speake proprely and vsually (as I haue before declared) but that is no hinderance to any thing yt I haue affirmed. And yet surely ye words of Ambrose sound nothing that way, for Ambrose abasing and disabling himselfe saith thus:

                           
                              Non igitur mihi apostolorum gloriam vendico, quis enim boc, nisi quos ipse filius elegit dei? &c. I therefore challenge not to my selfe the glory of the Apostles: for who can do this, but they whome the sonne of God did choose? And what can you hereof conclude? He saith afterwards also, that i e doth not chalenge to himselfe the circumspection of Pastors, yet was he then a Byshop, as it is in that place euident. Gladly would you haue some authoritie for your purpose, if you could tell where to find it.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of the residence of the Pastor. Tract. 5.
            
               
                  Chap. 1. the first Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 46. Sect. 6.
                     Now that I haue proued that there are no Euangelists, Prophets or Apostles, and that the ministeries of the word, which remayne, are limited vnto certayne places: I will take that whiche you graunt, that is, that the Pastor or Byshop ought to haue a speciall flocke. And demand of you, wherefore he should haue it? Is it not to attend vpon it? And can he attend vpon it, vnlesse he be resident and abiding vpon it? But he cannot be abiding vpon it, if he go from place to place to preach where he thinketh necessarie. Therefore being Pastor or Byshop of a congregation allotted vntoA digression from the matter to the person. him, he may not go from place to place to preach where he thinketh good, much lesse to haue a mastership of a colledge in one corner of the land, a Deanry in another, and a Prebend in the thirde, and so be absent from his pastorall charge in such places, where eyther he preacheth not, or needeth not to preach, those places being otherwise furnished without him. For then how is this difference kept betweene the Pastor and other ministers, that the one is tyed to a place, and the other is not. For if you say, that it is in that he shall preach more at his flocke, than at other places, I answere that the Euangelists and Apostles did carrie longer in one place, than in another, and taught some congregations yeares, whē they did not othersome moneths. And therfore they say nothing, which alleadge for the nonresidence of Pastors that S. Paule called Timothie and Titus from Ephesus and Crete, for first they were Euangelists and no Pastors, then they went not of their owne heads, but called of the Apostle, which was a chiefe gouernoure of the Church. And thirdly they went not, but hauing other sufficient put in their place, as it appeareth in their seuerell epistles, so that if that place make any thing it maketh not to proue the non residencie, but rather whether a minister may be translated from one Church to another.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your reader, if he iudge indifferently, cannot but acknowledge this, that you so cō
                           fidently speake of proores, to be but a vaine bragge and nothing so.
                        There is no man that denieth but that a Pastor ought so to attend vpō his slocke,How a Pastor ought to be rendent. as he may be well able to do his duetie towards the same, and with a good conscience answer his doings before the chiefe Pastor, to whome he shall giue his accompte. In the meane time if he be godly, if he preach among them as often as he is perswaded to be conuenient, if he haue a care ouer them, that they be not destitute of that, whiche is necessarie, if he haue such as are honest, learned, and diligent to supply his absence, he may be bolde to say to his vnlawfull iudges, 
                              tu quis es, qui iudicas alienum seruum, proprio
                              Rom. 14. 
                              domino stat, aut cadit. VVho art thou, which condemnest another mans seruant? he standeth or falleth to his owne Master▪
                            Whether a Pastor hauing a flocke, may also preach out of his owne charge, is another question. And although it be by you denyed, yet bycause your words without proofe weigh not much, I will (for the auoiding of confusion) speake nothing thereof in this place, but this only, that as the opinion is strange, so is it most vntrue, and not to be iustifyed eyther by Scripture, aunciente fathers, or reasons.
                        But (oh T C.) who séeth not the mark, you shoote at? who perceyueth not how youWhy T. C. slideth from the matter to the person. slide from the matter to the person? To what ende do you here recite a mastership of a colledge, a Deanrie▪ a Prebend, but that your meaning is to note some one particular man, whome (bycause he hath withstoode your erroneous and contentious doctrine, hath not exalted you, as it is wel knowne you haue desired, hath executed those lawes vpon you, whiche (for the auoyding of manifest and wilfull periurie) you oughte toThe oth of the fellowes of Tri. Col. in Cam. haue executed of your selfe) you séeke by all meanes possible to deface. Is this conscience▪ Is this praebe, e te beneuolum magistro, non solùm dum in eo vixeris, sed etiam postea pro virill. &c. The Lord forgiue you, and giue you grace to know your selfe.

If he that hath this mastership, Deanry, Prebend & benefice, neglect his duetie in any one of them, if he do not that, that both Gods lawes and mans lawes require of him, if be be a loyterer, if he séeke his ease, if he be not able to giue an accompt of his doings when he shall therevnto be called, then let him susteyne both the shame, and the blame also.
                        The Pastor is not so tyed to any place, that he may not from the same be bodilyThe Pastor may be absent vpon occasion absent vpon occastō, as I am ready to proue by sufficient both reason and authoritie, when I shall be vrged there vnto. The examples of the Euangelists and of the Apostles do verifie the same, for they fully instructed the churches, wherein they preached, in all things necessary to saluation, though they did not cōtinually remayne with them, but now and then visit them. And therefore the Pastors may so do in like manner.
                        Touching Timothie and Titus (whome you so oft without any kind of proofe denieTimothie being a Pastor was absent frō Ephesus. to be Pastors) I haue spoken else where at large: notwithstanding bycause your too too bolde asseuerations may appeare what they are, I will in a few words euen in this place declare, bothe that Timothie and Titus were Pastors, and that their examples do euidently proue that a Pastor may be vpon occasions absent from hys flocke. And for this time I will be content with that only, that M. Caluine writeth touchingIn ye treatise of Archbyshops. &c. the same matter, referring the reader for further proofe, to that, that I haue in more ample manner written of the same. M. Caluine. 1. Ti. 1. doth call Timothie Pastor of the Church of Ephesus. And in the. 1. Ti. 4. expounding these words, ne donum quod
                           Tract. 8. Caluine. 
                           in te est. &c. he saith that the holy ghost had by oracle appointed Timothie to be receyued into the order of Pastors. And. 2. Ti. 4. that he did excell vulgare and common Pastors, meaning that he was an excellent Pastor, endued with more singular and notable gifts, and of greater authoritie, than the common sort of Pastors be. And in the same Chapter speaking of Paules sending for Timothie from Ephesus to Rome, he sayth, that there was no small cause why Paule sent for Timothie from that Churche, whiche he ruled and gouerned, and that so farre off: heereby we may gather (saith he) how profitable conference is with such men: for it might be profitable to all Churches, whiche Timothie might learne in a small time: so that the absence of halfe a yeare, or of one whole yeare, is nothing in comparison of the commoditie, that commeth thereby. Whereby it is manifest that Caluine both tooke him to be a Pastor, and also excuseth his absence. So that the example of Timothie maketh much for the pnrpose: The like may be said of Titus, and of sundry other in the scriptures.
                        Now if the Apostle being a chiefe gouernoure of the Church might call Timothie and Titus so farre from their cures, and that for no great, nor yet common matters of the Churche, but for his owne priuate businesse, as it appeareth. 2. Tim. 4. then I trust you will also thinke it lawfull, that suche as be rulers and gouernours of the Church, may do the like. There is no man that writeth so exactly of Non residence, butLawfull causes of the pastors absence. he confesseth certaine necessary causes of absence, as if it be for the commoditie of the Church, whereof he is Pastor, or for the commoditie of the whole church of that kingdome, or for the commoditie of other particular churches in the same, or for necessitie, or vpon commaundement of higher authoritie: in all these and such like cases the absence of a Pastor is lawfull, and it is praesentia rather than absentia, if you will beléeue learned writers. Now if you will demaund of me who shal allow these causes, I answer, no one priuate mā, of what calling soeuer he be, but the magistrates, to whome the gouernment of the Churche is committed, if they allow the absence, and the Pastor satisfye his owne conscience, there is no man of God, no good conscience, no modest spirite, that dare presume to iudge him, much lesse to condemne him.
                        That he ought in his absence to prouide a sufficient deputie, I confesse, and that example of Tichichus doth proue that, for he was Timothies deputie, and not his successor, as you séeme to insinuate. M. Caluine saith that S. Paule sent Tichichus to Ephesus,Ca.▪ in. 2. Ti. 4. whē he sent for Timothie to Rome, in the meane time to supplie his absence: So that he was but Timothies deputie. Moreouer it is manifest that Timothie was oft absentTimothie oft absent from Ephesus. from Ephesus, twice with Paule at Rome, and that he retourned thither againe this last time, as well as he did at other times, as both M. Caluines words before mentioned

do declare, and I also haue euidently proued in that place, where I proue TimothieTract. 8. to be Byshop of Ephesus.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the second Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 47. Sect. 1.
                     But I will neuer weary my penne to confute those, whome their owne This is 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            mens consciences as God. consciences are too strong for, and confuteth euery night when they go to bed: for that were nothing else but to reason with the bellie, that hath no eares to heare, or with the backe that hath no eyes to see. Those that thinke that they hauing charges of their owne, yet may go from place to place where they thinke it necessary, and that it skilleth not where they preach, so they preache: must consider, that if they thinke that God is the authoure of their placing in their flockes, then that eyther their abode there is needefull and expedient, or else that God did not see well and cleerely, what was meete to be done in placing them ouer that congregation, and appoynting that that congregation shoulde hang and depend vpon them, for their nurrishment and good gouernment.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        A sore iudgement and presumptuous: still I say 
                              tu quis es. &c. who art thou whycheThe Pastor may preach 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  mo places. condemnest. &c. The rest of that section is builded vpon the petition of the principle, for there is no man (I think) that so regardeth preaching in other places that he neglecteth it in his owne. But I am fully perswaded, ye God hath so called no man to one place, that he hath restreyned him from doing good in other places also: and I cōstantly beléeue, that in the mo places he laboureth and doth good, the more his seruice to be accepted vnto God. And it is a token that he is truly called when he hathe an hartie desire to profite many.
                        All congregations of Christians are deare vnto God: wherefore he doth not so much incline to any one, that he woulde haue the other altogither neglected. And therfore if there be but one good man placed in a whole shire, I thinke that he is there placed to do good in the countrie round about him, and that he ought so to do, bycause they be all shéepe perteining to one folde: but yet so must he labour generally, that he haue an especiall care of his owne particular flocke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 47. Sect. 2.
                     And you see that if I woulde follow those noble metaphores of watchman and Shepheard, which the scripture vseth to expresse the office of a minister with, what a large field is opened vnto me. For then I could shew you how that cities besteged, and flocks in daunger of the wolues, areLuke. 2. * watched continuallie night and day. And that there is no citie so sore and so continually besieged, nor no flocks subiect to so manyfold diseases at home, or hurtfull and deuouring beasts abroade, and that without any truce or intermission, as are the Churches, the Shephards, and watchmen whereof are Pastors or Byshops.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue shewed before what your metaphors of watchmen and the pheards cā proue:Tract. 4. cap. 1. diuis. 6. what dissimilitudes there is betwixt them and spirituall watchmen and Pastors. I thinke your meaning is not, that the Pastor should preach both night and day, or thatThe metaphores of watchmē and shephards. there is no continual watching, but continuall preaching. If I were disposed to dallie with you in your metaphores, I could say vnto you that watchmen must of necessitie oftentimes haue their deputies, or else that there must be many of them, and so watch by turnes. I could also say, that assoone as the watchman hathe told the citie of the enimies approching, and hath discrieb them vnto it, he may depart from his station and take his rest.
                        Likewise that the watchman hath least to do, when his enimies are nighest, especially when they haue inuaded the citie: for then are the souldiers to driue them away by force. Wherefore by these metaphors this onely can you proue, that the Pastors ought to admonish their flocks of their enimies, discrie them in time, and will them to be vigilant. The enimies are knowen, the armoure is certaine, the citizens reasonable,

wherefore if they neglect the Admonitions giuen in due time and order, if they be not vigilant, their bloud be vpon their owne pates, the watchman hath done hys duetie. The like in all respects may be said of shephards and shéepe.
                        To what purpose you haue quoted in your margent the. 2. of Luke. I knowe not,Luke. 2. except it be, bycause it is there said, that the shepheards were watching their shepe in the night. The which how you can apply to your purpose I would gladly learne, for these shepheards went from their shéepe, and left them in great daunger.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 47. Sect. 3.
                     But I will leaue that to their considerations, and will shew that the partes and duties of the minister be suche and so many in his owne flocke, that if he were as wise as Salomon was, as great in councell as Ioseph, as well learned as S. Paule, as actiue as Iosue, which fought so many battayles in small space, yet al were little inough or too little, to perfourme to the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ul that, which his charge requir
                           〈1 line〉
                        th of him. Of the Pastors therefore is required not only the preaching of the word, and ministring of the sacraments, whereof, the preaching of the word, & ministring of the sacrament of baptisme, ought to be continually, and as oft, as the Church may conueniently assemble, the other sacrament of the Lord his supper, although not so continually (sor that the Church shall hardly haue so much leysure from their necessary affairs of this life, as that they may celebrate it as 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ften as the other) yet so often, as that we remember▪ that too rare and seldome celebrating it, argueth a mind too too much forgetfull of the vnspeakable benefyte of our redemption, and argueth also that we are farre behind the primitiue Church in zeale, which did celebrate it euery Saboth: I say beside the preaching of the worde, and ministring of the sacramentes, there is required of hym that he should admonish priuately, and house by house those that are vnder his charge.20. Actes.
                     
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Certaine it is, that the charge of a Pastor is great, and that he, which doth the best, must confesse and say that he is but an vnprofitable seruant: and yet if he occupy hys talents, be they mo, or be they fewer, and gaine with them more or lesse, he hathe a mercifull master, who will embrace him with mercie, and will accept of his seruice. And therefore, though he be much inferioure to Salomon in wisedome, to Ioseph in councell, to Paule in learning, and to Iosua in actiuitie, yet may he be a faithfull seruant,Matth. 25. and heare of his Lord and master, 
                              Euge serue bone & fidelis. &c. It is wel done good seruant and faithfull.
                        
                        If you should thus streightly deale with the Pastors, and leaue them no consolation, you should not follow our sauioure. Christ his mildenesse and mercie.
                        But let the bitternesse of your speaches go, and let vs come to the weight of your reasons: you say that there is required of the Pastors preaching of the word, and ministring of the sacraments, & priuate admonition, & that ye preaching of the word & ministring of the sacramēt of Baptisme, ought to be continuall: and priuate exhortations likewise, & therfore the Pastor may not be absent. Touching ye preaching of ye word I haue spokē before something, it must be according ye to cōscience & discretion of the Pastor, who hath to cōsider what is best for that cōgregation, wherof he hath ye charge, both for the often preaching, & for the maner of preaching also: The sacraments maye be administred by other, than by the pastor, as they were in the Apostles tyme. 1. Cor. 1. & Act. 10. Priuate exhortation must also be vsed as occasion serueth, according to the discretion of the minister. But I meruayle that you saye, the ministryng of the sacrament of Baptisme ought to be continually. &c.Baptisin ministred but once in the yeare. You knowe that in Victor his tyme it was celebrated but once in the yeare at Easter. And in Tertullians tyme at Easter and Pentecoste, and in many Parishes in Englande there is no such dayly néede of administring that Sacramente. To conclude, both the Sacramentes maye bée as well ministred by an other if occasion serue. And therefore of all other reasons this is the slenderest.
                        Sainct Paules meaning in the. 20. of the Actes, is not that he dayely went into their houses to exhort them, but that he did so as occasion serued.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the fifte Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 47. Sect. 3.
                     Now tell me howe this can be done profitably, without a diligent marking and looking into their manners? How can either publike preachings, or priuate admonitions haue their effect and working, vnlesse the word of God be applyed according to the disposition or state of that people, vnto which it is preached? And vndoubtedly hereof it commeth that the word of God is no more effectuall in this realme than it is, for bycause it is preached hand ouer head, without knowledge and vnderstanding the estate of the people. For so, oftentimes the promises and glad tidings of the gospell of our Sauioure are preached vnto those, that being before secure in their sinnes, are after the hearing of the promises rocked into a dead sleepe thereof, and they that are ouerthrowen with the conscience of their sinne, and confounded in themselues, are by the sharpnesse of the law, and hearing of the iudgement of God broken into peeces, & driuen to desperation. And so likewise, the people are taught sometimes how to leade their liues in honest conuersation, when all that doctrine falleth to the ground, bycause they haue no knowledge of Christ, nor of faith in him: and to be short, it is as much as if eyther the surgeon should apply his plaister, or the Phisition his medicine, when they neyther know of the wound, or disease of their patients. But this knowledge of their estate, cannot be withoute a continuall abode amongst them, therefore a continuall residence is necssary.
                     
                        Io. Whtgifte.
                        The Apostles and other in their time, did not long continue in one place to learneA man may profyte them by preaching, whome he knoweth not▪
                            the peoples manners, and yet did they muche preuaile by preaching: neither is it so hard a matter to know the peoples manners and conditions, though a man be not perpetually resident among them.
                        The word of God (his name be praysed therefore) hath bin effectuall in England, and numbers are by the same conuerted from superstition, blindnesse, and ignorance, to the true knowledge of God. But this is an old and vsuall obiection of the Anabaptists against the Church of Christ, that in their Churches there is a manifest amendmētThe vsuall obiection of ye Anabaptists of life, but in other Churches, which seeme to professe the gospell, there appeareth no such frute: & that the gospel is preached, but no man the better. This I say, is the slaunderous speach of the Anabaptists against those Churches, from the which they haue deuided themselues, and it is very oft vsed by you.
                        You must thinke that there be Pastors and Preachers in England, that vnderstand the state of the people, and know what discretion to vse in their sermons and exhortatiōs, as well as you can teach them. But this is most true, that as you thinke none learned but your selfe, so do you also iudge all men to lacke both wit add discretion but your selfe. And here in this place haue you taken vpon you this censure most confidently, I will not say arrogantly.
                        In the end of this diuision you conclude thus, the knowledge of the estate of the people cannot be knowne without a cōtinual abode with them: therfore a continual residence is necessary. You must proue the Antecedent, for it is false. The Apostle knew (so farre as it wasThe Pasto
                                 〈1 line〉
                               may know the estate of the people without a con tinuall abode amongst them necessary for him to knowe) the Romaines, the Corinthians, Galatians and other Churches to whome he wrote, and yet was he not continually resident among them▪ And so did the other Apostles and Preachers, whiche were not resident in any one place: and yet a preacher may do good in preaching among them, whome he knoweth not, for it is God that directeth him in his words and matter. And for as muche as he cannot but knowe that euery congregation consisteth of diuers mindes and affections, therefore (excepte he be voyde of discretion) he will so moderate and temper hys sermon or exhortation, that it may profyte all, and hurte none, but suche as do not accordingly receyue it. And therefore bothe these propositions are false: th
                              〈1 line〉
                            a man by preaching cannot profyte such, as he knoweth not: and that he cannot know them, except he be perpetually resident with them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the sixte Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 48. Sect. 1.
                     Moreouer as in the law the priests were ready in the temple to answer to al the doubts & questions, that any of the people should come to aske: so the ministers in their seuerall parishes shoulde be ready to dissolue the difficulties, that eyther one hathe with another, or with himselfe, touching the conscience, for want whereof, the consciences of many, after doubtfull and daungerous wrastling with the deuill, and wich dispaire are strangled. And therevpon some hang or drowne themselues, some other putting away all care or conscience of sinning, and labouring to haue no sense nor feeling of their sinne, close vp the wounde vnhealed, which after, eyther breaketh out more daungerously, or else euery day more and more waxing senselesse, and withoute feeling, treasure vp vnto themselues the wrath of God against the day of iudgement. For although the iudgement of God doth not for the time follow them so hard, as them, which through terroure of conscience vntaught and vncomforted, kill themselues: yet their estate is neuer the lesse daungerous therefore, but rather more, for asmuch as by a longer line of sinne drawne out, they also pull vpon themselues a heauier conde
                           〈1 line〉
                        nation. Which things when they see oftentimes before their eyes, that will consider it, it is easy to iudge that it commeth to passe a great deale oftner than we can see.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You do not referre me to any place, where I might reade that the priests in the lawe were ready in the temple to answere all the doubts and questions, that any of the people shoulde come to aske. &c. And I do not remember any suche place in the scripture, excepte you meane that, which is written in the. 17. of Deute. verse. 9. &c. where there is no sucheDeute. 17. attendance mentioned: but only the people are willed to bring their controuersies to the priests and the iudge. If you meane the. 12. verse of that Chap. where it is said of the priest that he standeth before the Lord to minister there, you haue also missed the quisshion. For the meaning of that place is that whosoeuer presumptuously refuseth to harken vnto the Priest (so long as the prieste is the true minister of God, and pronounceth according to his word) shall die. &c. The priest here had to do in ciuill and iudiciall matters togither with the iudge: the priest was but in the chéefe place, where iudgement was heard, and not in euery particular congregation. Wherfore if you would conclude any thing of this place, it must be, that the Priest must be ioyned with the Iudge, and haue to do in ciuill and iudiciall matters, and remaine in some chiefe place of the countrie where iudgements are to be heard. You can by no meanes hereof conclude, that euery particular congregation should haue a Pastor continually remayning with them.
                        There is not now any such general ignorance, but that there may diuers be found able to answer all such doubts, as you speake of sufficiently, though the Pastor be absent. The scriptures also are publikely red in euery mans house, whiche are as Saint Paule saith. 2. Ti. 3. profitable to teach, to improue, to correct, to instruct in righteousenes,2. Tim. 3. that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect in all good works: and as Chrysostome calleth them, they be an apothecarie his shoppe, where euery man may findeIn. 3. Coll. remedy for his diseases.
                        Moreouer the sufficiencie of his curate may be suche, that he shall be aswell able to answere all suche questions, as if he himselfe were present. Neyther are those cases you put vsuall (God be thanked) and they oftentimes happen, where there is leaste cause to complaine of any absence of the Pastor.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 48. Sect. 1.
                     When as therefore the only preaching of the word of God being continuall, is a bond strong enough to hold the Pastor to his flocke, then the enquirie of the maners & behauioure of his flocke, the priuate admonitions and consolations, the dissoluing of doubts, when any riseth, as a three or foure fould cord ought much more to hold hym: so that he which shall breake all these things willingly and wittingly, cannot easily be thought to breake them as Sampson did his, by the strength of God, but rather by some other power not of God.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I would not haue any man to thinke, that I take vpon me to maintaine carelesse &Care
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               be not defended. slouthful pastors: I speake only of such as be vigilant, & occupie themselues profitably in the Church, visite their seueral flockes, & teach them to the satisfying both of the parishes, and of their owne consciences also: such I am persuaded, may do as much in al those points here by you mentioned, to the commoditie of their flocke being somtimes absent, as if they were continually present, besides the good they may do, to the whole Church generally, wherof they are also members and Ministers.
                        But I muse with what face you can thus seke to deface true pastors that do good inSome 
                                 〈◊〉
                               delight to 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              face good 
                                 〈◊〉
                               that doe 
                                 〈◊〉
                               good the
                                 〈1 line〉
                               ues. the Church, though not so much as you thinke they should do, seing you your self, and a number mo do no good at all in any place, but only range vp & downe, liue at other mens tables, disturbe the Church, & thinke that you haue done your duties, when you haue defaced all other mens doings. I am verily persuaded, that he which preacheth at his cure but one sermon in a yeare, offendeth God lesse, than you doe, that haue forsaken your calling.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the eyght Diuision
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 48. Sect. 1.
                     Besides that S. Paul commaundeth that the pastor should be a paterne or example in al goodnesse,1. Tim. 4. & holinesse of life vnto his flocke, & our sauiour Christ saith that when the she
                           〈1 line〉
                        harde hath 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        Iohn. 10. forth his sheepe, he goeth before them, but if the Pastor be not amongst his flocke▪ and haue not his conuersation there, they can not follow him. If they haue not the example before their eyes, 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         not make the like vnto it. Therfore this commaundement also bindeth them to residencie amongst their flockes. S. Peter willeth the Pastors of the Churches, that they shoulde feede the flockes. What flockes? Not euery one, but those, which are committed to their faith or trust, or which dependeth vpon them. And S. Paule speaking to ye ministers or Bishops of Ephesus, willeth themAct. 20. that they should take heede vnto the flockes, ouer the which the holy Ghost had made them ouerseers, where he restra
                           〈1 line〉
                        eth, as S. Peter did their ouersight and watch vnto their particular flock.1. Thes. 2. S. Paul saith that he toke it heauily that he was separated from them but a small time. If therfore the Apostle was away with griefe from them, whom he had taught, whō his calling compelled to be awaye, and woulde not suffer to be alwayes there: what shall be thought of the Pastors, whose callings is to be with their flockes, & which are consecrated vnto them, euē as the Apostles were vnto ye whole world? what I say shal be thought of them, that are away monethes & yeeres?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Christ is a paterne and an example to vs in all goodnesse, whome we muste followe,A man ma
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              olow the example of h
                                 〈1 line〉
                               that is not 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              lwayes present and yet we neuer saw him, but haue only heard of him by his word. S. Paule willed the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 4. &. 11. and the Philippians chap. 3. to followe him, and yet was he not perpetually resident among them. A man may be throughly knowne touching his externall conuersation, of those with whom he is diuers times conuersant, although he be not alwayes abiding with them. I thinke there be Pastors very well knowne to their flockes both for their life and doctrine, and yet doe not continually remaine with them: you and I haue not bin long nor much conuersant together, and yet surely I suppose that I know you both touching your Religion, conuersation, and affectiō, as well as if I had béen twentie yéeres companion in your chamber with you. And therfore this is no good argument, to say that the pastor muste be an example to his flocke, and therfore he must of necessitie be continually among them, for he maye so be, and that perfectly, if he be sundry times among them, and likewise if they heare of his good conuersation in place where he remayneth, when he is not among them.
                        The same answere serueth for that which is alleaged out of the. 10. of S. Iohn.
                        S. Peter. 1. Epist. Chap. 5. doth not onely exhort Pastors and such as be addicted to some certain place, but all other also to whom this word presbyter doth reach, as it may appeare in that he himself sayth 
                              qui sum & ipse presbyter, whiche am also my selfe an elder.
                           1. Peter. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Wherfore it is an exhortation generall to al preachers and Ministers of ye word, and not only proper to pastors: the words that follow be diuersly expounded: some say feede the flocke of God, which dependeth vpon you, some, which is committed vnto you, and othersome, as muche as lyeth in you, which is the most common interpretation, 
                              〈◊〉
                            it is as much as though he should say, according to the Talent that God hath gyuen

vnto you. But how soeuer it be interpreted, the meaning is, that euery mā labour in teaching, instructing, and gouerning the Church of Christ, and the charge committed vnto him faithfully and diligently. Which exhortatiō of Peter may be obeyed of him that is not continually remaining in one place, if he do, as I haue said before.
                        The words of S. Paul Acts. 20. tend to the same ende. A minister of the word and pastor must be diligent in his calling, not slouthfull, and ought to séeke by all meanes possible to profit the Church of Christ, and especially in such places, where vnto he is especially called: all this I graunt.
                        The place of S. Paule. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Thes. 2. is far from the purpose. For Paule declareth his singular good will and affection that he had to the Thessalonians: he doth not expresse any dutie of his ministerie, and therfore a learned man interpreting that place sayth, 
                              binc colligimus, quod sancti etiam se videre secundiòn carnem gestiunt, hereof we gather, that the Saincts also do gladly desire to see one another bodily. A man to expresse his singular affection towards his friend, will say, that it gréeueth him to be out of his companie one houre. But how followeth this argument. Paule was desirous to be corporally present with the Thessalonians, and to remaine with them, Ergo a Pastor must neuer be absent from his flocke? if it be lawfull to make such arguments, I will conclude any thing.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 48. Sect. 1.
                     And indeede those that feede their flockes faithfully according to the commaundement of God, doe see what a great wisedome and mercy of God it is to appoynt euery flocke his pastor, & euery pastor his flocke. They can tell of a wonderfull loue, that God worketh in them towardes theyr flockes, and in their flockes towardes them. A greate encoragment vnto them, and as it were a pricke to sturre vp their dulnesse it is, when they see the blessing of God vpon their labours, and thereof a maruelous care, and thought to turne all such things away, as shoulde hinder the encrease of that blessing, which they can not haue any feeling or experience of, which are not conuersant with their flockes, besides a familiaritie betwene the pastor and the flocke is profitable to this, that eueri
                           〈1 line〉
                         one maye be emboldened to come and demaunde to be satisfyed of those things they doubte of, which they will neuer do vnto those, whome they are not by continuall conuersation acquainted with.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        How can you tell? you haue no such experience, for you neuer had flocke: or what boasting pastor hath so bragged of himself? Peraduenture bicause some troublesome persons delighted with contentions and straunge opinions made much of him, & the rest gaue him some countenance, he thought they loued him, when as peraduenture it was nothing so. But be it true of those, whom you meane: I doubt not but there be flockes that haue that loue towardes their Pastors, and Pastors that haue that loue towards their flockes (though they do not continually remaine with them) which ought to be in the Children of God, and which neuer will be remoned, deface you them as much as you can.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the tenth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag 49. Line. 2.
                     And it is not nothing, that Aristotle disputeth against Plato his communitie, which would haue all thyngs common, and that all men indifferently shoulde haue care of all things, and shoulde haue nothing, whiche he shoulde saye to be his owne. For therein Aristotle saide verye well, that that which was You speake contraries. cared for of all men, was neglected of all, and cared for of none: so that the preseruation of wife or Children, or of any other possession, was then the best and surest, when as euery man had a certaine possession committed vnto him, whiche he shoulde care for, and take charge of. And so the Lord his wisedome was for the better suertie and saluation of his Church, not to make many Ministers, which should in common and indifferently take care of all, but ordeyned that the Church should be deuided in diuerse partes, and that euery one should haue a peece to care for, and to giue accompt for.
                     
                        
                        Io Whitgifte.
                        What hath Aristotle to do with non residence? Authoritie is scarse when his helpe isAristotle not rightly allea ged. required. But what saith he? forsoth, that that which was cared for of all men, was neglected of all. I thinke that you report not Aristotles wordes truely: for as farre as I remember, he sayth that that which is common to all, is neglected of all. The other can not be true, for that which is cared for of all men, can not be neglected of all (for to care for, and to neglect, be contraries) but must of necessitie be well prouided for, and looked vnto. But to what purpose do you alleage this? Bycause I saye that no man must so loke to his priuateA mā hauyng a priuate charge▪ ought to care for the whole. charge, that he neglect the other partes of the Church: do I therefore say that there is no priuate charge, but all things are in common? It is the duetie of euery member in the common wealth so to loke to his owne priuate affaires and businesse, that he neglect not the common state of his country: are all things therfore common? neither did Aristotle euer teach that a man should so care for his certaine possession, that he preferred not the common vtilitie before it: and so likewise Christ hath deuided to euery man a portion of hie Church to care for, but yet not so, that he should thinke himself no longer bound to the whole, or that he must now cease from profiting the whole.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T C. Page 49. Sect. 1.
                     Now if any man will say, that in such great scarcitie of Pastors, it is good, that when a man hath trauailed in one place, & remoued them from superstition, & brought them to beleeue in God through Christ, to go to another place, and assay also to draw them from Idolatrie: first I vrge that, which I did before, which is the calling, wherein euery man must abide, and without the which no man ought to attempt any thing. Then I say, that it is as hard a prouince, and as painefull a thing vnto the pastor, as acceptable and precious a worke vnto the Lorde, to kepe those, which are gotten, as to get those, which are not gotten: and that that saying is fulfilled here, if in any thing else, Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri.
                     
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This obiection is of greater force, than you are able to withstande. For the same God, that hath called him to the one place, to plant his true Religion there, hath also called him to the other, that he may doe the like euen as he did the Apostles, Prophets and Euangelistes, and pastors also, who haue béen euen immediatly after the Apostles time transferred from one place to another, for the greater commoditie of the Church: Neither can it be proued that any man should be so tyed to one place, that he may not be transferred to another to profit more.
                        It is true that the deuill most greuously assaulteth those, which haue embraced the truth, bicause now they are become his professed enimyes, & openly withstand hym: But they are sufficiently armed with faith, and with ye word of God, so that although they be tempted, yet can they not be ouercome. The other that remaine in ignorance he wholy possesseth, and bicause they haue yéelded themselues vnto him, he doth suffer them to be quiet: therfore to deliuer such out of his seruitude and bondage, and so to arme & instruct them, that they are not only able to withstand, but to put to flight the deuill also, must of necessitie be both the hardest, and the most acceptable worke vnto God: except you will say that it is more commendable to helpe him, who is sufficiently armed, and able to resist, than him that is altogether vnarmed, and as it were vnder the foote of his enimy. Certainly the most acceptable worke vnto God is, to conuert sinners vnto repentance, and to heale such as be sicke, & therfore Christ himselfe sayd, that heLuke. 19. came to seeke that which was lost: and the parable of the lost grote, and of the ProdigallLuke. 15. sonne doth with might & maine ouerthrow your sayings: so do the whole dealings of the Apostles, and the whole course of the Scriptures.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 49. Sect. 2.
                     For we knowe that after that the Deuill perceyueth, that men are pulled oute of the power

of darknesse, into the glorious light of the Gospel, he sweateth and laboureth by a thousand meanes to destroy them, and bestirreth himselfe more then, than in the time of their ignorance, and in steade of that one chayne of ignorance, and want of the knowledge of God, he layeth a thousande trappes for them, to snare them with. So that the continuall daunger that the Churche is in, dothe as it
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         were speake vnto the pastor in the cōmon prouerbe, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        : that is, looke diligently to that charge, whiche thou hast receyued. For if the watcheman should forsake the citie, where vnto he is appoynted, and go, and watche in another, where he is not called, although he saue that, if he loose the other, he shall not therfore escape the punishment of betraying the other citie▪ where he was placed watchman.
                     
                        Io Whitgifte.
                        So it is: but all the diuels in hell can not preuayle agaynst them: therefore sayde S. Paule to the Ephe. cap. 6. Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able toEph. 6. resist the euill day. &c. euery Christian is in this case, yea the pastor himselfe: but wote you what Christ sayth, Ioh. 10. My sheepe heare by voyce, and no man shall take themIoh. 10. Chrysost. in 3. Colos. Colos. 3. out of my handes. The Scriptures, as Chrysostome sayth, be continuall scholemasters: and he that hath vnderstanding may therein learne howe to withstande Sathan and all his assaultes. And therefore sayde the Apostle to the Coll. 3. Let the worde of God dwell in you abundantly, in all wisdome, teaching and admonishing your owne selues, in Psalmes and hymnes. &c.
                        
                        If the watcheman hathe sufficiently admonished the citie, and hathe ministred weapons vnto them, brought them out of the bondage of their enimie, and leaue some other behinde him to supply the rest, and then go to another citie to deliuer it also from the like slauery, if in the meane time the former citie be lost, or reuolted (which is not like) their bloud be vpon themselues, the watchman hath done his dutie. When Io
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           s had tolde Niniuie hir offences, & shewed his message for the which he was sent,The preacher is called thither where he may doe most good▪
                            was there any more required of him? Moreouer I am persuaded, that wheresoeuer the preacher may do most good, thither is he called of God: neyther is this to forsake his station, but to followe his calling, and to do good.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 49. Sect. 3.
                     Touching the behalfe of God and his glory, if any man will say that they can not perish, which once haue beleeued, and therfore those may be left, and others attempted, I can say of those that are in ignorance and blindnesse, that they can not perishe that be elected, although they neuer haue the Gospell preached. And therfore we must walke in those wayes that God hath appoynted, to bring them to saluation, which is to feede them continually, and watche ouer them so long as they are in daunger of hunger, in daunger of wolues, in daunger of the enimies, within and without, which is so long as the Churche is heere vpon the earth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        God forbid that any man should vse any suche kinde of excuses, to take away the meanes wherby God vseth to cal such as be his: but it is a cōfort to the pastor, when he is in conscience persuaded, that he hath not omitted to open vnto his flocke those wayes and meanes, and that he ceasseth not still to admonish thē of the same in time conuenient. S. Paul Act. 20. sayth to the Ministers of the Church of Ephesus, that heAct. 20. was free from the bloud of them all, and that he had opened vnto them the whole counsel of God. &c. and yet he had not bin muche with them: and after that time he thought that he should not sée the most of them any more. Wherfore a man may do his dutie, and open all things and meanes necessarie vnto saluation, although he be not continually remayning in one place. Chrysostome expounding the place in the thirde toChrysost. 
                                 〈◊〉
                               3. Col. the Collos. Let the worde of God dwell in you. &c. after that he hath willed them to prepare them Bybles, and tolde them that it especially perteyneth to them to reade the scriptures, he addeth: cast not all vpon our shoulders. You are sheepe, but yet reasonable, the Apostle hath committed many things vnto you. Those that are to be instructed muste not alwayes learne. &c. And agayne he sayth: 
                              Habes oracula dei, nemo te docebit quemadmodùm illa: Thou hast the word of God, no man can teache thee like vnto it.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag 49. Sect 4.
                     Upon all which things I conclude, that the residence of the Pastor is necessary, & to doubt whether the Pastor ought to be resident amongest his flocke, is to doubt whether the watchman should be in his towre, the eye should be in the head, or the soule in the body, or the shephard amongest hys flocke, especally where the sheepe are continually in daunger of wolues, as in the land of Iurie, frō whence this similitude or maner of speach was taken, where they watched their flockes night and day, as I obserued before out of S. Luke.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The question is not whether the pastor ought to be resident or no, but of the time, the maner and kind of residence. No man must continually be absent, for that were altogether to neglect his flocke: neither is it required that he be continually present, for that can not be. But if he neglect not his duetie in preaching, & performe other things requisite, although he be sundry times absent vpon the occasions before specified, yet is he not to be condemned, seyng it often times commeth to passe, yt such kind of men do most good, both in their Churches particularly, and in the Church generally.
                        Of the watchman and of the shephard I haue spoken before, and shewed wherin the similitudeTract. 4. ca
                                 •
                              
                              ▪ diuis. 6. & tract. 5. ca. 
                                 •
                              . diuisi. 3. holdeth, & wherin it holdeth not: no one watchman is continually in ye towre, neither is it possible that he should be: it is sufficient if the towre be watched, & the chiefe watchman neglect not his duetie: the shephard also is not alwayes present wyth his shéepe, but sometime he leaueth them alone, when he hath folded thē, or brought them into a safe pasture, & sometimes he cōmitteth thē to his seruaunt, or to some other to be kept in his absence. The similitude of the eye and of the soule, in some pointes may be aptly applyed, but not in this of residence, for if either the eye be plucked out of the head, or the soule separated from the body, neither of them both can be restored again. But you must confesse that there be causes why a pastor may be absent frō his flocke without any such vncurable daunger: and therfore these similitudes in these cases of absence holde not.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 49. Sect. 5.
                     If any will here vpon conclude, that they haue no space giuen them to slepe, to eate, to drinke. &c. they are cauils, which I will not vouchsafe to answere.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        A very modest, and short answere.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 1. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 49. Sect. vlt.
                     Againe, if he will say, that then they may not go forth of the towne to do their necessarie businesseHere you ouerthrow all your former building▪
                         
                        
                           
                              •
                           1. Iohn. for their families, I desire them in the name of God, yt they abuse not his graces, in deuising cloakes to couer their disorders, but that they would set before them the loue of Christ, which shalbe found to de so much, as they shall shew themselues diligent in continuall feeding their flockes, & to feare the iudgement of God, before whom no feined, or coloured excuse will stande. And so I trust they will make no longer absence, than must needes, and if vpon any occasion at any time they be somewhat longer, that the same be not without the leaue of their Churches, whose they are, and which they for the Lord his sake serue, & then also that in suche rare and necessary absence Here you admit cura
                              •
                           , which is contrary to your forme
                              •
                            assertion. they prouide thē of some able man to teach in the meane season, which the Churche by hir gouernours wyll allowe of.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Yet such doubtes woulde be directly resolued, for they séeme something to trouble you. And in very déede they cause you to ouerthrow whatsoeuer you haue hetherto gone aboute to builde: for nowe you confesse that the Pastor maye be absente of hys owne priuate busynesse: if he haue leaue of hys Parishe, and if he prouide some able man to teache in the meane season. &c. I pray you let me aske you a few questions: may not a man be aswell absent for publike affaires, or at the commaundement of the Prince

or chiefe Magistrate, as he may be for his owne priuate businesse? Is not his flocke in as great daunger when their Pastor is absent with their leaue, as when he is absent without their leaue? or where do you finde it in scripture, that the Pastor oughte to aske leaue of his Parishe, when he hath occasion to be absent? Or howe shall he getPag. 42. &c. an able man in the meane season, to teache his flocke, when as you affirme, that no man may be admitted into the ministerie, except he haue a certayne flocke committed vnto him. And that then it is not lawfull for him to preache out of his owne cure? These questions woulde be answered, and these contrarie spéeches of yours reconciled, if it be possible. For vndoubtedly they do not agrée with your former talke.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of pluralities, or hauing moe benefices than one.
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Then had euery flocke his shepheard, or else Act. 14. 23. shepheards: Nowe they do not onely runne fisking from place to place (a miserable disorder in Gods Church) but Esaie. 5. 8. couetously ioyne liuing to liuing, making shipwracke 1. Ti. 1. 14. of their owne consciences, and beeing but one shephearde (nay, would to God they were shepheards and not wolues) haue many flockes.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 50. Sect. 3. 4. & Pag. 51. Sect. 1.
                        You say also that euery flocke had his shephearde or else shepheards. And to proue that one flocke had moe shepheards, you cyte Act. 14. which maketh nothing for your purpose: yet I deny not but one flocke maye haue moe Pastors, for I see nothing in the worde of God agaynst it.
                        To be shorte, you say nowe they go fisking from place to place, and couetously ioyne liuing to liuing. &c. & beeing but one shepheard haue many flockes. If you meane by fisking from place to place, such as preache in diuers places, and not in their owne cures onely, your phrase of fisking is to light and scurrilous. When you alleadge any reason why men may not goe from place to place to preache, where they thinke it necessarie, you shall eyther be answered, or yeelded to. In the meane time I thinke it agreable bothe to Gods worde, and conscience.
                        Agaynst couetously ioyning of liuing to liuing you alleage the. 5. of Esay, which is farre from your purpose: for the Prophet speaketh there of suche as oppresse the poore, and will not suffer them to haue a place to dwell in: yet I do not allowe suche as couetously ioyne liuing to liuing, of what kinde or degree of men soeuer they be.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     To the abusing of the. 14. of the Acts by the Admonition, nothing is answered by T. C. nor to the. 5. of Esay.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the second Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 51. Sect. 1.
                     But I see no cause why one good and diligent Pastor may not rather be credited with moe flockes, than a slothfull, vnskilfull, or negligent with one. You thinke (I suppose) that there be dyuers parishes in Englande which might be ioyned in one, and so committed to one man, and why may they not be so in like manner, when they be distinct?
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 50. Sect. 1.
                     And heerevpon also is ended another question that the Answerer maketh, whether one may haue many flockes, which is, whether one shepheard may be many shepheards, one watcheman many watchemen. For if his residence be necessarie in one place, then he oughte to content hym selfe with one.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        My question is this: why one man may not aswell haue diuers parishes, when they be distinct, as he may when they be ioyned togither? for the compasse, the number, and the distance of place, is all one: you confessePa. 34. lin. 10. that the one may be, and the reformed Churches in Fraunce dyd so vse it, where (as I am credibly enformed, and you before séeme to affirme) sixe Townes or mo were committed to one Pastor. This béeing lawfull, I sée not why the other shoulde not be so in like maner: neither haue you answered to any one worde in this parte.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chapter. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 51. Sect. 2.
                     I speake not this to encourage any man to take more vpon him than with a good conscience he may well discharge. And I woulde wishe you to absteyne from iudging too farre, when you see a man that hath mo liuings, vse himselfe vprightly and carefully in them all, and otherwyse profitably to the whole Churche.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 50. Sect. 2.
                     And whereas you would haue men charitably iudge of those, whiche take many liuinges▪ surely if so be that he taketh many flockes, not to the intent to haue more liuing to maynteyne an ambicious pompe, or to satisfie a greedie desire of hauing more than inoughe, but to this ende, that he may bring in a more plentifull haruest vnto the Lorde: it were good that he would be content to take but that liuing of all his flockes, which he nowe hath of one, especially where one is able to keepe and maynteyne him and his familie honestly. Else let him heare what you mighte haue spoken in the singular num ber, for any pl
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ralitie you 
                              〈◊〉
                            vsed. Councels & others haue thought of those which haue more benefices than one.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You kéepe no order in answering my booke, but place and displace at your pleasure, onely to this ende, as it should séeme, that you would not haue your Reader perceyue what you omitted vnanswered. But I will followe you, and examine what Councels and other haue thought of suche as haue more benefites than one: for in this portion you vtter but words, and take vpon you to iudge mens intents and purposes, and to prescribe them their stipende.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 50. Sect. 3.
                     In the. 15. Canon of the Councell of T. C. vseth 
                              〈1 line〉
                            most corrupte Councell for his defense. Nice, it is commaunded that no clearke should be placed in two Churches, and he addeth the reasons, wherof the first is, that it is a poynt of marchaundise,Mat. 6. and of filthy gayne. The seconde, that (*) no man can serue two masters. The thirde,1. Cor. 7. that euery one ought to (*) tarrie in that calling, wherin he is called.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.T. C. alleageth the secōd Councell of Nice to dete
                                 〈1 line〉
                               mine controuersies.
                        
                        It should séeme that you woulde gladly make men beléeue, (and it is very like that you your selfe are also persuaded) that this Councel was the first Councel of Nice:

For else why doe you in the nexte section place Damasus, and name the second tome of the Councels, when as Damasus was long time before this your Councell of Nice, and the same Councell is in the seconde tome of the Councels. Least therefore the Reader may be deceyued, I let him to vnderstand, that this Canon héere by you alleaged, is a Canon of the seconde Councell of Nice, holden about 
                              Anno. 795. or. 781. and one of the corruptest Councels that euer was, wherein not onely praying to Saincts, & adoring of Reliques, but also worshipping of Images. &c. was confirmed.
                        But yet let vs examine this Canon of that Councell. In the ende of that sameThe Canon of the seconde Councell of Nice examined. Canon it is thus written: 
                              Et haec quidem in hac regia ciuitate, in his autem quae extra sunt locis, propter hominum inopiam permi
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 titur: And these things are to be vnderstanded in this regall Citie: for in those places that be without, it is permitted for the scarsi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ie of persons. Wherby it is playne, that the meaning of the Canon is, that no one man should haue committed vnto him mo great cities than one: but that he might haue mo townes or villages committed to his charge, it is manyfest by those words of that Canon that I haue rehearsed. And therefore Gratian himselfe dothe thus expounde that Canon: 
                              Sed duae ecclesiae intellig untur ecclesiae duarū ciuitatū, in quibus nullus debet conscribi: But by twoCaus. 21. q. 1. Clericus. churches are ment the churches of two cities, wherin no man ought to be appoynted. And for the proofe thereof he alleageth this Canon of the Councel of Calcedon: 
                              Clericū in duarum ecclesijs ciuitatū conscribi non oportet: A Clearke may not be appoynted in the Churches of two cities. And the Glosse vpon that place sayth: that one man may be intituled in two Churches, if the Churches be poore: or if the Bishop doe dispense and thinke it conuenient, or if the number of Clearkes be fewe: or if he be intituled to the one, and haue the other in commendā, or if the one be neere to the other. And the authoritie of this Glosse is as sufficient as the credite of that Councell of Nice, if the Canon did not expounde it selfe. I omit the absurde allegation of the Striptures to confirme this their purpose. For the place Mat. 6. is to be vnderstanded of contrarie masters: and that in the. 1. Cor. 7. of the kinde of vocation, and not of the place. He that dothe his duetie in mo places, is lawfully called to them all, as I haue sayde before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 50. Sect. 4.
                     And in the An ouersight, for it is in the first Tome. seconde tome of the Councels, Damasus in his fourth Epistle likeneth those that set ouer their charges vnto other, vnto harlots, which assone as they haue brought foorth their children, by and by giue them to be nourished of others, to the intent that they might the sooner fulfill their inordinate lustes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You are deceyued: it is in the first tome of Councels, and therefore the more like it is, that you take the former Councel to be the first Councel of Nice: But such dealing is vsuall with you: if you had ment playnely, you would haue sayd, the seconde Councell of Nice, and not simply the Councell of Nice, whiche argueth either that you were deceyued your selfe, or else sought to deceyue others.
                        This place of Damasus is nothing at all to your purpose, which you might easilyDamasus alleaged to a wrong purpose. haue perceyued, if you had red that Epistle. For he onely there speaketh agaynst suche as were called Chorepiscopi, who were in degrée inferiour to Bishops, and yet did they despise to be counted no better than Priests. There were certayne Bishops in Damasus time, that gaue them selues wholly to idlenesse and pleasure, and cōmitted their office to suche, as were called Chorepiscopi, as it is euident in that Epistle: neyther dothe he meane any other charge than consecrating of Priests, Deacons, and virgins, imposition of hands, blessings, erecting of aulters, dedicating of Churches, and suche like, whiche were taken properly to perteyne to the Bishop, and yet notwithstanding was by some Bishops passed ouer to such Chorepiscopi. This negligence of bishops in such matters Damasus cōdēneth, togither with ye office of Chorepiscopus.
                           
And this is the whole drifte of Damasus in that Epistle, as it is most euident. And therefore sayth Leo (as Gratian reporteth) Dist. 68. Hi (meaning 
                              chorepiscopi) propter
                              Distinct. 68. 
                              insolentiam suam, qua officia episcoporum sibi vsurpant, ab ecclesia prohibiti sunt: These men for their insolencie, wherby they vsurpe the offices of Bishops, are excluded from the Church. So that héere is not one worde in this whole Epistle agaynst Curates, and suche asPag. 50. lin. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              ▪
                            are lefte to supplie the Pastors absence. Moreouer you your selfe in the beginning of this page confesse, that a man béeing absent may leaue his Deputie in his place. But yet heere you haue forgotten your purpose, that is, to proue that one man may not haue moe benefices: in whiche cause also it appeareth that you are destitute of proofes, béeing compelled to vse onely corrupt authorities?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the sixte Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 50. Sect. 5.
                     Whether it were better that one diligent Pastor should haue many flockes, than a negligent and vnskilfull Pastor one, is not the question: for we say neyther is lawfull, nor ought to be done.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You say muche, but proue little. I thinke it muche better that one man haue dyuers, than that any should be vntaught. For I speake of that time wherein there is not a competent number of preachers to be had for all places.
                        It passeth to sée howe you haue dismembred my booke, euen of purpose to auoyde the answering of diuers things, and euen very héere you haue omitted one principal poynt. For I aske also this question, why that Parishes beeing distincte, may not aswell be committed to one man, as the same mighte be, if they were made all one, as you woulde haue them? for the distance of places, and the number of persons is not altered: onely the ease of the Pastor, and greater paynes of the people is procured. For whereas the Pastor before came to them, nowe must they take paynes to come to him. But suche things you wil not voutsafe the answering, bicause in déede you can not.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 50. Sect. 1.
                     For who deuided Parishes? and who hathe authoritie to ioyneOf the diuision of parishes. them? dyd not Dionisius a Monke, and Pope of Rome? for it is thus written of him, Tom. 1. conci. Dionisius Monacbus Papa presbyteris ecclesias diuisit, & coemiteria, parochias
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               & Dioeceses constituit: Dionisius a Monke and Pope deuided to Priestes Churches and Churcheyardes, and appoynted Parishes and Dioces.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 50. Sect. 6. 7.
                     Do you beleeue that, whiche you set downe of Denis the Monke and Pope, that he deuised and deuided parishes? If you doe not, why woulde you haue vs beleeue it? If the law doth condemne him that turneth a blinde man out of the way, or layeth a blocke before him, what dothe it him, which woulde put out the eyes of them that see their way already? I haue shewed, andAssertions without proofe▪
                         the matter is playne, that the Lord deuided nationall Churches into parishes and congregations. So that if S. Paule haue not the worde of parishe, yet he hathe the thing. And those that haue read stories, knowe that 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         (whiche we call a Diocesse, and whiche conteyneth with vs numbers of parishes) was at the first, taken to be the same that parishe is, and vsed a great whyle before Denis was borne, or munkerie begotten.
                     And as for Coemeteria or Churcheyardes, if you meane those places that lye next round about the Churches, as they came in with the Monke, they mighte well haue gone out with him, for any profite eyther to the Churche, or common wealth by them. But if you meane as the Greke

worde, whiche is there vsed, signifieth, a fitte place where the bodies of men sleepe, and are buri
                           〈1 line〉
                        , attending the tyme of their rising vp agayne in the iaste and generall daye of iudgement, then these Churcheyardes were in the tyme of the Lawe, and in the primitiue Churche in all times, when there was any outwarde pollicie of the Churche, and especially when the Churche had quietnesse and peace; that it mighte without daunger (*) bury their dead in some certayne conuenientLuke. 7. place therevnto appoynted, whiche was, for feare of the infection commonly, as it mayeEuseb. 7. be gathered, in the fielde out of the Towne, vnto the whiche vse and custome (if it mighte be donelib. 13. cōuemently) it were wel that we were restored, both because it is more safe for the preseruation of the Townes and Cities in their health, as also for that through the superstition, which hath beene of beeing buried rather in the Churche, than in the Churcheyarde, in the Chauncell rather than in the Churche, nearer the highe altar, than further of the remnauntes whereof are in a greate number of mens heartes yet, whiche mighte muche be helped by the bringing in of that custome agayne, of burying the dead in some honest place out of the towne thereto appoynted.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue tolde you my Author, and if you will not credite one witnesse, you shallThat Denis deuided parishes. haue moe. Denis himselfe dothe testifie it in an Epistle that he writte to Seuerus a Bishop. Damasus sayth the same, so dothe Marianus Scotus, Platina, and others. Polidor Uirgill dothe something playnely open the matter in these wordes:Pol. Virg. lib. 4. c. 9. de inuent. 
                           
                              Circiter annum Domini. 267. Dionisius tam presbyteris vrbis Romae, quàm aliarum gentium templa, coemiteria & parochias quas dicunt, diuisit: Praeterea Episcopis dioecaeses distribuit, mandauit
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                 , vt vnusquis
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  suis finibus ac limitibus contentus esset: Parochias (vt hoc demonstremus) nostri appellant singula templa Dioecesis, & eorum territorium certis terminis distinctum. &c. About the. 267. yere of our Lorde, Dionisius deuyded Churches, Churcheyardes, and Parishes (as they call them) aswell to the Priestes of Rome, as of other nations: furthermore he distributed Diocesse vnto Bishops, and commaunded that euery one should content himselfe with his owne boūdes and limites: our men call Parishes (that we may make this playne) the seuerall Churches of a Diocesse, and their territorie limitted within certayne boūdes. &c. Wherefore take héede least you cast dust in your owne eyes, & blind your selfe: for this of Denis is not denied of any that I can reade.
                        Where hath the Lord deuided nationall Churches into parishes and congregations? Why doe you not note the place? or where hath S. Paule the thing, thoughe not the worde or name? or what stories saye, that 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            was taken to be the same that we call nowe a parishe? Héere is muche spoken, but nothing proued.
                        This Denis was Bishop of Rome about the yere of our Lorde. 263. whiche peraduentureHow parishes are by man distinguished. you haue not considered. But to put all this matter out of doubte, and to open that (the ignoraunce whereof maketh you so hotte in this matter) there was diuerse congregations and Churches in the Apostles time, but yet was there not any limitation of place, or certayne compasse of grounde certaynely appoynted: for that was lefte to the discretion of man to enlarge, or to contracte, as it should be thought from time to time moste conuenient: and who can once imagine or suppose that Christ, or his Apostles did appoynt the limittes of Diocesse or Parishes? or who knoweth it not, that it is in the power of suche as haue authoritie, to enlarge or diminishe Dioces or Parishes, as they shall sée it expedient. I knowe nothing to the contrarie, but that the Parishe, whose bondes and limits be but one myle compasse, maye be made ten myle compasse, and contrarywise. It is well sayde of one, that 
                              distributio gregis nunc extenditur, nunc coarctatur pro hominis arbitrio: The distribution of a flocke is sometime enlarged, and sometyme made lesse, according to the iudgement of man. And this matter néedeth not to séeme so straunge vnto you, for if you had bin so diligent a reader of the booke of Actes and Monumentes, as you boast your selfe to be, then mighte you haue read there, that the Councell of Nice dyd appoynt to certayne Bishops the limittes and boundes of their Prouinces and Dioces. But what should I labour in a matter so manyfest?
                        If by Coemiteria or Churcheyardes those places be ment that be about the churches, where we vse to burie the dead (as it is moste lyke they be) then heare I no reason at all

Why you shoulde in suche maner speake of them, excepte you will plucke downe whatsoeuer hathe beforetyme béene appoynted, be it neuer so auncient, and the vse thereof conuenient and necessarie. There is no doubt but by Coemiteria are ment places of buriall, whiche because they haue béene (as you confesse) at all tymes certayne, especially in the peace of the Churche, it is méete that they shoulde so still remayne. And for as muche as the places nowe vsed, if they were appoynted by Denis (as it is moste lyke) are fitly appoynted, and moste conueniently in moste places, you haue alleadged no cause as yet, why they shoulde be remoued, but the selfe same cause, that maye be in lyke manner vsed to remoue the Churche, and whatsoeuer else hathe beene deuised by any man, be it otherwyse neuer so necessarie, conuenient, or comely.
                        But I will not followe you in these digressions, where you onely spende paper with wordes voyde of proofe. If you quote Eusebius. 7. Lib. 13. to proue that the place of buriall was in the fieldes, there can be no suche thing gathered of his wordes: and if you quote him to proue that the worde signifieth a place of buriall, you goe about to proue that, which no man denieth.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of Ministers that can not preache, and of giuing licences to preache. Tract. 6.
            
               Some may be Ministers that can not preache.
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The tenth. Then the Ministers were Philip. 2. 20. 25. Preachers: nowe bare readers.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 52. Sect. 2. 3.Colos. 1. 7. 
                           Luke. 9. 2
                        
                        Your places of Scripture alleadged to proue that MinistersUnapt profes of the Admonition. were then Preachers, proue not that all were then Preachers. The place in the seconde to the Philippians. 20. verse, is this: For I haue no man lyke mynded, vvho vvyll faythfully care for your matters. And in the. 25. verse: But I suppose it neeessarie to sende my brother Epaphroditus to you, my companion in laboure, and fellovv souldiour, euen your messanger, and he that ministred vnto me suche thinges as I vvanted. Collossians. 1. verse. 7. As ye also learned of Epaphras our deare fellovve seruant, vvhich is for you a faythful minister of Christ. Quorsum haec?
                           
                        
                        Howe proue these places that all Ministers then preached? That of Luke, chapter. 9. proueth aswell that they cured diseases, as that they preached, and therefore out of that place you mighte aswell conclude that all Ministers oughte to be curers of sicknesses, aswell as preachers. This I wryte, onely to let you vnderstande your vanitie and ignoraunce in quoting so many Scriptures, to so small purpose.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     
                        Ad haec ne verbum quidem: but onely to the place of the nynthe of Luke, and that out of place.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 52. Sect. vlt.
                     I wishe that euery minister were a preacher, but that beeing vnpossible as the state is now, I see not how you can cōdemne readingFayth commeth by reading. ministers, seeing reading is necessarie in the Church, & fayth cōmeth aswel by reading the scriptures in the booke, as by rehearsing of thē without booke. In the. 31. of Deut. it is thus written: 
                           Leges verba legis huius coram omni Israel. &c. Thou shalt reade the vvords of this booke before all Israell. &c. S. Paule sayth in the. 15. to the Rom. 
                           
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               scripta sunt. &c. VVhatsoeuer is vvritten. &c. But I neuer heard reading of the scriptures,The Zuinfildians condemne reading of scripture. reading of prayers, reading of Homilies, taken out of the scripture condemned, but onely by the Authors of this booke, and by the zuinfildians.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 50. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 51. Sect. 1.
                     If you should beget, and be a father of many bookes, and all your children like their eldest brother, you would (without better aduise) shake many groundes of our religion. For heere agayne you wishe that all pastors were able to teache, but that beeing vnpossible (as the state is nowe) you are content with Pastors or ministers, that can doe nothing but reade. You throughout your whole booke make this a maruellous good estate, and alwayes turne the best side outwarde, and when men goe about to vrge the deformities thereof, to the ende they mighte be remedied, then you lay open the shame and nakednesse of it, and make it greater, than it is in deede. For as I haue shewed before, the Church standeth not so muche in neede of your reading ministers, as you would make the worlde beleeue. And although it be a great deformitie, and sore plague of the Churche, whiche you here speake of, and confesse at vnwares, yet you will let no man come neare to heale it. There be some make a gayne by sores, and sore legges, and therefore they haue a medicine to keepe their woundes alwayes greene, that they should not heale.
                     I hope you do not of purpose keepe the Churche in this estate, but this I dare say, that the chiefe of your gayne, and of your honour, consisteth and is grounded in the ruines of the Churche, and therefore I desire you to tooke vnto it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I omit whatsoeuer you héere speake agaynst my person, for I am purposed to absteineThe causes of the lacke of able ministers. from requiting you in like sorte, onely I will answere for my selfe where you labour to slaunder me. The cause of lacke of a sufficient number of méete ministers in this Church, is neyther the religion professed, nor the gouernment that is vsed, nor yet the gouernours: But partly the crueltie of the times past, wherein numbers of méete ministers haue bin consumed: partly the vn willingnesse of mē in this present time, which haue not that zeale to enter into this calling, that is to be wished: and partly (nay chiefly & principally) you & your schismes, which haue caused some to cast off their ministerie wholly, some to forsake their pastorall charges, and yet to kéepe their Prebendes and other liuings: some to depraue the ministerie, condemne it, and by all meanes possible alienate as many from it, as they can. And therefore nothing that I confesse of the scarsitie of méete & able ministers, derogateth any thing eyther from the doctrine professed in this Church, or frō the kinde of gouernment, or the Magistrates: but rather cōmendeth the same, bicause notwithstanding al the former impediments, yet hath it a number of excellent ministers, & doth continually bréed mo.
                        If any confession tende to the condemnation of any, it is of you & your adherents, who haue more hindred & slaundered the Gospel in this realme of England, than the Papists eyther haue done, or could possibly do. And I am fully persuaded, that one of the greatest deformities suffered in this Church, is lacke of discipline towardes you, who be so farre from healing any sore in the Church, that the more you be suffered, the greater doe you wounde it: And in very déede the reformation you pretende, is nothing but a méere confusion, or rather subuersion bothe of the Churche and common wealthe also.
                        
                           My honour and gaine is but verie small, yet it is more, than I am worthie of, but I trust the tyme will come, when as such boyling affections vttered in so spitefull a maner, will be made manyfest: and I pray God it be not imputed vnto you in that day. If my houour and gayne be other than may stande with the good and prosperous estate of the churche, I am readie to yelde it vp whensoeuer I shall by due authoritie be required. In the meane tyme, God be iudge betwixt you and me.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 51. Sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
                     But what if the estate of the Church be suche, as you speake of, that it will scarce yeeld three preaching Pastors and Bishops in some Diocesse, may you therfore make reading ministers? In deed if the Apostle had made this a councell only, and no commaundement, that Pastors of churches should be able to teache, then your saying might haue bene borne.
                     But seyng that S. Paule hath commaunded expressedly, that he should be able to teache, andTim. 1. 3. to conuince the gaynsayers, I would learne of you gladly, what necessitie there is, whiche canTit. 1. cause a man to breake the morall law of God, to bring in a tradition of man. You may as wel break any other commaundement of God for necessities sake, as breake this, being comprehended in the fyrst table.
                     And tosay that these that can only reade, must be tolerated in the Church as ministers, is to say bycause you can haue no Pastors in the Churches, you will haue idolls, for so will I not doubt to call them, although through ignorance of that whiche they do, some may be good men. But yet in respect of the place that they occupie, they are idolls, for they stand for that, and make shew of that whiche they are not, and admit you them as often as you will, the Lorde pronounceth that they shall be no ministers to him, which haue no *knowledge.Qzee. 6.
                     
                     But let vs heare your reason It is youre owne reason. there must be reading in the church, therfore there must be ministers, whiche can doe nothing else. Then we may reason thus to. There muste be breaking of bread, and distributyng of the cuppe in the Church, and pouring on water, therfore whosoeuer is able to breake aloafe of bread, or to lift a cup of wine, or to poure on water on the bodye of the chylde, may be made a minister.
                     And did you neuer reade, yt there were readers in the Church, when there were no reading ministers? But of that of reading of the scriptures & prayers in the Church there wyll be a fitter place to speake afterward, where it shal be shewed how vniustly you surmise these things of them▪
                     
                     Touching Homilies shal be spoken more hereafter, where further occasion is giuen.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Sainct Paule. 1. Tim. 3. and Tit. 1. sheweth what qualities a Bishop or a Pastor ought to haue: but he doth not say, that if none can be founde, or not a sufficient number, in whome all these qualities do concurre, that then the Church shal rather be destitute of ministers, than haue suche: for there were in his time that swarued from this rule, and yet was he glad they preached.
                        Of the ministers of this Churche of England, though diuerse be ignorant, yet inaye they by studye and diligente readyng of the Scriptures, Catechismes, Homilies, and other godlie and necessarie bookes so profyte in knoweledge, that althoughe they bée not able publikely to preache, yet maye they bée able priuately to exhorte, aud otherwyse also by Readyng the Scriptures and Homilies, according to the order appoynted, greately profyte the people of God. But what should I contende with you in this matter? Thys Churche of Englande in this poynt professeth nothing, that is not allowed by the generall Confession of the Churches in Heluetia, from the whiche I thinke you will not dissente. That Confession as I tolde you before, hathe these woordes:
                        
                           VVe condemne all vnmete ministers, not indued with giftes necessarie for a shepheardConfess. Heluet. that should feed his flock: howbeit we acknowledge that the harmlesse simplicitie of some shepheardes in the olde churche, did sometimes more profite the churche, than the greate exquisite, and fine or delicate, but a little to proude learning of some others. VVherfore we reiect not nowadays the good simplicitie of certain, so that they bee not altogether vnskilfull of God and his worde. There is nothing in that. 6. of Ozee that serueth your turne. You say, that I reason thus: There muste bee readyng in the Churche, therefore there muste bee Ministers that can doe nothyng else. You knowe what is wrytten 
                              Sapi. 1. Os quod mentitur. &c. The mouthe that speaketh lyes, slayeth the

soule. &c. I woulde it were not so vsuall with you. My argumente is this, that for somuche as there can not be a sufficient number of preachers to furnish this churche of England in al places, therfore there may be reading ministers; that is such ministers as by reading the scriptures & other bookes apointed vnto them, may profit ye people & instruct them, for reading is necessarie in the Church. &c. This is my reason. That which you vse is a child of your own begetting, it is none of myne, as the Reader can not choose but perceiue. The reason that foloweth of breaking bread and distributing the cup. &c. is vsed but for a iest, which ought not to be in serious matters, & therfore I leaue it to them that are disposed to laugh, when they should rather wéepe.
                        I know there were readers of olde in the Churche, but they had not authoritie to administer the sacramentes, as our ministers haue, and of necessitie must haue, andTract. 9. ca. 2. the. 2. deuision. lawfully may haue also, as it shall be hereafter declared.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 51. Sect. 7.
                     I dooe not vse to maintayn the places, which are quoted, although they be truely alleadged, for the Nay, it is bycause you can no
                              〈1 line〉
                           , for you wāt no good will. causes, which I haue before mentioned, but yet I can not but speake of this place of saint Luke, for feare of the daunger that may ensue. For if this be a good reason, ye the place of S. Luke may not be vsed to proue that preaching is perpetually annexed to the ministerie, bicause in yt same place is made mention of curing of diseases, which is but a temporall thing, & followed the ministerie, but for a time, then the comandement of S. Iames, *that the elders of the Church shouldIames. 5. pray for those that are sick, is now no commaūdement, bicause putting on of hands, and anoynting of them, that they might recouer their health, hath no place, and by this meanes you wyll pull from vs as many places of the newe testament, as you did before of the olde.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You would no doubt maintey
                              〈1 line〉
                            all their places, if you could: for the quotations be the substance of that booke, & the thing that most persuaded the Reader, which credited al things there written without examination, & thought it must of necessitie be true, being so confirmed by the scriptures. And surely you could not haue greatlier condemned the authors of that Admonitiō, than in suffring so many quotations of theirs to passe without defense. For what wickednesse can there be greater, than to abuse the Scriptures in maynteyning of sects and errours.
                        The place of Luke is not answered: the words of the texte be these: and he sentLuke. 9. them to preache the kingdome of God, and to cure the sicke. &c. No man liuing can cōclude of this place, the one more, than he can do the other, & your words be but your owne: There be other places a number that be more generall than this, to proue preaching by: this was peculiar and proper to the disciples, as the whole circumstances of the place declare, for they are also commaunded to take nothing with them in their iorney, neither staues. &c. To preach is perpetuall, but it can not be gathered of this place, that none ought to be admitted into the ministerie but such as can preach, bicause it was peculiarly spoken to the Apostles, as the other circumstāces do proue. The commaundement of Saincte Iames is generall, for he telleth what all sicke men ought to doe, and the ministers lykewyse that resorte to the sicke, and therfore though the anoynting wyth oyle, whiche was a signe of the gift of healing, bée taken away bicause the gift is ceased, yet doth praying remayne still, and is perpetuall, and not onely proper to some ministers of the Churche, but common to all. Wherfore the places be not lyke: the one béeing spoken peculiarly to the disciples, the other generally to all ministers.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Oflicences to preache.
               
                  Chap. 3.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     And if any be 
                           〈1 line〉
                        o well disposed to preache in their owne charges, they may not withoute my Lordes licence.
                     
                        
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 53. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                        YOu here finde fault that if a preacher be disposed to preache inNot to preac
                                 〈1 line〉
                               without li▪ cence. his cure, he may not do it without my Lordes licence.
                        Where the word of God is professed, & Christian magistrates gouern, there it is mete that no man should take vpon him any function except he be by the Magistrate, (to whom it doth appertein) thervnto admitted: And forasmuch as there be always in the church hypocrites, heretikes, schismatikes, & other euil disposed persons, whiche study for nothing more than to disquiet the state of the church, & to occupie the people with their factions, it is necessarie that none should be admitted to preache in any place, without he be thervnto licenced by the Bishop, who ought to haue a diligent care in that matter.
                        I suppose you are not of that mynd, that men maye nowe in this Church vnder Christian magistrates preach without licence: it hath always bin the opinion of wise, learned, & godlie men, that since the Apostles tyme, none wer ordinarily called to the office of preaching, but such as were called of God by man: only Anabaptists, and some other secte of heretikes teache the contrarie.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 51. Sect. 8. 9. & Pag. 52. Sect. 2.
                     What dealing is this to bring mē in suspition of yt, which they neuer thought of, as though there were any word yt founded to this, ye a man should put himself into the office of preaching, without the approbation of those A doubtful
                              〈1 line〉
                            saying. men, to whom it doth perteyne.
                     Their complaint is, that those which are ordeyned Pastors, and therfore to preach, can not do it without further licence: as if a man shoulde be charged to doe a thing forthwith, and then he that chargeth him, bindeth him hand & foote, that he can not do it vnlesse he will lose him.
                     The bishops inhable him to teach, & point him a place to teach in, & yet they wil not let him teath▪ vnlesse he haue a further licence. It h
                           〈1 line〉
                        be an heretik or schismatike, or suspected of any such thing▪ why is he admitted, or being admitted, why is he suffred to be so much as a reader 
                           〈1 line〉
                        n y• churche
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        nd bicause you could not answer this, therfore you set vp a fansie of yours to confute. And thus you fight without an 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and you make triumphes, where there is no victorie.
                     They wil say vnto you, yt not only vnder a godly magistrate, but not in ye time of persecution any man ought to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ake vpon him any function in ye church▪ vnlesse he be ther vnto called by mē, except he haue a wonderful calling, which is rare, & must be 
                           〈1 line〉
                        iligently examined by them, which haue it, 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        nder pretence of the spirite of God, whom they make author of their calling, it fall out ye 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         be but their own he
                           〈1 line〉
                        long affection that hath thrust thē in: so far they are from the frensy of Anaba
                           〈1 line〉
                        tists, which you by a confutation of ye, which they neuer affirmed, would seeme to staine them with.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This Repl
                              〈1 line〉
                           e cōsisteth partly of equiuocations, & partly of 
                              〈◊〉
                            suppositiōs. For where you say, ye no mā shuld put himself into the office of preaching, wtout the approbation of those men, to whō it doth apertein: you speak ambiguously, & therfore you must explicate what you mean by those to whō it doth apertein: whether ye people & seniors, as you cal them, or ye bishops or ye ciuil Magistrate, or such, to whō ye ciuil Magistrat doth cōmit ye iudging of such matters. For ye Auabaptistes confesse ye they must be called of their churches, but they deny ye authoritie of the ciuil magistrat herein, & the authoritie of such also as he doth 
                              〈◊〉
                            for yt end & purpose. Again, you here suppose, yt no man may preach out of his owne cure, & therfore being once admitted 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o preach there, he nedeth no further licence▪ Likewise you 
                              〈◊〉
                            suppose that none may be admitted to preache, except he haue 
                              〈◊〉
                           : to be 
                              〈1 line〉
                           hort, that 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ heretikes, schismatikes, may be known foorthwith, 
                              〈◊〉
                            being suspected, by and by remoued out of the ministerie▪ all which suppositio
                              〈1 line〉
                           s bēe vntiue, and therfore this Replis full of greate absuraities. Their meaning is playne, that though there be iuste cause, why the Bishoppe should inhibite them from preachyng, bothe for theyr contentions, and also for their errours, yet woulde they preache whether the Byshoppe wyll or no, for the case is theyr owne. They were admytted to preache in theyr cures, and elsewhere, so long

as they vsed them selues modestlye, quietly, and taught sounde doctrine: but after they began to deuide the Churche, and make contention in it, they were restrayned from preachyng vntill suche tyme, as vpon their submission and reformation, they shoulde be there vnto admitted agayne: hinc illae lachrymae, this is the matter, and hereto you answere, ne gry quidem.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of the apparell of Ministers. Tract. 7.
            
               The causes why they refuse the apparell, examined.
               
                  Chap. 1. the fyrst Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 52. Sect.. 3.
                     The cappe, the surplis, and tippet, are not the greatest matters we striue for, whych notwithstandyng hath bene enformed to the Churches beyonde sea, to the ende that the iudgementes of some myghte be the easlyer had agaynst vs. Howbeit we thinke it an attyre vnmeete for a minister of the Gospell to weare, and the Surplis especially more than the other two, bycause suche hurtefull Ceremonies are so muche more daungerous, as they doe approche nearer the seruice▪ or worship of God,
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Yet in the beginning suche was youre pretence: neyther was there any thing else that you contended for: as it is well knowne to all men that had to deale with you, or hearde of you. I am certainly perswaded, that if the Churches beyonde sea did fully vnderstande your procéeding, together with the state of thys Churche of Englande, that they woulde as bitterly write againste you, and as willingly condemne you, as euer they dyd the Anabaptistes. But to your reasons agaynste the apparell.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the second Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 52. Sect. 4.
                     The causes why wee are lothe to meddle with them, are not as many are borne in hande, This assertion is contrary to your practise. Monumentes of idolatrie may be vsed if they haue any profite. bycause that we thinke any pollution so to sticke to the things themselues, as that the wearyng of them had any suche power to pollute and make vncleane the vsers of them: Neyther yet only bicause the Papistes haue superstitiously vsed them, but bycause they hauing bene abhominably avnsed by them, haue no vse nor profyte in those thinges or endes, wherein and wherevnto they are nowe vsed. And further, that they are also hurtful, beyng monuments of Idolatrie, where as to bring them in and establishe them, it behoueth that there shoulde some manyfeste profite of them appeare. For it is not inough to saye, it is indifferent in the owne nature, Ergo meete to be doone: but as the circumstaunces of the tymes and persons, and profite or hurte of our brethren doe require or not require, so muste it be doone or not be done. For in these things whiche are called indifferent, God will haue the vse of them to be measured, that it be referred fyrste to his glorie, then to the profite of others.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is true that is commonly sayde: that suche as be in errour neyther long agrée with other, neyther yet with themselues. Some of you haue taught, that pollution dothe sticke to the thyngs them selues, as that the wearyng of them had power to pollute and make vncleane the wearoes: and a number be caryed away with that doctrine: else why do they refuse to come to our Churches, our sermons, yea to kéep vs cōpanie, or to salute vs? why spitte they in oure faces, reuile vs in the streates, and shewe suche lyke villanie vnto vs, and that onely bycause of our apparell? Is not all this a manifest declaration that they thinke vs therewith to be so polluted, that what so euer wee speake or doe is polluted, in lyke maner, euen the worde of God and his sacramentes? and where haue they learned this, but of you and others your partners? Lykewyse what was the chiefe grounde of this opinion, howe didde you moue the people to this extremitie, and what haue they yet to speake in the defense of theyr excessiue raging? forsoothe that thys geare came from the Pope, was inuented by

Antichriste, and therefore abhominable, and not to be vsed. This onely reason they haue, and this is the common place that you haue hitherto bette vpon. But nowe béeing conuinced by manyfest reasons, and seeing the manyfolde absurdities, that wayteth vpon suche assertions, you passe ouer the matter as though you had neuer bene stayned with it, and saye the causes why you are lothe to meddle with them, are not asThe apparell not refused bycause the Papists vse it. many are borne in hand. &c. So that in effecte this is nowe by you confessed, that those thyngs whyche the Papistes haue superstitiously vsed, yea whyche they haue abhominably abused, if they haue any vse or profyte en those thyngs or endes, wherein and wherevnto they are nowe vsed, be lawfull, and not to be refused. And therefore wée muste (I thynke) haue no more to doe wyth thys Argumente: The Pope inuented them, Ergo, they are not to bee vsed: but thys muste bee the question, whether they haue anye vse or profite in those thynges or endes, wherein or wherevnto they are nowe vsed. And this shifte is inuented to take awaye all obiections, whiche maye bée of Churches, of Bells, of Pulpits, and suche lyke.
                        But let vs procéede to the reasons. You haue not yet proued that they haue no vse, or that they profyte not in those things and endes, wherin and wherevnto they are nowe vsed: and therefore I will take that for no reason as yet: althoughe I haue sufficientely answered vnto it, where I haue spoken of Ceremonies, and in this treatise also that folowethTract. 2. of this matter.
                        You saye further that they are also hurtefull, beeyng monumentes of Idolatrie. &c. Whereby you acknowledge that notwithstanding they bée monumentes of idolatrie, yet maye they be broughte in and established if some manyfeste profite of them appeare, so that this also is graunted, that monuments of idolatrie may be broughte in and established vpon this condition, if they be profitable.
                        That which followeth in this portion of your replie touching things indifferent, I consent vnto, with this prouiso, that it is not euery mans part in the Church to iudge and determine, what the circumstance of the times and persons maketh profitable or hurtfull (for then should we neuer be quiet) but theirs onely, to whome the gouernment of the Church is committed: to the whiche prouiso if you do consent, we are in this matter thus farre agréed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 52. Sect. 4. 5.
                     Nowe, that they are not profitable and hurtfull, it also may appeare, if we consider them by all the kinds of men in the realme.
                     The Papistes are eyther stubborne or weake, and in respect of both these, they cannot be but hurtfull. The weake I call those that haue made some steppe from poperie to the gospell, and of whome there is good hope that they may be fully gotten to the Gospell: but these are harmed by the vse of these vestiments, for they take occasion of falling at them, bycause they thinke that the sacraments get reuerence by them, and the ministerie is commended by such apparel wearing, and thinke that the sacraments want something of that they should haue, if they be not vsed: Wherevpon are hard oftētimes these voyces: I will not communicate vnlesse he weare a surplis. But this offence and occasion of falling is confirmed by the vse of these garments, therefore in respect of suche men, they are hurtfull.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Al this is spoken without proofe, and it is very vntrue that the weake Papist is hurt in any respect by wearing this apparell: they take such garments as things perteyning to comelinesse and order, and so ought they to do. Neyther did I euer in my life heare that these garments hindred one iote any from comming to the gospell. But admitte all this were true (as it is most vntrue) why should it not aswell by doctrine and teaching be remoued, as other superstitious opinions be in these things, whiche you can be content still to remaine.
                        These voyces, I will not communicate, vnlesse he weare a surplis, may sometimes come vpon iust cause, whē the good subiect séeth the minister which ought to be an example

of obedience, stubburnly and wilfully shewe example to the contrarie: and somtime it may come of waywardnesse when men be disposed to contende: but surely I doe not thinke that any man, whiche is persuaded to communicate with vs in the Sacramentes, can thinke that they be eyther the better or the worse for the externall habite of the minister. They be dissuaded from farre greater matters than that, and therefore it is not to be thought that they will sticke in such trifles. But ad
                              〈1 line〉
                           t it were so, is it not as greate an errour to thinke that the Sacramentes bée polluted with the apparell, as it is to thinke, that they wante somethyng, whiche they should haue, if the apparell be lacking? Yes truly: and therfore to take away bothe the errours, I thinke it moste conuenient, the apparell be vsed, and these errours by doctrine to be confuted.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 52. Sect. 6.
                     Agayne, although I haue knowledge, and knowe that the wearing of a surplisse is lawful forA 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           . me, yet an other, whiche hath not knowledge, is by my example edi
                           〈1 line〉
                        ied or strengthened to weare a Surp
                           〈1 line〉
                        sse, wherof he can tel no ground why he should weare it, and so sinneth agaynst his con
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        : and for this cause S. Paule concludeth, that that which a man may 
                           〈1 line〉
                        o in respect of him selfe, may not be done, and is not lawfull to be done in respect of other.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If to weare a surplis, were an offence to the weake, or if there were not manifestThe weake are not offended, but they which accōpte them selues most strong. groundes in Scripture, (suche I meane as commaunde obedience to superiours) to proue the wearing of the surplis to be lawfull, then were it some thyng that you saye. But seeing suche onely be offended therewith as accompte themselues most strong, and condemne other of infirmitie: séeing also that obedience to Magisirates in such
                              〈1 line〉
                            indifferent things, hath manifest groundes in scripture, and to doubt of obedience in suche matters, is in eff
                              〈1 line〉
                           cte, to plucke the Magistrate his sworde out of his hand, this reason hath not so muche as any similitude of probabilitie in it. Is there any minister of the Churche, (for of suche only is the Surplis required) that will rather bée moued to weare a surplis, by the example of an other, than by the consideration of his duetie towardes the lawe, and 
                              〈◊〉
                            of the Churche, by due authoritie in a lawfull and indifferent thing appointed? you might make the same reason serue to plucke downe the Churche, the Pulpit, the Belles, yea to ouerthrowe all orders, and all lawes in things indifferent, whiche all haue the same grounde of obedience that the surplis hath.
                        In the Conf
                              〈1 line〉
                           ssion of the Dutche Churche in London, whiche is allowed by the
                              Things indifferēt chāge their nature be
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 g cōmanded or forbidden, Confess. Ec
                                       〈1 line〉
                                    les. Belgiog
                                       〈1 line〉
                                    rman.
                              
                            Churche of GENEVA, and diuers other reformed Churches (whereof I haue made mention before) it is thus written of things indifferent: Things otherwyse indifferent of themselues, after a sorte chaunge their nature, when by some comma
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ndement they are eyther commaunded or forbidden, bycause neyther they can bee omitted contrarie to the commaundement, if they be once commaunded neyther done, contrarie to the prohibition, if they be prohibited, as it appeareth in the Ceremoniall lawe. So that the grounde why a man shoulde weare the surplis (béeing an indifferente thyng as you co
                              〈1 line〉
                           fesse it to be) can not be vnknowne to any, but suche as know not the ground of their obedience towardes authoritie.
                        It is true, that in some things indifferent a man must haue respect to the weakenesseIn what kind of 
                                 〈◊〉
                               thinges we 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ughte to haue a resp
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ct of the we
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ke. of his brother, and absteyne from doing that, whiche he might lawfully doe, rather than to off
                              〈1 line〉
                           nde his brother. But that is in suche indifferente thynges, as bée not by any lawe commaunded or forbidden, but lefte frée to euery man to do, or not to doe: As, if to weare the Surplis, were by no lawe commaunded, but lefte to euery mannes owne disposition: then surely if there were any weake offended with the wearyng of it, I oughte to absteyne for the weake hys sake: but béeyng

by lawfull authoritie commaunded to weare it, if I should refuse so to do, I shoulde offend against the Magistrate, and against God, who by his Apostle hath giuen thys commaundement, 
                              omnis anima potestatibus. &c. let euery soule be subi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ct to the higher powerRom. 1
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . &c. which is to be vnderstanded in all things, that are not against God. And therfore if any man be offended with me in so doing, the offence is taken it is not giuen.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the fifth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 52. Sect. vlt.
                     Agayne for the stubborne Papists, they take herevpon occasion to speake euill of, and to bl
                           〈1 line〉
                        spheme the truth of the gospell, saying that our religion cannot stand by itselfe, vnlesse it lea
                           〈1 line〉
                        e vpon the staffe of their ceremonies, and perswade themselues that those were very well deuised by their Popes, that they that are their 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nimies to their religion, cannot be without. And herv
                           〈1 line〉
                        on they 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ake occasion to hope that their other trumper
                           〈1 line〉
                        e and baggage will in the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nd come in againe, which ca
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        seth them to be more frosen in their wickednesse, and shut their eares vnto the tru
                           〈1 line〉
                        h, which possibly they would heare, if all hope of bringing in of their Poperie were cut off.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is but a mere fancy: for first, it was brought into the Church before theyr Popes whome they hold vpon, inuaded that seate, as it is afterwards declared. Secondly, they be not matters that they make any greate accompt of. Thirdly, they know fullwell, that we could be without them: and that we (but only for obedience sake) do not much estéeme of them. Wherefore this is an argument framed only vppon light coniectures. But beit all this were true, shall we for their fancie or fonde iudgement refuse to do that, which is lawfull, which we may d
                              〈1 line〉
                           , and which we are bound to do? Or in making orders for the Church, must we enquire what their opiniō wil be? Then plucke downe Churches▪ &c. for of them they make a greater reck
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ning, than they do of the surplisse, or any other such like matter. I thinke verely that there is not one Papist in England that doth take occasion vpon any thing reteyned in this Church, to hope that their other trumperie and baggage will in the end come in 
                              〈1 line〉
                           gayne: neyther is there any cause in respect of them, why they should so hope: and if they do, yet I doubte not but that they shall hoppe without that hope. But a man may imagine if he will that there is a man in the Moone, with a tree on his backe. &c. and you cannot let him.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 53. Lin. 5.
                     And let it be obserued that throughout the realme there are none that make such clamours, and outcries, and complaints for these ceremonies, as they and those, that they suborne. They pretende I confe
                           〈1 line〉
                        se, the Queenes maiestres Imunctions, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         vnto them, but who is so blinde as seeth not that they haue another meaning. For I appeale vnto the consciences of all that knowe them, whether they do it for any obedience towards hi
                           〈1 line〉
                         maiestie, whose death should be a thousand times better newes vnto them, than hir graces mariage.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The more is the pittie, that they should haue suche i
                              〈1 line〉
                           st cause of clamoring, and thatThe clamors of Papists should mo
                                 〈1 line〉
                               the ministers to more circumspection. those which should teach them obedience to God and their Prince, be examples to the contrary. A subtill and craftie Papist wil be glad of any cause of quarelling: the more circumspect therefore ought the minister to be, in taking héede lest he giue iust cause of the same. But there be honest, godly, and zelous men also that cannot abide s
                              〈1 line〉
                           che disorder and contempt, whome peraduenture you would gladly straine with the note of Papistrie, as your manner is: and for my part I thinke it to be the part of all dutifull subi
                              〈1 line〉
                           cts to kéepe lawes and orders appoynted, and to sée other kéepe them also, if they be therevnto called.
                        Surely he that is a Papist indéede, cannot wish well to hir 
                              〈◊〉
                           , but if he communicate with vs in the sacraments, heare the word preached, and come to our Churches, I will thinke and hope the best of him. But if he refuse so to do (as there be di
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ers such) so long as he so continueth, I must count him an enemie to religion, to the

Churche, and to the Prince, be he Papist, Anabaptist, or whatsoeuer. For he that in hart and in déede misliketh the religiō, cannot like wel of such as mainteine the same.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 53. Sect. 1.
                     There are also numbers of those, which haue all Antichristianitie in such detestation, that they cannot abide the least scrappe of it, and when they see the ministers weare them, they are greeued in their harts, and they beginne somewhat to feare, least this communicating with the Papists in apparell, should make some way to those which vse them, the easier to admitte other things, when they should be likewise commaunded. And these brethrens minds are not to be lightly greeued, and the ministers, if they thinke to profite them, must cut away all occasion, whereby they may haue an euill opinion of them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           M. Caluine in his booke against the Anabaptists after he had spoken some thing againstThe puritie which can abide no imper fection, is diuelish. the Puritanes and Donatists, hath this saying worthy to be noted: Here therfore we may be admonished, that when as vnder the pretence of the study of perfection, we can tolerate no imperfection, eyther in the body or in the members of the Church, that then the Deuill dothe make vs swell with pride, and dothe seduce vs by hypocrisie, that he might prouoke vs to forsake the flocke of Christ: knowing assuredly that he dothe obteyne the victory, when he draweth vs from the same. For seeinge yther remission of sinnes or health, is in no other place, although we outwardly beare the countenance of an Angelicall☞ conuersation, yet if we do with such boldnesse separate ourselues from the Christian felowship, we are become Deuils. If thys be to be feared in such as shew thys prepostorous zeale agaynste that whiche is blameworthy, what shall we thinke of those that vnder the pretence of zeale deface the minister, and the word that he preacheth, for doing that which is lawfull, and the whiche of duetie he ought to do. If the minister shoulde applie himselfe to please the people, and suche especially of whome you séeme to speake in this place, his greatest study had néede to be how to transforme himselfe dayly into a new shape. But most certaine it is that you study to much to please the people: And that is the occasion of so many nouelties, whereby they are most commonly delighted, est natura hominis nouitatis auida.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the eight Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 53. Sect. 2.
                     Seing that therefore this kind of Ceremonies in apparell, harden the harts of the Papistes, and cause them to be the stiffer in thir poperie, hinder the weake from profyting in the knowledge of the Gospell, greeue the minds of the godly, are occasion of an euill opinion vnto them of their ministers, we thinke that these ceremonies are to be remoued, as not only not profitable (which they ought to be) but hurtfull, if not to the ministers themselues that vse them, yet to their people to whome they are commaunded by God to haue regard vnto, in these thinges that are indifferent in their owne natures. Now I will come to that, which you set downe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Seing that not one word of that is true: and if it were, yet the erroure and false perswasion of the minde rather to be refourmed, than relented vnto, I sée no cause why thys kind of apparell (being commaunded) ought not to be vsed, except you will leaue to euery man libertie to do what him list, or suffer the fansies of some to rule Prince, Councell, Byshops, Church and all.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               That ministers were knowne in times past by distinct apparell▪
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The eleuenth. In those days knowne (1. Samuel. 9 18. Mat. 26. 48 Mat. 26. 7
                              〈1 line〉
                           .) by voyce, learning, and doctrine: now they must be discerned from other by popish and antichristian apparell, as cappe, gowne, tippet. &c.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 53. Sect. vlt. &. Pag. 54. Sect. 1. 2.
                        To proue that in those days ministers were knowne by voice learning,Uayne and childish all
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              gations. and doctrine, you cite the ninth of the first of Samuell: and the 26. of Mathew. In all that ninth Chapter of Samuell, there is not one word that maketh for this purpose, except you meane this, that when Saule asked of Samuell where the Seers house was, Samuell answered againe that he was the Seer: If this be to be knowen by voice, learning, and doctrine, the ignorantest minister that is, may soone be knowne by his voyce, learning, and doctrine: for if you aske him, where is such a man, he can answer you, I am he. In the. 26. of Mathew the first place, vers. 48. is this, Novv he that betraied him, had giuen them a token, saying, vvhosoeuer I shall kisse, that is he, lay holde on him. The multitude that came with Iudas, knew christ by Iudas kissing of him, therfore, in those days ministers were knowen by voice, learning, and doctrine. The second place in that Chapter alleadged, vers. 73. is this. They that stoode by said vnto Peter, surely thou art also one of them: for euen thy speach bevvrayeth thee. Peter was suspected by his speach to be a Galilean, and therefore one of Christes Apostles, Ergo a minister was then knowen by voice, learning,An argument retorted vpon the aduersary and doctrine. You may aswell of that place gather thus. Peter preached not Christ thē, but denied him, Ergo a minister must be knowen by denying of christ. Lord God, what dare not these mē alledge for their purpose.
                        I know that the chiefe tokens whereby a minister ought to be knowen is doctrine and learning: but you childishly abuse the scripture, and play with the same.
                        Now you say, ministers must be discerned from other, by PopishA minister may be knowen by his apparell. and Antichristian apparell, as cappe, gowne, tippet. &c. Do you thinke that bycause a minister oughte to be knowen by his voyce, learning, and doctrine, therefore he may not be also knowen by hys apparell. Iohn the Baptist had peculiar apparell, and was knowen by it: Christ had distinct apparell from other, for his coate had neuer a seame.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 53. Sect. 3. 4.
                     The places alledged by the Admonitiō, with others, which may be cited, howsoeuer you deride them are 
                           〈1 line〉
                        otwithstanding probable coniēctures They were quoted by the Admonition to proue that ministers were knowen by voice, learning, and doctrine, and you transferre them to apparell. that 
                           〈1 line〉
                        eyther Samuel, nor the Apostles, nor our Sauioure Christ did weare any distinct apparell from others, which liued in their times. For if Samuell being then the seer, had had a seuerall apparell, whiche was proper to the seers, it is not like that Saule woulde haue asked of himselfe where his house was. And if the Apostles had worne a seuerall apparell from the 
                           〈◊〉
                        , they should not haue bin esteemed by so generall and vncertaine a note, as of speaking somewhat brodely, or as I may terme it, Northēly, for it had bin a surer note to haue said thou art one of his Apostles, bycanse none weareth this apparel but his Apostles, where there was a great number that spake Galilean like, which were not of his Apostles, nor disciples

neyther. But let these goe. You say our sauioure Christ had a seuerall apparell, bycause he had a cote without seame. Assuredly you might vse lesse scornefulnesse in rehearsing of other mens arguments if for no other cause, yet for this, that they might take more pitie of yours.
                     For what an argument is this? our fauioure Christ did weare an vnder garment, which could not be well parted, but with the spoyle or marring of it, therefore he ware a seuerall apparell from the rest. It is true, Iohn Baptist had a seuerall apparell, and to help you, so had Elias, but to this end, that both by his vnwonted apparell, and straunge diet which he vsed oflocusts and wild honey, the extraordinaries of his ministerie might be set foorth, and the people the rather moued to enquire of his office, whome they sawe to varrie so much from the common customs of other men. But ministers now haue no such extraordinarie functions, therefore by that reason of yours, they shoulde not be seuered from other men, by any note of apparell. You say you know that the cheefe notes of a minister, are doctrine and learning, if you meane that the distinction of apparell must supply the rest, and that that also hath some force to commend their ministerie, the Prophets and Apostles of our sautoure Christ, left vs no A
                              〈1 line〉
                           table reason. perfect patterne of a minister, nor no sufficient glasse to dresse him by, whereof Vntrue, as shall appeare. the most part neuer vsed any such seuerall 
                           〈◊〉
                         and none of them haue leit any commaundement of it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        They be coniectures indéede, and méere coniectures but without all shadowe of probabilitieThe vnapt reasons of the Admonitors dissembled by T. C. or reason: and if you will giue me leaue so to coniectnre, I will proue any thing. But such slender coniectures argueth the slendernesse of your proofes. The Admonition vseth thōse places to proue that ministers were then knowen by voice, learning and doctrine, which how they or you can conclude of them, I confesse, that I cannot imagine, excepte you will say, that Samuell said vnto Saule I am the seer: and they that stoode by said vnto Peter-euen thy speach bewrayeth thee: therefore ministers were knowen by voice, learning and doctrine: which is asmuche as though you woulde saye, Saule knew Samuell by Samuels owne report, and a welchman is knowen by his tong, 
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              rgo ministers are knowen by voyce▪ learning, and doctrine: is not this a proper kind of reasoning? is this the reuerence due to the scriptures, thus 
                              〈◊〉
                            to abuse them?
                        But say you, if Samuell had had a seuerall apparell proper to the Seers, it was not like that Saule would haue asked of him where his house was: Nay, you shoulde rather haue sayde that it is like that Saule being a rud
                              〈1 line〉
                           y, and brought vp only in keeping of cattell, had neuer séene prophet before, and therefore could not know Samuell, what kind of apparell soeuer he had worne. And that this is true, that Saule did not know what a Séer meant, and that he did neuer sée any before, it may appeare in the same chapter. And therefore saith M. Mart
                              〈1 line〉
                            vpon that. 18. verse of the. 9. Chapter. Saule is so rude inP. Martyr. the common wealth, and such a straunger from ciuill affaires, that he did not so muche as know Samuell although he were both iudge of the people, and the magistrate, and Prophet, and the captaine of the host.
                        
                        Moreouer M. Caluine vpon the. 23. of Math. proueth out of the. 13. Chapter of Zach.
                              Prophets knowne by a distinct apparell. Caluine. Zach.
                               13. that the prophets were distinguished and knowne from other men by a certaine and peculiar forme of 
                              〈1 line〉
                           s. And the very wordes of the 
                              〈◊〉
                            fourth verse of that Chapter of Zacharie doth euidently proue it: for there the Lord 
                              〈1 line〉
                           aith; In that day shall the Prophets be ashamed. &c. neyther shall they weare a rough garment to 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                              ▪
                            Upon the which words the note in the bible printed at Geneua is this: They shall no more weare Prophets apparell to make their doctrine seeme more holy▪ to the which also agreth M. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            vpon the same place, and addeth these words: This is the summe, that thys kind of vesture was not reproued in the 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                              , as some men 
                                 〈◊〉
                               do wrest this place to condemne long gownes, and what soeuer doth not please their waywardnesse. &c. Whereby it is euident that the Prophets did weare, and were knowen by a peculiar kind of garment. If you enquire of the practise, we haue diuers examples: yea euen of Samuell whome we now haue in hand. For one thing that 
                              〈◊〉
                            Saul, that he whome the wytch had raysed, was Samuell, was the de
                              〈1 line〉
                           ption of his apparell. 1. Sam. 28. There commeth vp an old man with a mantell vpon him▪ And Saule perceyued1. Sam. 28. that it was Samuel. &c. It cannot be thought that Saule conceyned this opinion, bycause she named an olde man, but bycause she added his mantell and kind of attireWe reade likewise of Elyas. 2. Reg. 1. &. 2. that he had a heary or rough mantell agreing

to the description in the Prophet Zacharie, and a leather girdell wherby he was knowne of Ahazia: And this is by you confessed. Elizeus succéedeth Elias both in office and vesture: And Iohn Baptist did not only represent Elias his spirit, but also his kind of garmente, for his rough garment of camels heare, and leather girdle are described by Saint Mathew cap. 3. I suppose now that the manifest scripture, the opinion of learned interpreters, and the practise of so many notable Prophets do sufficiently iustify my assertion, and are able to improue your probable coniectures, as you tearme them.
                        Touching Peter what kinde of apparell soeuer he did weare, the matter is not great: it is the fond reason of theirs that I reproue, which is tootoo childish, as I haue shewed before: and yet may it be supposed that Peter vsed all the meanes he coulde, not to be knowen, and therefore whether he cast off his vppermost garment, or changed it, it may be a question. Furthermore, it was in the night time: finally, he was suspected by a maid to be one of Christs disciples before he had spoken one worde, as it appeareth, Io. 18. But to let al this passe, what kind of reasoning call you this? Peter was knowne by his voice, Ergo he was not knowne by his apparell: or this, Peter was knowne by his tong to be a Galilcan, Ergo ministers must be knowne by voice, learning, and doctrine.
                        Here you let slippe without any defense at all, that which is alledged by the AdmonitionThe Admo nition wanteth a procto
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            out of the. 48. verse of the. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           6. Chapter of Mathewe to the same purpose.
                        No man can deny but Christes apparel differed from the rest, and that this was a rare kind of habit, else would not the Euangelist Saint Iohn cap. 19. haue made so particular mention of it: wherefore, that whiche I say is true, that euen then ministers of the Gospell might be knowne by their apparell, as Christ and Iohn the Baptist: and therefore not to be so straunge a matter, that ministers should also now differ from other men in their apparell.
                        That which you speake of Iohn Baptist, confirmeth my saying, which is, that ministers of the Gospell were then also knowne by their apparell: and if vnwonted apparell did set foorth Iohn his ministerie, and moued them the rather to enquire of his office, why may it not haue the same vse now in like manner? But I haue vsed those examples only to shew the vanitie of the Admonition, which would make the Reader beléeue, that in those dayes there was no distinction vsed in apparell.
                        Christ and his Apostles haue left a perfect patterne of a minister touching conditions, qualities,Lose conclusiōs of T. C. & office, so hath ye scripture done of a magistrate, and of a subiect also, of a master and of a seruant. &c. but shall there be therefore no distinction in apparell betwixte them? or no externall notes to discerne them by? what kind of argument cal you this, Christ and his Apostles haue left vs a perfect patterne of the ministers office: Ergo, the magistrate may not take any order for his apparell? Truly these be loose conclusions and (as you vse to tearme them) very pitifull arguments. Of the same force be these arguments: most of the Apostles and Prophets vsed no such seuerall apparell, Ergo, we may not vse any seuerall apparell. And againe, none of them haue left any commaundement of it, Ergo it ought not to be.
                        The first reason hath thus many faults: first, the Antecedent is vntrue, as I haue shewed before out of this Prophet Zacharie, and M. Caluine. &c. For the Prophets were discerned from others by a certaine kind of apparell, and it is not able to be proued but that the Apostles had seuerall apparell from the common sorte of men. Secondly,The Antec
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              dent of T. C inferreth a consequent against himselfe. it is no good argument à facto ad ius: but it is much worse à non facto ad non ius, the which kind of argument Zuinglius diuers times reproueth in his treatises against the Anabaptists, as I haue oftentimes said. Thirdly, if some of the Apostles and some of the Prophets did vse seuerall apparell (as the Antecedent cōfesseth they did) though it doth not follow that we must do so: yet it euidently proueth that we may do so, being no commaundement in the scripture to the contrary.Theargumē
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                               of T. C. ouerthrowne by his owne assernon.
                        
                        Youre seconde argumente is ouerthrowne by youre owne selfe. For Pag. 13. you saye, that many thynges are bothe commaunded and forbidden, of whyche there is no

expresse mention in the word, which are as necessary to be followed and auoyded, as those whereofPa. 13. Sect. 1 expresse mention is made: which if it be true, (as it is most vntrue) then thinges of lesse importance and not so necessary, though they be not expressedly commaunded, yet may they be done. M. Caluine in his booke against the Anabaptists (for your arguments and theirs do maruellously agrée, and be builded vpon the selfesame foundation) sayth thus: To dissolue that which God neuer dissolued, is in a mortall man a token of to muche rashnesse and arrogancie. But let vs always hold this, that then the authoritie of God is vsurped,Caluin aduer. Anabap. when that is condemned, which he hath permitted: But the scripture mentioneth in no place that the vse of armoure is forbidden vnto princes. &c. You may herby then perceiue, that M. Caluine doth not thinke this to be a sound argument, it is not commaunded: Ergo it is vnlawfull, except it can be shewed to be prohibited: wherefore if you will condemne a seuerall kind of apparell in ministers, you must shewe some commaundement or prohibition in the word of God for the same, else are you rashe, and arrogant, vsurping to your selfe gods authoritie as M. Caluine saith.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the second Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 55. Sect. 1.
                     
                        Eusebius saith, that S. John the Apostle ware on his head a leafe or thinne plate like vnto a Bishops miter.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 53. Sect. vlt.
                     For want of store, and to make a long booke, heere is S. Iohns miter rehearsed thr
                           〈1 line〉
                        se in one leafe to the same purpose, and in the saine words. And bycause it was not enough that M. Bullinger, and M. Martyr should speake of them, you haue preuented them both, least you should haue
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            But not once digested or answered. seemed to haue brought nothing. If this be not coleworts*twise sodden, I cannot tell what is.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is so often rehearsed as you report, but by diuers authors, to shew their opinions of one and the selfesame thing. M. Gualter and M. Martyr among other examples, vse this of S. Iohn to proue that in the auncient Church there was a peculiar fashion of apparell for Priests. I recite their words as witnesses in this case worthy of credite, and by that occasion this example of Iohn is the oftner repeated: but thys is a sore matter to moue such choler: you should quietly haue answered the reason, and left your heate of speach: but you haue done the contrary.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               That the Magistrate may appoint a distinct apparell for Ministers.
               
                  Chap. 3. the. I. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 55. Sect. 1.
                     But what if none of the Prophets, what if none of the Apostles (which you are not able to proue eyther of the prophets or Apostles) were knowne by their apparell? May not therefore Christian magistrates in Christian common weales, for order and decencie appoynte a seuerall kinde of apparell, as well to ministers as to other states of men.
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Page. 54. Sect. 1.
                     You aske whether the christian Magistrate may enioyne a seuerall kinde of apparell to the Ministers. Eyther the cause is to weake, whiche you defende, or else it hathe gotten an euill patrone, whiche would so gladly shifte it, and chaunge it with another. For this is an other question, whiche you speake of. For although that be graunted vnto you, whiche you demaunde, yet you can not conclude your cause. For albeit the Magistrate may commaunde a seuerall apparell, yet it followeth not that he may commaunde this kinde of Popishe apparell, and therfore what manner of argument is this of yours, the Magistrate maye commaunde a seuetall apparell, therefore he maye commaunde this. The Colledge walles will tell you You mighte haue learned other Logike within the Colledge walles. that a man can not conclude from the whole to the parte affirmatiuely. So you see I mighte let you fishe and catche nothing, but I am neyther afrayde, nor ashamed to tell you the truthe of that you aske, so farre foorthe at leaft as I am perswaded. That is as much to say, as if you like it, you may vse it. I thinke therefore it maye be suche a kinde of apparell, as the Magistrate commaunding it, the Minister may refuse it, and suche it may be, as he may not refuse it. But whatsoeuer apparell it be, this commaundement can not be without some iniurie done to the Minister. For seeing that the Magistrate You may say the like of Iudges. doth allow of him, as of a wise, learned, and discrete man, and trusteth him with the gouernment of his people in matters betweene God & them, it were somewhat hard not to trust him with the appoynting of his owne apparel, and he is probably to be supposed that he hathe discretion to weare his owne geare comely, and in order, that is able to teache others, howe they shoulde weare theirs: and that he shoulde be able to doe that by his wisedome, and learning, that others doe without learning, and great store of wysedome, and that he should keepe order and decencie in apparell, which hath learned in the schole of Christe, whiche they doe that had neuer other scholemaster than common sense and reason. And if any minister be founde to faulte, in going eyther dissolutely, or to exquisitely and delicately, then the Magistrate mayWhy may be not aswell appoynt him an order, as punishe his disorder
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         punishe him according to the disorder wherin he saulteth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you had noted my order, and delte sincerely, these wordes of yours might with lesse discredite vnto you, haue bin well forborne. For in this place I onely proue that the ministers may be distinguished from other by a seuerall kinde of apparell. And I aske the question whether a christian Magistrate may appoynt a seueral kind of apparell for order and decencie? Of this apparell whiche the Admonition calleth Antichristian, I speake a little after. Your so vsuall kinde of reasoning not ad idem, argueth but lacke of abilitie to answere the present purpose.
                        The question is incident to my cause: for if the Christian Magistrate haue authoritie to appoynt a seuerall kinde of apparell to Ministers, then it is also lawfull for Ministers to vse it.
                        You saye the Colledge walles will tell me, that a man cannot conclude from the whole to theAn argument holdeth from the whole to the part affirmatiuely somtune. parte affirmatiuely. Althoughe my argument is neyther 
                              à genere, nor à toto,
                            but ab oppositis relatiuis▪
                            (for it is this in effecte, the Magistrate may commaunde it, Ergo the subiects must obey it) yet not the Colledge walles (which be dumbe and can not speake) but the rules of Logike telleth me, that if by the whole you meane that whiche the Logitians doe call Genus, then an argument from the whole to the parte doth firmely holde affirmatiuely, if the whole be taken 
                              vniuersaliter, vniuersally, as in this example, omne animal est sensibile, Ergo, omnis bomo est sensibilis. Omnis virtus est mediocritas, Ergo temperantia est mediocritas: and so likewyse the Magistrate hath authoritie to appoynt any kinde of habite for order or decencie, Ergo he maye appoynt this or that kinde of habite. If you meane by the whole, that whiche the Logitians doe properly call to tum integrale, as you séeme to doe, then the rules of Logike tell you, that ab omn
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              oto ad partes (excepte it be à toto in modo) the argument is good affirmatiuely, and not otherwise. I am not disposed to boaste of my knowledge in Logike, nor to winne any opinion thereof to my selfe by defacing or contemning of other: But, I thanke God, I haue sufficient to maynteyne whatsoeuer I haue written, and to answere what you can replie to the contrarie. But who would haue thought that this spirite had bin in T C. a man supposed to be so mortified. &c.The Magistrates authoritie in appoin ting apparellabridged by T. C.
                        
                        You answere my question in déede: but as good neuer a whitte as neuer a deale the better. For in suche sorte you giue the Magistrate authoritie to commaunde some kinde of apparell to the Minister, that he can commaunde none vnto him,

whatsoeuer it be, without some iniurie done to the Minister: whiche is a verye straunge answere. For first it restrayneth the Magistrate from hauing authoritie to 
                              〈◊〉
                            any kinde of apparell: for suche (you saye) it maye be, that the Minister maye refuse it: Then dothe it accuse the Magistrate of doing iniurie, if he appoynte euen that kinde of apparell that he maye lawfully doe. For you saye, whatsoeuer apparell it be, this commaundement can not be without some iniurie done to the Minister. This is a very nyce authoritie giuen to the Magistrate: but let the Reader well consider your wordes, and marke what authoritie you giue to Magistrates. One reason whereby you woulde proue that the Magistrate do
                              〈1 line〉
                           he the Minister iniurie, if he commaunde him to weare that kinde of apparell, whiche is lawfull to be commaunded, is this: the Magistrate dothe allowe of him as a wise, learned, and discrete man. &c. and therefore it were somewhat harde not to trust him with the appoynting of his owne apparell. &c. First, it is not true, that the Magistrate dothe allowe of him. &c. For you wyll haue him chosen by the Parishe, and the Magistrate can not knowe what kinde of Ministers euery Parishe dothe choose. Secondly, if the Magistrate allowe of him, it is vpon condition that he be obedient to his lawes. Thirdly, the Magistrate may be deceyued in him, and take him for another manner of man than he is. Laste of all, howe wyse, howe learned, howe discrete soeuer he is, yet is it méete that he obey lawes, and be subiecte vnto good orders. May not other learned, wyse, and discrete men, alleadge this for them selues also, and say, that they be able to gouerne themselues, what néede they lyke children be prescribed what to doe? And vndoubtedly at this day this is the voyce of diuers: and this lesson of libertie belike they haue learned of you.
                        I doe moste humbly desire those that haue the care of this common wealthe, butWherevnto the assertion of the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               tendeth. to consider what lyeth hidde euen in these your wordes vttered in this place, they will then no doubte vnderstande that you séeke fréedome from all lawes of Princes, and imagine that suche perfection maye be in men, that they shall not néede to be gouerned by ciuill lawes, but euery man to be a lawe to him selfe.
                        And héere your subtile dealing is worthy to be noted (whiche is very vsuall with you) in altering the case: for whereas the kynde of apparell is appoynted to be a distinction from other men, and an externall note of their calling, as it is in other sortes of men, as Iudges, Sergeantes, Aldermen. &c. you (as though
                              〈1 line〉
                            you knewe not this) make your Reader beléeue, that the Magistrate in appoynting apparell dothe mistrust the Ministers discretion, in wearing his owne geare comely, and in order: as if the meaning of the Magistrates commaundement héerein, were, that Ministers shoulde not goe eyther dissolutely, or disorderly, and not rather that all Ministers shoulde vse that fourme of decent apparell, whereby they mighte in one vniforme order agrée ámongest them selues, and differ from other states of people in hir Dominions. If you ment vprightly, you woulde not so often deale in this order.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 55. Sect. 1.
                     Iudges, Sergeants, Aldermen, and Citizens are knowne by their apparell, and why maye not Ministers be so likewyse? are they not vnder subiection? be they not subiect to ciuill lawes and ordinances? ought they not to obey their gouernours in all things not agaynst the worde of God?
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 54. Sect. 2.
                     And whereas you woulde proue that it maye be done with the Ministers, as it is done wyth Iudges, Sergeantes, Aldermen, and Sheriffes, the case is not lyke. For as for these which be in office, their robes and gownes may as their maces and swordes, somewhat helpe to set foorthe the maiestie and moderate pompe whiche is meete for the offices of Iustice whiche they execute, and consequently to helpe to strike a profitable feare into their hearts, whiche are vnderneath them, whiche hathe, nor can haue no place in the minister, whose authoritie and power, as it is not outwarde, so can it not, nor ought not to borrowe any credite of those externall shewes. And the Magistrate, or the Citie, may seeke some honor of the Citizens, mustering as it were by numbers in one liuerie, whiche ought not to be looked for at the ministers hande, because he honoreth and serueth the Magistrate an other waye, nor can not also, considering that they are scattered throughe all the lande in euery Towne, one, or not so many, as beeing put in one liuerie, would make any great shewe to the honour and commendation of the Towne, or Citie where they remayne.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I mighte as well answere for Iudges, Sergeants. &c. as you doe for ministers, and saye that seeing the Magistrate dothe allowe them as wyse, learned, and discrete men, and trusteth them with the gouernment of the common wealthe, it were somethyng harde not to trust them with the appoynting of their owne apparell: but so shoulde I reason fondly and seditiously: for it is méete that learned, wyse, and discrete men should be subiecte to lawes: and the wyser, the learneder, and the discréeter they be, the more willing they are to obey the same. And this kinde of argument tendeth to nothing else, but to the animating of the subiects agaynst the Magistrate, and agaynst the lawes.The subiects an
                                 〈1 line〉
                              nated 
                                 〈◊〉
                               the magistrate.
                        
                        Thoughe the authoritie that the Minister oughte to haue, muste come especially by his doctrine, good conuersation, and by his calling: yet is no outwarde meanes (béeing lawfull) to be refused, whereby the same maye be helped: and he muste labour as muche as he can, euen by outwarde meanes (whether it be of conuersation, or of apparell, or any suche lyke thing) to commende his office and calling, and to procure reuerence vnto it.
                        A man mighte lykewyse saye, that Princes, Iudges, and Magistrates, are not to be reuerenced for their apparell sake, but for the authoritie committed vnto them by God: and yet is it méete and conuenient that they weare suche kinde of apparell as may externally commende their authoritie.
                        The apparell of Ministers declareth their modestie and grauitie: signifieth their calling and office: perteyneth to comelynesse and order: and therefore as conuenient to be prescribed vnto them, as any other kinde of apparell is to Iudges, Sergeantes, or other ciuill Magistrates. And forasmuche as Ministers be members of the common wealthe, it is méete that they shoulde be subiecte to the orders of the same.
                        It is the honor of the Prince to haue all the states and degrées of persons within hir dominion in good order, be they in Citie, or in Towne, togither or separate: and therefore this is nothing that you say, the Magistrate or the Citie maye seeke some honor of the Citizens. &c.
                        The Iudge, wheresoeuer he goeth, ought to be knowne by his apparel, euen so the Minister: neyther can you shewe any good reason to the contrarie. M. Caluine vponCaluine. the. 23. of Mat. sayth, it is méete that Doctors should in grauitie and modestie of apparell differ from the common sorte.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 54. Sect. 3.
                     And so you see your question answered, whereby appeareth they are subiectes as other are, and to obey also sometimes, where the commaundement is not giuen vpon good grounds.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is answered in déede according to my expectation, but neyther according to the truthe, nor the duetie of a subiect.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The distinction of Apparell was appoynted for Ministers before the Popes tyrannie.
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 55. Sect. 2. 3.
                     If you doubte whether a particular kinde of apparell differing from the lay men, were euer appoynted for Ministers in the Church before the Popes tyrannie, and whether in these dayes it maye be appoynted in reformed Churches, or no, heare the iudgement of master Bullinger, and master Gualter, in an Epistle written by thē to master N. and master M. Their words be these.
                     That in the auncient Churche there vvas a particular fashion of apparellBullinger & Gualter. for Priests, it appeareth in the Ecclesiasticall historie of Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 27. and of Socrates lib. 6. cap. 22. No man is ignorante, vvhich hath but lightly redde ouer the monumentes of the auncient fathers, but that the Ministers vsed a cloake in their seruice. And therefore I say de before, that the diuersitie of garmentes had not his originall of the Pope. Eusebius citeth out of the auncient vvryters, that sainct Iohn the Apostle vvare on his head a leafe or thinne plate lyke vnto a Bishops myter. Pontius Diaconus vvitnesseth of sainct Cyprian the Martyr, that vvhen he offered his necke to the executioner, he first gaue him his cappe, and the Deacon his vpper garment, and so stode appareled in vvhite linnen. Moreouer Chrysostome maketh mention of vvhyte apparell of Ministers. Hitherto Bullinger and Gualter.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 54. Sect. 3. 4.
                     The place of The place of Theodoret fal
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           fied▪
                         Theodoret cited by M. Bullinger, maketh mention of a golden Cope, and that vsed by Bishops of Hierusalem, and solde by Cyrill a good Bishop, whereby he declared sufficiently his misliking of suche garments in the ministerie of the Sacraments. In the place the whiche he citeth out of Socrates, there is one Sycinius an Nouatian Bishop is sayde to haue worne whyte apparell, and therefore is reprehended as for too muche exquisitenesse and finenesse of apparell, and the Bishop of Durisine, in a letter he wrote, alleadgeth the same place agaynst the surplice. A man would hardly beleeue that master Bullinger should vse these places to proue a distinction of apparel amongst the Ministers: We are not ignorant but that a cloake hath beene vsed of the Ministers in their seruice, but that was no seuerall apparell of the Ministers, but common to all Christians, which with chaunge of their religion, chaunged also their apparell, as appeareth manifestly in Tertullian de Pailio.
                     
                     As for the Petalum that S. Iohn ware, I see not howe it can be proued, to be like a Bishops 
                           〈1 line〉
                        iter. For the cappe that S. Cyprian gaue the executioner, argueth rather that it was the common apparell, whiche was customably worne, for else it woulde not haue done him so muche good. As for his vpper garment, whiche he gaue to his Deacon, it was a token of his good wyll, which he would leaue with him, as the practise hath beene seene with vs, and proueth nothing that it was any seuerall apparell. As for the whytelinnen garment, whiche he suffered in, it can not seeme straunge vnto vs, which haue seene the holy martyrs of the Lorde executed in Smithfielde and other places. And it is not to be thoughte that S. Cyprian had so small iudgement, that liuing in the tyme of persecution, he would by wearing of some notable apparell from the rest, as it were betray him selfe into the handes of his ennemies, vnlesse all the Christians had done so too for clearer and more open profession of their faythe, and greater detestation of the contrarie Religion: as Tertullian and the Chrystians in hys tyme dyd, by the wearing of a Cloake, whiche reason maye bee also alleadged of the Petalum of Saincte Iohn.Hom. 6. ad pop. Antioch
                              〈1 line〉
                           . It is true, Chrysostome maketh mention of a white garment, but not in commendation of it, but rather to the contrarie. For hee sheweth that the dignitie of their ministerie, their

sa
                           〈1 line〉
                        tie and crowne was in taking heede, that none vnmeete were admitted to the Lordes supper, not in going about the Churche with a whyte garment. And it is easily to be seene by (Scripture fondly alleaged.) SalomonEccle. 9. in his Ecclesiastes, that to weare a whyte garment was greatly esteemed in the East partes, and was ordinarie to those that were in any estimation, as the wearing of blacke with vs: and therefore was no seuerall apparell for the ministers, or for to execute their ministerie in.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The wordes of Theodoret be these, But the tale, which they had raysed of Cyrillus,T
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 eod. lib. 2. cap. 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 7. did chiefly displease the (
                                 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 
                                 ▪
                              ) Emperour. For wheras the most worthy king Constantine had for the honour of the Churche of Hierusalem giuen vnto Macarius Bishop in the same citie, a holy garment (precious and wrought with golde) which he should weare, when he ministred the holy Baptisme, they reported that Cyrill solde it. &c. Héere you sée that Theodoret counteth it but a fable, that Cyrill should make any suche sale, and those that say he solde it, declare that it was not for any disalowing of the vesture, but forSozo. lib. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                               cap. 25. necessitie of the poore in the time of famine, as Sozo. lib. 4. cap. 25. testifieth.
                        You deale with M. Bullinger as you doe with me, that is, you peruert his meaning and alleage that out of Socrates, that he ment not, & keepe that in silence, which makethLib. 6. cap. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                              ▪
                            directly for this purpose. Socrates there sheweth howe Sycinius béeing a Nouatian, did weare white apparel, & when he was for the same reproued, he answered that it was no where written that Priests shoulde weare blacke apparell, and bad them proue by scripture, that priests ought to weare blacke apparell. Whereby it is playne, that ministers in those days did weare black apparel, & were therby knowne, and that Sycinius béeing an heretike refused so to do, vsing the same arguments that you do, scilicet, that it is no where commaunded that Priests should weare suche kinde of vesture. Wherfore the story is aptly alleadged by master Bullinger, to proue a seuerall kinde of apparell, and it insinuateth what manner of men those be, that contemne the common order in suche matters, and loue to be singular like vnto Sycinius the Nouatian heretike.
                        As for S. Iohn his Petalum, you heare what these learned men saye, who no doubte haue good grounde of their iudgement. Neyther woulde Eusebius haue made any mention of it, if it had not bin a kinde of apparell, whereby S. John was knowne.Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 31. The wordes of Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 31. be these: Iohn whiche leaned vpon the brest of the Lorde, beeing a Priest wore a leafe or thinne plate. Whereby it is euident, that this apparell was peculiar to S. Iohn in the respecte that he was a Priest. That Cyprian his apparell was not vsuall and common for other men to weare, it may appeare by this, that the names of his apparell be expressed, for that whiche he gaue to the executioner is called Birrus, that is, a thi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ne plate, and that which he gaue to the Deacon was called Dalmatica, a garment with long sléeues: as for the white linnen, it is not there mentioned as any distinct kinde of apparell.
                        The wordes of Chrysostome doe manyfestly declare that then suche kinde of garment was vsed in the administration of the Sacramentes: neyther doe his wordes tende any thing at all to the disalowing of it, for they be spoken by the way of comparison, and negatiues by comparison are not simple negatiues (as I tolde you before) but by the way of comparison: and therefore when Chrysostome sayth, that the dignitie of their ministerie. &c. was in taking heede, that none vnmeete were admitted to the Lords supper, not in going about the Churche with a white garment, he dothe not disallowe going about the Churche in a white garment, but he sayth, that it is not in comparison of the other, so greatly to be regarded.
                        If Salomon in that place ment any suche matter, yet is it no profe at al for this thatT. C. doth 
                                 〈◊〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              eage the 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               fundly 
                                 〈◊〉
                               carelesly. you alle
                              〈1 line〉
                           e it for: there was a great nūber of yeres betwixt Salomon his time, and Chrysostomes, and all kinde of customes much altered, & therfore I maruell what you meane to bring in Salomon to proue that the white apparel vsed by ministers of the church in the administration of the sacraments in the time of Chrysostome, was not s
                              〈1 line〉
                           uerall, but common and vsuall apparel. But that the Reader may vnderstande your

carelesnesse in alleaging the scriptures, I will set downe the wordes of Salomon in that. 9. chapter and. 8. verse. At all times let thy garments be white, and let not oyle be lacking vpon thine head. In the which sentence, by the white garment is ment eyther innocencie of life, as Pellicane doth interprete it, or ioy & mirth, as some other thinke:Ecclesi. 9. but there can be nothing lesse gathered thereof, than that there was at that time any suche vsuall kinde of apparell. And to what purpose should he haue so sayde, if it had bin so? The Metaphores & figuratiue kinde of spéeches that Salomon vseth in these bookes, can not be vnknowne to any. You do not trouble me with many quotations, but those that be, are passing straunge. And surely I can not but maruell howe you dare be so bolde, as thus to abuse the scriptures.
                        Be it that this is the saying of belly gods (according to the note of the Geneua Bible, whervpon I thinke you grounde your assertion) to moue vnto mirth & pastime, dothe it therefore followe, that this was an vsuall kinde of Apparell in Salomon his time? Or if it were then, must it be also in Chrysostome his time? Or if it were so in his time, might it not also be vsed of the ministers in the administration of the sacraments, as a comely and decent vesture, and differing from the rest? If I had the gifte of iesting, that you are so excellent in, what sporte could I make with this, and a number suche like places?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 56. Sect. 1.
                     
                        Peter Martyr likewise in an Epistle written to master Hoper,P. Martyr. sayth on this sorte: I vvill not graunte that these diuersities of vestures haue their beginninges of the Pope, for so muche as I reade in the ecclesiasticall historie, hovve that Iohn the Apostle vvore at Ephesus, vvhere heIohns apparell. dvvelled, a Bishops apparell, tearming it Petalum, seu lamina Pontificalis. As touching Sainct Cyprian the holy martyr, Pontius the Deacon vvriteth, that a little before he shoulde be beheaded, he gaue vnto him that vvas appoynted to behead him, his vesture called Birrus, after he had put it off, and to the Deacons he gaue his other vesture called Dalmatica, and so stoode in linnen. Chrysostome maketh mention of the vvhite vesture of the ministers of the Churche. Haec ille.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 55. Sect. 1.
                     The reasons that M. Peter Martyr vseth, are the same before, and howe he hath also condemned them, it shall appeare, with M. Bucers iudgement of these thinges in the ends of the booke.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In the meane time you sée howe these notable learned men agrée in one truthe agaynst you: neyther are you able to shewe any contrarietie in this poynt vttered by him, or M. Bucer, as I trust shall then appeare.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 56. Sect. 2. 3.
                     
                        Socrates also in the seconde booke of his Ecclesiasticall historieSocrates. sayth, that the father of Eustathius beeing Bishop of Cesarea, did depriue the sayde Eustathius his sonne beeing a priest, of his placeEustathius. and dignitie, because he wore apparell not comely for a Priest to weare, nor agreable to his order.
                     
                        Therefore it is certaine that Ministers euen from the Apostles tyme haue had a distincte and seuerall kynde of apparell from other men.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 55. Sect. 2.
                     As for Eustathius his depriuation, bycause he dyd not were apparell meete for a Minister, it maketh not to this purpose one whit. For I haue shewed that if any minister goe like a ruffian or swashe buckler, or in the brauerie of a courtier, that it is meete he should be punished according to the quantitie of the fault. And that it is so to be vnderstanded it appeareth manifestly by the counsell of Gangris, which did therfore confirme the same deposing, bycause he ware a straunger apparell, and the habite of a Philosopher, and caused all his fellowes to doe so. Therefore I maruaple what you meane to alleage this place. It is also alleaged of (*) Nicephorus, in 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . neither of theLib. 9. cap. 45. places there is any Eustathius the sonne of Eustathius, but of Eulabius, or as Nicephorus readeth Eulalius. And therefore your conclusion is both vntrue and vncertaine, that since the Apostles times there hath bene a distinct and seuerall apparell of the ministers from the rest.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The wordes of Socrates Lib. 2. chap. 43. be these: Eustathius the Bishop of Sebastia inSocra. lib. 2. cap. 43. 
                              Armenia was not admitted to make his defense, bycause he was deposed before of his father Byshop of Cesarea in Capadocia, for that he wore an vndecent garment. The canon of the Councell of Gangris: If any man thinketh it to auaile vnto his holye purpose (toDistinc. 3
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . wete of continencie) that he weare a cloake, as if thereby he should atteine vnto righteousnesse, and reprehendeth, or condemneth them which weare the ornament called Byrrhus and the other common and vsuall garment, let him be accursed. Dist. 30. Both by Socrates and also by this Canon of the Councell it doth appeare that Eustathius and his adherentes were condemned for vsing a newe and singular kinde of apparell, from that which then was commonly and customably vsed of all Bishops. That in the conclusion of this Councell which is spoken of modest, simple, and decent apparell, agaynst that which is lose and dissolute, hath no collour of prouing any thing against Eustathius his contempt and singularitie, neither doth it in any one word signifie, that he was not depriued for refusing to weare the ordinarie and accustomed apparell to Priestes.
                        You saye, that in neither of the places, there is any Eustathius the sonne of Eustathius,T. C. taketh aduantage where none is giuen. but of Eulabius. &c. Gladly woulde you haue some thing to dally with, if possibly you could tell how. Are you not ashamed thus to deale? where doe I say that Eustathius was the sonne of Eustathius? had you not my booke before you? be not these my words: Socrates in the second booke of his Ecclesiasticall historie saith, that the father of Eustathius being Bishoppe of Caesarea, did depriue the sayd Eustathius his sonne beyng a priest. &c. I neither name him Eustathius, nor Eulabius, nor Eulalius: Therfore my conclusion is both true and certain, and you doe but séeke occasion of quareling.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               That the Apparell now vsed is not Popishe or Antichristian: and that things inuented by euill men may be vsed of Christians.
               
                  Chap. 5. the first Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 56. Sect. 4.
                     But cappe, gowne, tippet. &c. you saye, is Popishe and Antichristian: This is onely sayde, and not proued. If you call it Popishe and Antichristian, bycause it was first inuented by an Antichristian Pope: it is first to be considered whether that be true or no. Then if it be true, whether euery thing so inuented, is of necessitie to be abolished.
                  
                  
                     
                     T C. Page. 55. Sect. 3.
                     The matter lyeth Then the ease is altered of late. not in that, whether these things were first inuented by Papistes, or being deuised of others, were after taken by the Papistes, but the matter standeth in this, that they haue bene vsed of the Papistes as notes and markes, and sacraments of their abhominations.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You alter the case as oft, as it pleaseth you, and libertie you haue to affirme or denie what you list, when you list, and where you list without controlement: for hitherto I am sure your chiefe groundes against the apparell hath béen, that the same was inuented by Popes, and vsed by them. But take your pleasure. That which followeth in my Answere to the Admonition, is directly against this your grounde also, if you will stande to it and not shrinke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the second Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 56. Sect. vlt.
                     It is certaine that this apparell of ministers, which you find your selues so much greeued with, was appointed long before the churchStephanus a good Bishop inuented this apparell. of Rome declined from the puritie of Christs Religion, for Stephanus Bishop of Rome, who liued the yeare of our Lord. 256. is sayde to be the first, which did appoint this kinde of apparell for ministers, neyther are you able to shewe that any Antichristian Pope inuented the same. But admit it were so that this apparell was either borowed of the Iewes, or taken from the Gentiles, or inuented and vsed byThings inuented by euil men may be vsed of Christians. some Antichristian Pope, yet it followeth not, but that the same may be well vsed of Christians in the Churche of Christ.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To this T. C. speaketh not one word, good or euill.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the thirde Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 57. Sect. 1. & Page. 58. Sect. 1.
                     
                        Augustine in his Epistle ad Publicolam hathe this notable saying.
                        Augustinus. 
                        Et cum templa, idola, luci, & si quid buiusmodi data potestate euertuntur, quamuis manifestum est, cum id agimus, non ea nos honorare, sed potius detestari, ideò tamen in vsus nostros priuatos duntaxat & proprios, non debemus indè aliquid vsurpare, vt appareat nos pietate ista destruere, non auaritia. Cum verò in vsus communes, non proprios ac priuatos, vel in honorem dei veri conuertuntur, hoc de illis fit, quod de ipsis hominibus, cum ex sacrilegis & impijs in veram religionem mutantur. &c. VVhen temples, Idols, groues, and such like things by authoritie be ouerthrovvne, althoughe it is manifest, vvhen vvedoe that, vve honourPriuate vse of idolatrous things forbidden. them not, but detest them, yet for all that vve may not therefore conuert thē or vse them to our ovvne priuate vses onely and commoditie, that it may appeare that vve destroy them for Religion sake, and not for couetousnesse. But vvhen they are conuerted, not into priuate and our ovvne vse, but into common vses, or to the honor of the true God, that is done and brought to passe in them, vvhich is done and brought to passe in men them selues, whē of Idolaters and vvicked persons they are chaunged into true Religiō. This hath God himselfe taught in those testimonies, vvhich thou thy selfe haste

vsed, vvhen as God himselfe commaunded that of that same groue, vvhich vvas dedicated to straunge Gods, there shoulde be wood taken for his sacrifices: and of Hierico, that all the Golde and Siluer, and brasse shoulde be brought into the treasurie of the Lorde. VVherefore that also, vvhich is vvritten in Deutronomie, thou shalt not couet their siluer nor their golde, neyther shalt thou take any thing therof to thy selfe, least thou offende, bycause it is abhomination vnto the Lord thy God. &c. It manifestly appearreth that eyther priuate vses is forbydden in such things, or that nothing should so be brought into thy house that it be honored: for then it is abhomination. &c. Hetherto Augustine.
                     By these wordes it doth manifestly appeare, that euen things altogetherIdolatrous things turned to cōmon vse. dedicated to Idols and vsed in Idolatrie, may be conuerted to common vses, and vsed in the seruice of God and to his honor, but not to priuate vses nor superstitiously.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 55. Sect. 4.
                     As for Augustine his place, it is to be vnderstanded of such things as haue This shift 
                              〈◊〉
                            answered 
                              〈◊〉
                            ward. a necessarie vse, and therefore may not be taken away from vs by the superstition of men. For so we might also be depriued of the sunne, which is as it were the life of the worlde, bycause the sunne hath bene worshipped. But that Saint Augustine did not like of this kinde of reteining ceremonies, it maye This shift 
                              〈◊〉
                            answered 
                              〈◊〉
                            ward. appeare. Do you aske saith he, how the Paganes may be wonne, how they may be brought to saluation,August. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           om. 10. de verbis domini in Mattheum 
                              〈1 line〉
                           m. 9. forsake their solemnities, let go their toyes, and then if they agree not vnto our truth, let thē be ashamed of their fewnesse, whereby he sheweth that the nearest waye to gaine the Papistes, is to forsake their ceremonies. And yet I woulde be lothe to saye eyther with you, or with Augustine, that it is not lawfull for a man, to make of a Popishe surplisse, a shirte for himselfe, or to take the golde of a Cope which he hath boughte, and conuert it to his priuate vse. And herein we do nothing disagree with Saint Augustine, whiche graunt that surplesses and copes, and tippets, and cappes, may be applyed to a good vse, eyther common or priuate, as they will best serue, but we denie that that vse is in distinguishing either the ministers from other men, or the ministers executing their ecclesiasticall function from themselues, when they doe not exercise that office.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The wordes of Augustine be plaine, neyther can they be so shifted of. And it maketh euidently against your distinction that he sayth such things may not be conuerted into priuate vses. A man may cauill with the most manifest authorities either of scriptures or fathers, that can be: but euery shifte and cauill is not a sufficient answere. This proposition is by these wordes of Augustine directly proued: that things altogether dedicated to Idols and vsed in Idolatrie may be afterwarde vsed in the seruice of God, and to his honour, which is the state of our question. And bycause this is a materiall poynt, and peraduenture Saint Augustine his authoritie is not much regarded of you, I will set downe M. Caluine his opinion also touching the same matter, who in hys Harmonie vpon the bookes of Moyses, vpon these words in the. 23. of Erodus ver. 24. Thou shalt vtterly ouerthrowe, and breake in peeces their Images, sayth t
                              〈1 line〉
                           us: we make itCalui
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . not now any scruple of conscience to reteine still those Churches which were polluted with Idols, and to put them to better vse bycause that whiche is added to the lawe propter consequentiam (as they terme it) doth not bynde vs. I graunt that all those things which doe tende to the planting of superstition ought to be taken awaye, so that, by precise vrging of that vvhich is of it selfe indifferent, vve be not in to much rigour, Superstitious. The place is worth the noting, it fully ouerthroweth your groundes agaynst the apparell.
                        Saint Augustine in that sermon quoted in your margent, speaketh against such as professing Christianitie did notwithstanding resort to the temples of the Paganes at their solemnities and feasts, thinking it sufficient, if they did in heart detest the Idols, though in bodie they were present in their temples and at their feasts: much like vnto those that thinke it sufficient to serue God in heart, though in bodie they be present

at the Masse, and Idolatrous seruice. That this is the meanyng of Augustine in that place, it may euidently appeare to all suche as will peruse it: vpon this Augustine bringeth in these wordes: If you aske howe the Paganes may be ouercome, wonne, and illuminated, howe they maye be brought to saluation: forsake all their solemnitie, let goeAug. serm. 6. de verbis domi. in Matth. theyr toyes, and then if they agree not vnto the truth, let them be ashamed of theyr fewnesse. It was in Saint Augustines time, as it is in some places at this day, where in some one citie there be Churches both for the Gospell, and for the masse also: it is not méete that suche as professe the Gospell, shoulde resort to the Masse: for besydes that they offende God in beyng presente at Idolatrous seruice, they also giue occasion to the Papistes to thinke better of theyr Masse, bycause they sée it frequented of suche as seeme to professe the Gospell, and thereby also persuade them selues of a greater multitude that embraceth their Religion: wherefore one way to conuert them is, to absteine from their Churches, that they may vnderstand both our misliking of theyr seruice, and their owne paucitie also. And that this is ment of by Augustine in that place, it may also appeare by these wordes in the same Sermon: The Paganes saye in their heartes, why forsake we our Gods, seeing the Christians them selues worship them as well as we. And agayne: Beholde against what true God thou doest offende, whyles thou fallest downe before false Gods. S. Augustine speaketh not one worde in all that sermon of ceremonies, or any thing else taken from the gentils, and by Christians conuerted to other vses: muche lesse of any suche matter as we haue newe in question. And therfore you do but abuse the Reader by reciting certaine words of S. Augustine without the circumstances, which open the true meaning of them.
                        I praise your wit for saying that such things may be conuerted to priuate vses: for denie that (as S. Augustine plainely doth) and I shall be bound vnto you, that your doctrine shall haue the fewer fautors by. 3. parts: for surely many that condemne your opinions in heart, for hope of priuate commoditie, that might come vnto them, by the dissolution of colledges, Churches, &c. doe séeme very wel to like of them. Wherfore teach them (if you be wise) that such things may be conuerted to their priuate vses, whatsoeuer Augustine saith to the contrarie.
                        
                           Augustine saith also that they maye be conuerted 
                              in honorem Dei, vnto the honour of God. What say you to that? as for your denying that that vse is in distinguishing eyther the ministers from other men. &c. bicause it is but your bare denyall against al the proofes alleaged, I will with affirming the contrarie passe it ouer.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the fourth Diuision
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 58. Sect. 2. 3.
                     
                        Peter Martyr in the Epistle before mentioned touching this matter,P. Martyr. writeth on this sort.
                     But let vs consider your other argument, that is to saye: It is not lavvfull to vse these kinde of vestures, bicause they vvere inuented by the Popes tyrannie. In this poynt I doe not vvell perceiue hovve it may be affirmed for a suertie, that vve can vse nothing that perteined to the Pope, and is vsed inTemples of Idols conuer ted to the wor ship of God. Poperie. Truely vve must take good heede that vve bring not the Churche of Christ into suche bondage, that it may not vse any thing that the Pope vsed. It is very true that our forefathers toke the temples of Idols, & turnedReuenewes. them into holy Churches, vvhere Christ should be vvorshipped: And they tooke also the salarie and reuenevves consecrated to the Idols of the gentils, to their vvicked shevves and playes, and to their holy votaries virgines, and transposed it to finde the Ministers of the Church: And yet all these things dyd not onely seruice vnto Antichrist, but vnto the deuill: yea the holy EcclesiasticallPhrases of Poetes. vvriters dyd not sticke to take the verses of Poetes, vvhiche had

bene dedicated to Muses, and to other diuerse Gods and goddesses, for to be played in playes, and spoken in shevves, to obteine the fauour of theyr Gods: I say they did nothing sticke or feare to vse them, vvhen it seemed to them conuenient, imitating Paule the Apostle, vvho stucke nothyng at all to rehearse for his purpose Menander, Aratus, and Epimenides, and that he dyd in intreating the holy Scripture apply prophane vvordes to set forth Gods Religion. VVe reade also hovve that vvine vvas consecratedWine, bread▪ &c. consecrated to Idols. vnto Bacchus, bread vnto Ceres, vvater vnto Neptune, oyle vnto Minerua, letters vnto Mercurie, song vnto the Muses and vnto Apollo, and manie other things Tertullian rehearseth in his booke intituled de corona militis Christiani, vvhere almost he entreateth thys selfe same argumente: yet for all that vve sticke not to vse all these things freely asvvell in holye as in prophane vses, although at one time or other before, they had bene consecrated to Idols and to deuils. Hetherto Peter Martyr.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 55. Sect. 5.
                     To all these things that M. Martyr reckeneth vp of reuenewes, and wages, verses, wyne, breade, oyle, water, which beyng consecrated vnto Idols are wel vsed, Tertullian answereth in the same booke, whereout a number of these are taken: when he sayth that we oughte to admit a participation of those things, which bryng eyther a necessitie or profit in the vse of them, but we deny 
                           〈1 line〉
                         these things thus vsed, are either necessarie or profitable. And therefore in steade of temples, tithes, wine, &c. if you would haue matched the surplice well, you shoulde haue sayde sensors, tapers, holy bread, holy water, and such like.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Master Martyr vsed these examples to proue that the surplice and other apparell of Ministers nowe vsed (for that is the matter he handleth) may lawfully be reteyned and worne: whose iudgement and authoritie with learned and wyse men doth farre ouerreach your naked denyall. Neyther doth Tertullian speake any thing in his books de corona militis, that tendeth to the confutation of anye thing that Master Martyr hath here spoken, but to the confirmation of it rather, as he maye perceyue that with diligence readeth the booke. Eusebius Lib. 4. cap. 11. sayth that Iustinus Martyr preached theEusebius. Gospell of Christ beyng apparelled lyke an heathen Philosopher. S. Augustine de ciuit. Lib. 19. cap. 19. writeth thus: it perteyneth nothing to the Citie of God in what kinde ofAugustine. apparell, or in what order of lyfe, so that it be not agaynst God, anye man followe this fayth whereby we come vnto God. Therfore when Philosophers become Christians, the church compelleth them not to chaunge their apparell, or manner of lyuing, whiche can nothing hinder Religion, but onely she compelleth them to chaunge their false opinions. Hilarie
                           Hilarie. also sayth, in Psal. 67. that the spoyles of the heathens taken from the deuill, are deuided to the furniture and ornamentes of the Churche of God. So that the saying of Master Martyr is very true, and confirmed by auncient authoritie, and the vse of the Church as the testimonies of these fathers manifestly declare. Where as you saye, that if I would haue matched the surplice well, I should haue sayd sensors, tapers. &c. I tell you againe that it is not I, but M. Martyr a famous and notable man, that so matched them, and at that time, when the same matters were in controuersie, and his iudgement required of them, and therefore coulde not be written of him, but with great aduisement. Howbeit, that you maye know something the more, you muste learne to put a difference betwene 
                              Adiapbora vera & Pseudoadiapbora, those things that be indifferent in deede, and those that are falsely accompted indifferent.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 5. the fifth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 59. Sect. 1. & Pag. 60. Sect. 1.
                     Bucer in an Epistle that he writte to Iohn Alasco, is of the sameBucer. iudgement, his wordes are worthie to be noted, and be these: For if by no meanes it be lavvfull to vse those things, vvhiche vvere of Aarons Priesthood or of the Gentiles, then is it not lavvfull for vs to haue Churches, nor holydayes. For there is no expresse commaundement by vvord in the holy Scriptures of these things. It is gathered notvvithstanding from the example of the olde people, that they are profitable for vs to the encrease of godlynesse, vvhich thing also experience proueth. For any thing to be aWhat it is to be a note of Antichrist. note of Antichrist, is not in the nature of any creature in it selfe (for to that ende nothing vvas made of God) but it hangeth altogether of consenting to Antichristes Religion and the professing thereof. The vvhich consent andThe vse or abuse of things indifferent. profession beyng chaunged into the consent and profession of Christianitie, there can sticke in the things themselues no note or marke of Antichristes Religion. The vse of Bels vvas a marke of Antichristianitie in our Churches, vvhen the people by them vvere called to Masses, and when they vvere roong against tempestes 
                           〈1 line〉
                         Novve they are a token of Christianitie, vvhen the people by them are gathered together to the Gospell of Christ, and other holy actions. VVhy may it not then be, that the selfe same garmentesBucers opinion. may serue godly vvith godly men, that vvas of vvicked signification vvith the vngodly? Truely I knovve very many Ministers of Christe, most godly men, vvho haue vsed godly these vestures, and at this day doe yet vse them: So that I dare not for this cause ascribe vnto them any faulte at all, much lesse so heynous a fault of communicating vvith Antichrist, for the vvhiche faulte vve may vtterly refuse to communicate vvith them inThe distribution of bread & wine in the sacrifices of deuils. Christ. The Priests of deuils did celebrate in their sacrifices, the distribution of bread and the cuppe, as Iustinus Martyr and Tertullian make mention. VVhat let is there vvhy vve may not vse the same ceremonies also? you vvill say vve haue a commaundement of the Lord touching this ceremonie. Very vvell. And by the selfe same it appeareth that same thing to serue among the children of God to the seruice of Christ, vvhich the vvicked abused in the seruice of deuils, if the commaundement of Christ be added thereto. But it is the commaundement of Christ, that in our holy actions vveinstitute and vse all things so as comelinesse and order be obserued, that fayth may be edified.
                     The same M. Bucer in another Epistle written to M. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, saith on this sort: All true godly men may☞ godly vse those rytes, vvhiche vvicked men haue abused hovvsoeuer vngodly.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 56. Line. 2. & Sect. 1.
                     It is true that M. Bucer saith, that it is not in the nature of any creature to be a note of Antichrist, but yet it followeth not thereof, that the creature that hath bene accidentally and throughe abuse applyed to Idolatrie, may be forthwith vsed as we shall thinke good. For neither the Idols of the gentus, nor the corruptions of those which offered, had not power to make the beefe or mutton that was offered, no good and holesome meate for the sustenaunce of man, neyther cause that a Christian man could not eate them as beefe & mutton, but yet either to eate it at the table of Idols,

before them, or else priuately in his owne house, when there was any weake by, that thought it an abhominable thing, was not lawfull: and yet the meate neuerthelesse the good creature of God, and which might be receiued with thanksgiuing, so the abuse of the surplis and coape. &c. cannot cause, but that they may be vsed as cloth and silke.
                     And whereas he saith that they are changed, and made of notes of Antichristianitie, markes of Christianitie, I say that they cannot be changed so by and d
                           〈1 line〉
                        cree or commaundement, for asmuch as notwithstanding that profession of chaunge, the ha
                           〈1 line〉
                         ts or men vnto whiche euery man must haue regard vnto, are not changed. For not so soone as the magistrate will say that these things shall be from hencefoorth vsed as things indifferent, foorthwith men do vse them so, but those only vse them so, which haue knowledge, both the ignorant and the weake take them still otherwise.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your answer to these learned and famous men, is not of any moment at all, forThe 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               answering of T. C. their reasons you answer only with wordes, when as indéede their onely wordes (for their godlinesse, experience, and learning sake) ought to be of greater credite than your reasons: but the aptnesse of your answers I referre to the iudgement of the reader, séeing he hath both their words and yours before his eyes. This only I note, that something you will saye how vnaptly soeuer, least you shoulde séeme to giue place to the plaine truth. These vestures are neyther vsed at the tables of Idolls, nor with the offence of the the weake, as I haue she wed before: they are knowne of all men to be notes of the ministers of the Gospell, aswell as the bell is knowne to be rong to godly prayers, and preachings. &c. and therefore you haue spoken, but aunswered nothing.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 60. Sect▪ 2.
                     Bullinger and Gualter in the epistle before alledged answering thysBullinger and Gualter. question, whether we may weare such apparell as the Papistes do, say on this sort: If vve shoulde haue nothing common vvith them, then must vve forsake all our Churches, refuseal liuings, not minister baptisme, not say the Apostles or Nicene creede, yea and quite cast avvay the Lordes prayer, neyther do you borrovv any ceremonies of them. The matter of apparell vvas neuer taken avvay at the beginning of reformation, and is yet reteyned, not by the Popes lavv, but by the kings commaundemente, as an indifferēt thing of meere pollicie. Yea truly if you vveare a cap or a peculiliar kind of apparell, as a ciuill and politique thing, it smelleth neyther of Iudaisme, nor Monachisme: For these vvill seeme to separate themselues from the ciuill and common life, and accompt a meritorious deede in the vvearing of a peculiar garment. So Eustathius Byshop of Sebastia, vvas notSuperstition in garments condemned. simply condemned for vvearing a peculiar kind of garment: but for that he did put religion in his garment. The canons of the councell of Gangren, Laodicen, and of the sixt councell, are vvell knovvne. If in case, any of the people be persvvaded that these things sauoure of Papisme, Monachisme, or Iudaisme, let them be told the contrary, and perfectlye instructed therein. And if so be through the importunate crying out hereon before the people by some men, many be disquieted in their conscience, let them bevvare vvhiche so do, that they bring not greater yokes on their ovvne necks, and prouoke the Queenes maiestie and bring many faithfull ministers in suche danger, as they cannot ridde themselues out againe. Hitherto Bullinger.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 56. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                     The rest of those things, which M. Bucer, and those which M. Bullinger and Gualter bring, are all of that sort, wherevnto answer is made.
                     Only this they adde, that if the people do abuse and peruerte those ceremonies, they oughte to be better instructed, which is a counsell not so conuenient, that the ministers and Pastors whiche

haue so many necessarie poyntes to bestowe theyr tyme on, and to enforme the people of, shoulde bee driuen to cut off their tyme appoynted therto, to teache them not to abuse these things, which if they vse neuer so well, they can gayn nothing, and to take heed that they hurte not themselues at those things, whiche in their best estate doe no good, especially when one sermon of the taking of them awaye ioyned wyth authoritie to execute it, may doe more good, than a thousande sermons without authoritie.
                     Besydes that, it is absurde, that Ceremonies whyche oughte to be helpers to promote the doctrine, shoulde become lettes and hinderances, whylest the minister is occupyed in teachyng, to beware of the abuse of them, and of superstition. And it is as muche as if one shoulde be sette to watche a chyide all daye long, least he hurte himselfe with the knyfe, when as by takyng awaye the knyfe quite from him, the daunger is auoyded, and the seruice of the man better employed. And so it followeth, that althoughe the Churche maye appoynte Ceremonies and rites, yet it can not appoynte these that haue greate incommoditie, and no commoditie, greate offence, and no edifying.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue omitted diuers things in the woordes of these learned menne, wherevnto you haue not answered one woorde, as the Reader by conference maye perceyue: and here you haue also willyngly passed ouer that whiche toucheth you somethyng pinchingly, in these woordes of M. Bullinger, and M. Gualter, scil. And if so bee thorough the importunate crying out hereon before the people. &c.
                        
                        If to preache the truthe of the right vse of these Ceremonies be not so conuenient,The reason retourned vp on himselfe. bycause the Pastors haue so many necessarie poyntes. &c. how commeth it to passe that you and your partakers haue so pestered your sermons and bookes therewith, and so long tyme taught the people nothyng else, but contempte of all good order and obedience in suche matters, and haue stirred them vp against the true preachers of the Gospell, and agaynst their Magistrates and rulers for the selfe same thyng? Is it not as conuenient for vs to roote out of the peoples myndes errours touchyng things indifferent, as it is for you to ingrafte them? or is not the doctrine of the true and lawfull vse of indifferent things, of due obedience towardes lawes and Magistrates a necessarie doctrine?
                        Where as you say, it is absurde, that Ceremonies whiche oughte to be helpers to promoteThe doctrine of things indifferent necessary. Things abused must not by and by be taken away. the doctrine, shoulde become lettes and hinderances. &c. I will not saye you speake absurdly, but vndoubtedly you speake vnaduisedly. For will you haue things indifferent abrogated so soone as they be abused, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           east they should becom lets & hinderances, whilest the minister is occupied in teaching. &c. then take awaye tythes, landes, meates. &c. The abuse wherof must of necessitie oftentymes be reprehended in sermons, and the true vse taughte: and make all thinges common, that the preachers in their sermons maye be occupied aboute greate matters. Doe you not sée that doctrine of thinges indifferente is necessarie? vnderstande you not that the taking awaye of the thinges from the eyes, dothe not by and by roote the opinion out of the hearte? Thynges abused muste not alwayes bée taken away when they are abused, but the right vse must be taught, and the abuse reproued.
                        The chylde when he hath discretion, and is able to be instructed, though he sometyme hurte hymselfe with the knyfe, yet must not the same be altogether taken from him, but he muste be rebuked for vsyng it so vndiscretely, and taughte to vse it better. Shall the ryche and costely apparell be taken from Princes, nobles, and men & women of estate, and they brought to a popularitie therin, bycause there is great abuse oftentymes in such apparell, and many prouocations to euill? No truly: but suche kyndes of abuses are to bée by the worde of God reproued. Neyther dothe suche instructions and doctrine in matters indifferente hynder preachers from weightyer matters. Why didde the Apostles make theyr decree of absteyning à suffocato & sanguine, from that that is strangled, and bloud? or Sainct Paul, of praying bare headed orAct. 15. couered? 1. Corinth. II. Whych thyngs afterward myght growe to abuse, if they had not thought the doctrine of ceremonies to be conuenient.
                        
                           Touching the great incommoditie and offence that you imagine to be in this apparell, it is but your fansie, which take y• apparel to be the cause of your nicenesse, contempt, disobedience, cōtention, & such like, remaining in you, whē in deed it is nothing else but singularitie, and preposterous zeale: Wherfore that is to be remoued out of the hart, rather than the apparel from the back. To be shorte, yt which you imagine of any opinion of the Religion in this aparel, or superstition, or any such lyke offence, it is but a mere imagination to cloke & couer the corruptions of the mynde before mentioned.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the seuenth Diuision
                  
                     Answere to the Admonition. Pag. 61. Sect. 1.
                     I haue the rather set down these mens sayings at large, bicause they be both pithie, learned, & wholly to the cōfutation of your assertion. Wherfore I conclude that a Christian Magistrate may reteine any ciuil, politike, or Ecclesiastical orders and rites, of whom soeuer they wer inuēted, or howsoeuer they haue bin abused, so yt, first they be not against the worde of God: Secondly, that Iustification and remission of synnes be not attributed vnto them: Thirdly, that the church be not troubled with the multitude of thē: fourthly, that they be not decreed as necessarie, and not to be changed: And last of all, that men be not so tyed vnto them, but that by occasion they may be omitted, so that it be without offence and contempt.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 56. Sect. 4.
                     And although they haue all these proporties whiche you recite, yet if they bee not to edifying. if not to God his glorie, if not comely and agreeable to the simplicitie of the Gospell of Christ, crucified, they may not be established.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is sufficient if they perteyne to order and comelynesse (as I haue before declared) the iudgement whereof dothe not belong to euery priuate man, but to suche onely as haue authoritie in the Churche: to whose determination in suche matters all other of duetic are bound to submit themselues.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 62. Sect. 1.
                     YEt one thing I must admonish you of, that there is a differenceA difference between worshipping of false gods, and of the true God falsely. to be made bewixt those things, which were wholly dedicated to false gods, and to be vsed in the worshipping of them: and those things which were vsed in the false woorshipping of the true God: for the Papistes herein differ from the Gentils, that they acknowledge and confesse the true God, and beleue the same articles of faith that we doe: but yet worshyp him not aright, nor beleue on hym in all poyntes, as the worde of God prescribeth. And therfore if thinges abused of the Gentiles, and inuented by them maye bee vsed of Christians, muche more may thinges inuented and abused by Papistes.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 56. Sect. 4.
                     Concerning your distinction, whereby you lessen the idolatrie of the Papistes, I haue shewed the vanitie therof.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And I haue answered whatsoeuer you haue there said: but yet your reply in yt place

will not serue euery circumstance of this place, except you will say with ye Stoickes, that 
                              peccata sunt paria, all sinnes are equall.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the ninth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition, Pag. 62. Sect. 1.
                     But of this matter I mynde also to speake some thing in the second parte of this Admonition.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 56. Sect. 5.
                     But of this matter you say you will speake againe. In deede so you doe, and againe, wherin you confounde the memorie and vnderstanding of the Reader, and declare your selfe not only ignorant of Aristotles rule of 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         (which is to speake of one thing generally and once for all) but euen to be voyde of that order, whiche men haue commonly by the naturall Logike of reason. Neyther can you excuse your selfe in saying that the admonition giueth you so oftentimes occasion to speake of them, and so to laye the fault vpon it, for that it beyng written by diuets persons of the same matters, wherof A manifeste vntruth. one knewe not of an others doing, can not be blamed for the repetition of one thing twice, when as you can not escape blame, whiche myghte haue gathered easyly into one place, that whiche is sayde of them in diuerse: which thing, although it be not so easy for me to do in your booke, as it was for you to do in theirs, yet I wil assay to doe it bothe in this, and in all other poyntes that followe, not thinking therby to bring this treatise of yours to any good order (for that were to cast it newe againe, and then you would complayne of your mind peruerted) but that I might remedie this so great disorder, which may be boone without chaunging any thyng of that which you haue set downe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue doone as you ought to haue doone if you had mente playnly: for I haue folowed verbatim the booke that I confute in the same order, that it is written, which I thinke be that confuteth oughte to doe. That the Admonition was written by dyuers persons, the one not knowing of an others doing▪ can not be true: for both the partes haue one title, they bée in one volume, they were Printed in one letter, at one tyme, by one and the same Prynter, and came abroade together, neyther were they euer separated that I knowe or can vnderstande. Moreouer this bewrayeth all, and condemneth you, for one that hath no conscience in wryting vntruthes, that in the beginning of the Admonition mētion is made of both of these treatises in these woordes: Two treatyses you haue heere ensuyng (beloued in Christe) whyche yee muste reade. &c. And in the ende of bothe these Treatises it is thus wrytten: Weee haue thought good in the latter end of our booke, for sundry consyderations, to certifye you (beloued brethren) of the reasons that haue moued vs, who are the authours of these treatyses to keepe backe oure names. &c. Fynally, the order and maner of bothe these Treatises the stile, the quotations. &c. doe manyfestly conuince you of false witnesse bearing: but it is to vsuall with you.
                        I am not so cunning in Aristotle, that I can be so bolde as to attribute that vnto hym, whych is not to be founde in hym, as you do in thys place: for though he speake much of this rule 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , yet hath he no such thing as you father vpon him in this place.
                        It is méete that he whyche wryteth a booke of any matters, shoulde of one matter speake fully in one place: but hée that confuteth, muste followe his order, whome hée confuteth. Whyche if you hadde doone in my Booke, as I haue doone in theyrs, eyther woulde not youre vnfaithfull dealyng haue bin so muche, or else must it sooner, or easylier haue bin espied. Youre tauntes I leaue to your selfe that haue so good a grace in them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 56. Sect. vlt.
                     And if there bee anye other argumentes touchyng anye of these poyntes in other places, whiche I haue not gathered together into one, the faulte is in thys, that I coulde not bestowe so muche tyme in makyng a harmonie of the thynges, whiche are at so greate dyscorde, and then that whyche is lefte oute, shall bee answered in place where I shall fynde it.

Nowe lette vs see M. Doctors 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , and second nauigation touching apparel, whether it bee any happier, or haue any better successe than the fyrst.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        A proper excuse, if any thing fall out in the whole booke, whiche you can not answere: as there be diuers, which you haue not answered.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Diuers things concerning apparell in other places of the Ansvvere.
               
                  Chap. 6. the fyrst Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Nowe, we muste haue Surplisses deuised by Pope Adrian.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 105. Sect. 1. 2.
                        THe impurities you fynde in the administration of Baptisme bee these, Surplis. &c. Touching the Surplis, and suche lyke apparell, I haue spoken before sufficiently: the fyrste inuentor of it (whyche you say to be Pope Adrian) dot he make it neyther better nor woorse, and yet it was vsed long before Adrians tyme, neyther can you proue hym to be the fyrst inuentor thereof. It is certayne that such kynde of vesture hath bene vsed in the ministration of the Sacramentes, long before any corruption of doctrine tooke place in the Churche, as it appeareth both by Hierome in his fyrst booke 
                              Aduersus
                              Whyte garmente vsed in the ministration. 
                              Pelagi.
                            where he maketh manifeste mention of a whyte garmente vsed in the Administration of Sacrifice by the Byshoppe, Prieste, and Deacon. And also Chrysostome Hom. 6. to the people of Antioche, who speaketh of the lyke garmente worne in the Churche. Those that answered the examiner, do but chyldishly cauill at these two places, whyche in deede bee playne of themselues and euident, and so is that of Hieromes also vpon the. 44. of Ezechiell. The religion of God hath one habite in the ministration, and an other in cōmon vse and lyfe. Reade the place considerately, and it shall easyly appeare, that Hierome meaneth as well of Christian Ministers, as of Iewishe Priestes.
                        But of the vse of this and other apparel prescribed in this Church to be worne by ministers, I haue spoken partly before, and am ready to speake more as occasion shall be offered. In the meane tyme the Surplis is not of the substance of Baptisme, neyther required as necessarie to the Administration therof, but as comely and decent.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 57. Sect. 1.
                     In the. 105. page M. Doctour to proue the vse of the Surplice, to drawe out his booke into some competent volume, borroweth certayne places of the examiner, for answere wherevnto, I will referre the reader to that whiche is answered vnto the examination, as to a full and sufficient answere, wherein I will reste, and when M. Doctor hathe proued that, whiche he sayeth, that it is but a chyldish cauill, he shall then heare further.
                     In the meane season it is but a slender replie to so learned an answere (that proueth bothe out of other authours, and out of those same whiche the examiner citeth, that by a white garmente is mente a comely apparell, and not slouenly) to saye it is but a chyldish cauill, whych a D. of Diumitie and of fortie yeares of age can not answere. The place of Hierome vppon the 44. of Ezechiell, the more it bee consydered, the more shall appeare the truthe of the Answere.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue not answered one worde of this, but only shifted it of: I purpose notA whyte garmente in the ministration vsed in Hieromes tyme. 
                                 Hiero. lib. 1. aduers. Pelagi. l
                                       〈1 line〉
                                    . 44. Ezecb.
                              
                            at this tyme to vnrippe the answere to the Examiner, except you had taken the paines to set it downe. Both the places of Hierome are to be séene: in the one he sheweth, that in the administration of the Sacramentes, the Bishoppe, Prieste, and Deacon didde weare a white vesture: And in the other he sayeth, that the Religion of GOD hathe one habite in the ministration, and an other in the common vse and lyfe. Ioyne these two places together, and sée whether the woords of Hierome be manyfest or no. And that it may euidently appeare, that at this tyme wherein Hierome lyued, the maner was to weare white garments in the tyme of diuine seruice and Administration of Sacramentes, I will recite the wordes of the fourthe Councell of Carthage, at the which there were present. 214. Bishops among whome was S. Augustine: 
                              Diaconus tempore oblationis tantùm vellectionis, alba induatur: Let the Deacon weare a whyteCon. Carth. 4. Can. 41. vesture, only in the tyme of the oblation and reading. Canone. 41. And this may be a sufficient confutation to what soeuer is spoken of these places of Hierome in the answere to the Examiner.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the second Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     And as for the apparell, though we haue ben long borne in hande, and yet are, that it is for order and decencie commaunded, yet we knowe and haue proued that there is neither order nor com
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        ynesse, nor obedience in vsyng it. There is no order in it but confusion, no comlynesse, but deformitie: no obedience, but disobedience both against God and the Prince.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 236. the last lyne but one, & Pag. 237. Sect. 1.
                        TO all this also I haue answered before, I meane to all the reasons here alleadged, as for bare wordes, they preuayle with none, but suche as haue respecte to the persons, & not to the matter. And therfore I omit these wordes of pleasure, which you vse, when you saye, that in this apparell there is no order but confusion, no comelynesse, but deformitie: no obedience but disobedience, both against God and the Prince.
                        
                        It is not euery priuate mannes parte to define what is order and comlynesse in externall matters being indifferente, but is proper toDisobedience to the prince in ciuill matters, is disobedience to God. them only, to whom God hath committed the gouernmente of hys church, whose orders and lawes (not beeing against the woorde of God) whosoeuer doth disobey, disobeyeth both God and the Prince: as you do in disobeying the Princes lawes in these matters.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothing is sayd to this, although some part of it necessarily requireth an answer.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the third Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     We maruell that they coulde espie in the laste synode, that a gray Amyse, whiche is but a garment of dignitie, should be a garment (as they say) defyled with superstition, and yet that copes, caps, surplesses, tippets, and suche lyke baggage, the preaching signes of Popishe priesthoode, the Popes creatures, kepte in the same forme to this ende, to bring dignitie and reuerence to the ministers and sacraments, should be reteyned still, and not abolished.
                     
                        Answere to the Admonition Pag. 237. Sect. 2.
                        It is well that you seeme to iustifye the gray Amyse, bycause the Bishops haue disalowed of it in theyr Synode, Truly this is your conscience and religion, to be always ad oppositum, & to disalow that, which law & authoritie alloweth, and allow that, which they disalow. The

nexte waye (as I thinke) to driue you vnto conformitie in apparell were to make a streight law, that no man should weare such kind of apparell: bycause you loue to be contrary to lawes and good orders.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 57. Sect 3. 4. 5.
                     Now I will desire the reader to turne vnto the. 237. 238. 239. 240. 242. pages, to see whether at this third voyage master Doctor bringeth any better marchandise. Where first he surmiseth an vntruth, as though the Admonition misliked of the taking away of the gray Amis, where it saith only, that there was lesse cause to take that away, than the surplis. &c. Wherein there is nothing but the truth sayd; for bycause that was vsed in fewe churches, and but of fewe also in those few churches: Therefore if there were cause to take away that, there was greater to take away the surplis. And to take away the Amis out of the Church, and leaue the surplis. &c. is to heale a scratch and leaue a wound vnhealed.
                     Now whereas you say, that we are always (Ad appositum) and that if the lawe commaunded straightly, that we should weare none of this apparel that then we would weare: if it should be answered againe that you do I 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           as few times as you. 
                        Seruire scenae: that is, that you are a time seruer, you see we mighte speake with more likelyhoode than you. But we will not take (as you do) the iudgemente of God out of his hands, but will attend paciently the reuelation and discouering of that, whiche is nowe hidde both in you and vs.
                     And although you will graunt vs neyther learning nor conscience, yet you might afford vs so much witte as that we would not willingly, and of purpose want those commodities 
                           〈◊〉
                        , which we might otherwise enioy as well as you, if we had that gift of conformitie which you haue.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The wordes of the Admonition touching the gray Amise be these: we maruayle that they could espie in their last synode, that a gray Amis, which is but a garmēt of dignitie, should be a garment (as they say) defiled with superstitiō, and yet that coapes. &c. Do they not say that the Amis is but a garment of dignitie. &c? consider their words well, and you shall sée that master Doctor hath said truly.
                        The gray Amis was iustly taken away, bycause the vse of it is not established by any law of this realme, as the vse of other vestures be: and in mine opinion the Byshops deserued commendation in so doing: for thereby they declared, that they will not suffer any rites or ornaments to be vsed in this Church, but suche only as are by publike authoritie established.
                        Experience hathe taught me that diuerse men be of that nature, that they haue aSome men delight to be contrary to times. delight in opposing themselues to the present estate, and I sée it by proofe to be a great fault in diuers of you.
                        I haue hitherto serued as few contrary times, as you haue done: as for the gift of conformitie, which you say I haue, I thanke God for it, I haue learned to conforme my selfe to the time in that sense, that S. Paule hath willed me so to do. Rom. 12. and toRom. 12. Rom. 13. lawes also and magistrates, as I am likewise commauuded in the. 13. Chapter of the same epistle.
                        What commodities you want, that I haue, I cannot coniecture: your meate and drinke is prouided with lesse trouble and charges vnto you, and in more delicate and deintie manner, than mine is: your ease and pleasure ten times more, you do what you list, go when you list, come when you list, speake when you list at your pleasure. What would you haue more? I know not why you should complaine, except you be of the same disposition with the Franciscane Friers, who when they hadde filled their bellies at other mens tables, were wont to cry out and say: O quanta patimur. &c. Some men are delited to be fed at other mens tables, and preferre popular fame befor Gold and siluer.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The faults wherewith the Admonitors charge the Apparell ansvvered.
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     But they are as the garments of the idoll, to which we should say, auaunt, and get the e h
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        ▪
                        
They are as the garments of Balaamites, of Popish priests, enimies to God and all christians.h Esa. 30. 22.
                     
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 237. Sect. 3. 4. & Pag. 238. Sect. 1.
                        But you say, they are as the garmentes of the Idoll, to the whiche we should say, auantCursed thigs consecrated to God. and get thee hence, they are as the garments of Balaamites, of Popish priests, enimies to God and all Christians. Be it so: so were all things in Hierico accursed, and an abhomination to the Lord, neither was it lawfull for the Israelites to touch any thing therof: and yet was the gold and the siluer, and the brasen and iron vessels caried into the treasure house of the Lord, and consecrated vnto him. Iosua. 6.
                        
                           Gedeon was commaunded to take and sacrifice that Oxe of his fathersGedeon sacrificed an oxe consecrated to Baal. to God, which his father had fedde, and brought vp to be sacrificed to Baal, yea and to burne that Oxe with the selfesame wood, that was consecrated and dedicated to the Idoll Baal. Iudic. 6.
                        
                        Our forefathers toke the temples dedicated wholly to Idolls, yea to Deuils, and most abhominably defiled with diuelish and abhominable seruice, and turned them into holy Churches, wher Christ should be worshipped.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 57. Sect. 6. 7.
                     Whereas you say that the accursed things of Iericho, and the Oxe, that was fedde to be 
                           〈1 line〉
                        anctified vnto Baal, and the wood consecrated vnto the Idoll, were conuerted to the seruice of the liuing God, when you shall proue that the surplis is so necessary to the seruice of God, as gold. and siluer, and other mettall, and as Oxen and wood, whereof the first sort were such, as without the which, the temple could not be built, the other, such as were expressely commaunded of God▪ to be vsed in his seruice, then I will confesse that this place maketh something for you. AndHere you disport your selfe, with your owne imagination. yet if your coapes and surplices. &c. should haue such a purgation by fyre, as thoseNo such purgation to be found in that place. metalls had, or euer the Lord would admitte them into his treasure house, and should be driuen to passe from Poperie vnto the gospell, by the Chimney, the fire would make suche wracke with them, that they should neede haue better legges, than your arguments, to bring them into the Church.
                     Moreouer, do you not see heere, that you haue not losed the knotte, but cut it? For the authors of the Admonition obiect the place of Esay. 30. and you obiect againe the places of Deuteronomy, and of the Iudges, this is to oppose sword against sword: in stead that you shoulde haue first holden out your buckler, and latched the blow of your aduersary. As for Churches, it hath bin answered that they haue a profitable vse, and therefore very euill compared with the surplis, whiche beside that it bringeth no profyte, hurteth also, as is before said.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        That wood, that golde, and that Oxe. &c. was not so necessary, but that bothe God might haue bin serued, and the temple builded without them: and therefore that is no answere.Things dedicated to idolls may be conuerted to gods honour. For although gold, wood, oxen. &c. be necessary, yet the golde and siluer founde in I
                              〈1 line〉
                           richo, the Oxe reserued by Gedeons father, and wood that was consecrated to Baal, was not so necessary: for there might haue bin other golde, siluer, wood, oxen. &c. prouided. In that God commaunded these things to be done, you know that S. Augustine (in the epistle ad Publicolam, in the words before rehearsed) doth conclude a generall doctrine, that things dedicated to Idolls may be conuerted to common vses, and to the honoure of God. For he vseth the selfesame places to proue the same, and answereth that, which may be alledged to the contrary out of Deuterono. So doth it also the place of Esay quoted in the margent of the Admonition: which answer if it will not satisfy you, then do I further referre you to that, which I haue also before alleadged out of M. Caluine writing vpon the. 23. of Exod. verse. 24. But thys place of Esay and suche lyke, are vnaptly alleadged agaynste the apparell nowe vsed, being

nothing of that nature, that those thinges be, whereof the Prophete in that place speaketh.
                        You say: if our coapes and surplices. &c. should haue suche a purgation by fyr
                              〈1 line〉
                           . &c. I pray you where reade you of any such purgation by fire of those metalls before they were admitted into the Lords treasure house? And what purgation by fire coulde there be of the wood, or of the oxe, before they were vsed in the sacrifice and s
                              〈1 line〉
                           ruice of the Lorde? There is no such purging of the things taken in Iericho mentioned in that Chapter, but theIosu. 6. ver. 24 contrary: for thus it is written. After they burnt the citie with fire, and all that was therein, only the siluer and gold, and the vessels of brasse and iron they put into the treasure house of the Lorde: and in the place before, where Iosua is commaunded to reserue these things, there is no commaundement of any such purging.
                        As your common answer is this, that such things haue profitable vses, and therfore may be reteyned, though they were consecrated to Idols (which is but a shift of your owne without any ground) so I say that these vestures haue a decent and comely vse, and be referred to order, and therefore may be reteyned likewise although they were vsed in Idolatrie. And if you shal answer and say that ther may be other things vsed mo
                              〈1 line〉
                           t comely and decently, then I reply, that so there may be places as commodious as these Churches: golde, siluer, wood. &c. as good and as profitable as that. And if you obiect that they be not comely and decent, then I say vnto you, that it is your part, and the part of all those, that be obedient, to submitte your selues to the iudgement of those that be in authoritie, except they commaund such things as be contrary to the commaundement of God.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Fol. 238. Sect. 2. 3.No man 
                              〈◊〉
                            defile the nature & form
                              〈1 line〉
                            of things.
                     
                     To be short, no Deuill, no Idoll, no Pope can so defile the nature or forme (not being contrary to the scriptures) of any of Gods creatures, that the libertie of a Christian man shuld be taken away in vsing, and not vsing them.Bucer.
                     
                     And I say againe with M. Bucer, that for any thing to be a note of Antichrist, is not in the nature of any creature in itselfe (for to that end nothing vvas made of God) but it hangeth altogyther of consenting to Antichristes religion, and the professing thereof: The vvhiche consente and profession being changed into the consente and profession of Christianitie, there can sticke in the thinges themselues no note or marke of Antichristes religion. The vse of bells vvas a marke of Antichristianitie in our Churches, vvhen the people by them vvere called to Masses, and vvhen they vvere roong against tempests, novv they are a token of Cstristianitie, vvhen the people by them are gathered togyther to the Gospell of Christ, and other holy actions. &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 57. Sect. vlt.
                     To be short (saith M. Doctor) when he reciteth me almost a whole side word for word, as he hath cited before, where he hath had his answer.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely this iesting spirite was neuer in any of the Apostles or Martyrs of Christes Church that I can reade: but to passe it ouer, M. Doctors Short is very shortly answered: the cause wherof I referre to the Reader. Howsoeuer you iest out the matter, you haue neither answered M. Doctors to be short, nor that which is translated.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 7. the third Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They serue not to edification.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 238. Sect. 3.
                        You say also that they do not edify. If you say that they do not edifyCeremonies do not edify of themselues but tend to edification. of themselues, you say truly: for only the holy Ghost on this sort doth edify, by the ministerie of the word. But if you say, they edifye not at all, that is, that they do not tend to edifying, as other ceremonies and things vsed in the Church (as Pulpit, Church, kneeling, singing and such like) which be appointed for order and decencie, do: then speake you that, whiche you are not able by sound arguments to iustify.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     To this not one word.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition Pag. 238. Sect. vlt.
                     
                        Peter Martyr in his epistle written to M. Hooper thinketh that they do edify after a sort as other ceremonies do. And so doth M. Bucer also in his epistle written to M. Alasco.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 57. Sect. vlt.
                     After this he setteth himselfe to proue that they do edify, and that firste by M. Bucers and M. Martyrs authoritie, and yet in their words before alleadged, there is not a word of edifying, If he gather it of their words, the answer is already made.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           I tell you it is in their epistles, not in their words before alleadged. M. Bucers worde
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              Bucer. be these. Now if any Church iudge and haue experience (such as I doubt not there are many at these days in Germany) that the vse of such vesture bringeth some commendation to the holy ministration, and thereby helpeth somewhat in the way of comelinesse and order, to the encrease of faithe: VVhat (I pray you) can be brought out of the scriptures why that Churche is not left to hir owne iudgement in this matter, neyther therefore to be contemned, or to be called into question for hir iudgement sake? That Church verely will keepe in these things a meane agreable to the crosse of Christ, and will diligently attend that no abuse creepe into it. Hitherto M. Bucer. To the like effect also writeth M. Martyr in the epistle before named.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Fol. 239. Sect. 1.
                     Furthermore, that they do edify, it is manifest, firste, bycause theyThe apparell doth tend to edifying for three causes. are by a lawfull magistrate, by lawfull authoritie, for order and decencie appoynted in the Church, without any manner of superstition, or suspicion of the same.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 57. Sect. vlt.
                     Then he bringeth reasons to proue it, whereof in the first he seemeth to reason that bycause it is commaunded by a lawfull magistrate, and lawfull authoritie, therefore it edifyeth. As though a lawfull magistrate doth nothing at any time vnlawfully, or as though a lawfull and a godly magistrate doth not sometimes commaund things, which are inconuenient and vnlawfull. Saule was a lawfull magistrate, and did commaund vnlawfull things. Dauid was a lawfull and godly magistrate,

and yet there flipt from him commaundements, which were neyther lawfull nor godly. But he addeth that it is done for order, and for decencie without superstition, or suspition of it. This is that, which is in controuersie, and ought to be proued, and M. Doctor still taketh it as graunted, and still faulteth in the petition of the principle, wherewith he chargeth others.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        That whiche is appointed in the Church by a lawfull magistrate, and by lawfull authoritie for order and decencie without any superstition or suspition of superstition doth edify as other orders do: but it is certaine that the apparell nowe vsed is so appointed, Ergo, it doth edify as other orders do.
                        You cauill at the maior, and bring in the examples of Saule and Dauid, to proue that a lawfull magistrate did commaund vnlawfull things, but you omitte the other circumstances conteined in the maior, and therefore you answer not to the purpose. The minor you saye is in controuersie, and I do fault in the petition of the principle. Surely I do petere y• 
                           principium, that no good subiect can denie. For the Quéenes maiestie is a lawful magistrate, the authoritie of Parliament is a lawful authoritie, hir maiestie by that authoritie hathe appointed this apparell, and that as it is protested for comelinesse and decencie without any superstition, Ergo, the minor is true. If you will yet doubte of comelinesse and decencie, then I still say vnto you, that what is comely and decent, is not euery mans part to iudge, but the magistrates and suche as haue authoritie in the Church.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag. 239. Sect. 2.
                     Secondly, bycause we are by due proofe and experience taughte, that such as haue worne this apparell, and do weare it, by the ministerie of the word haue greatly edifyed, and do dayly.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 58. Sect. 1.
                     The second reason is, that they that weare this apparell haue edifyed, and do edify, which is, as if a man would say, the midwiues which lyed vnto Pharao, did much good amongst the Israelits, Ergo their lying did much good. If he will say, the comparison is not like bycause the one is not sinne in his owne nature, whereas the other is sinne, then take this: One that stammereth and stutteth in his tong edifyeth the people, therefore stammering and stutting is good to edify. For what if the Lord giue his blessing vnto his word, and to other good gifts, which he hath that preacheth and weareth a surplis, &c. Is it to be thought therefore, that he liketh wel of the wearing of that apparell? This is to assigne the cause of a thing to that, which is not only not the cause thereof, but some hindrance also, and s
                           〈1 line〉
                        aking of that, whereof it is supposed to be a cause. For a man may rather reason, that for asmuch as they which preach with surplis. &c. edify (notwithstanding that they therby They that are driuen away 
                              〈1 line〉
                           or that cause do giue suspition of Anabaptisme. driue away some, and to othersome giue suspition of euill. &c.) then if they preached withoute wearing any such thinges, they should edify much more. And yet if a man were assured to gaine a thousand, by doing of that, which may offend, or cause to fall one brother, he ought not to do it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Indéede, if this apparell were of that nature, that a lye is, your similitude of the midwiues had some shew in it: and yet must you of necessitie confesse, that their lying to Pharao did much good per accidens: for otherwise the men children of the Israelites, and euen Moses himselfe had bin murthered: and you are not ignorant that diuers writers in this respect excuse that doing of theirs. You knowe likewise what the opinion of some is, touching that kynd of lye that is called officiosum mendacium: but for my part, I am in that point of Sainte Augustines iudgement. But your similitude is not lyke: and if it were, yet makes it agaynst you, for theyr lying dyd good, as I haue sayd e before.
                        Yo
                              〈1 line〉
                           r other similitude of stammering & stutting is ridiculous, and argueth your great

contempt of lawfull and decent orders. The lawes of this Churche haue prescribed this apparell to the ministers of the worde as decent, orderly, and comely, the same lawes haue inhibited those to preach, that refuse to submit themselues vnto such orders. Wherefore s
                              〈1 line〉
                           eing they be appointed as fit garments for preachers, and non
                              〈1 line〉
                            may preach, except he receiue them, they do edify, not by themselues, as I haue before declared, but per accidens, as all other suche like things do. For neyther the church, nor the Pulpit, nor the bells, nor 
                              〈◊〉
                            and such other do otherwise edify than per accidens.
                        
                        Touching offence that is taken at the wearing of this apparell, I haue shewed before, that it is an offence taken and not giuen: neyther is i
                              〈1 line〉
                            to be considered whether men be offended or no, but whether they haue any iust cause of offence. Many be offended with our Churches, and will neyther heare sermon, nor receiue the sacraments in them: we must not therefore pull downe our Churches, or cease to preach, and administer the Sacramentes in them. You must remember the destinction of scandalum acceptum and 
                              scandalum datum: an offence giuen, and an offence taken.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the seuenth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Fol. 239. Sect. 3.
                     Thirdly, bycause also by experience we dayly vnderstand, that such as consent in wearing this apparell, consent also in all other points of doctrine, and kepe the peace of the church, which is one of the principall causes of edifying: contrariwise, such as refuse the same apparel, not only dissent & disagree among themselues, but fal into diuers & strange opiniōs without stay: & slander the gospel with their contentiousnesse, and teare in peeces the Church of Christ with their factions and schismes: and be the cause why both the worde of God, and Christian magistrates be almost generally contemned.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 58. Sect. 2.
                     The thirde reason is, that they which consent in wearing the surplices, consent also in all other poyntes of doctrine, and they that doe not weare it, do not consent, not so muche as amongst themselues. I
                           〈1 line〉
                         this consent in the points of religion be in the surplice, cope. &c. tell vs I beseech you, whether in the matter, or in the forme, or in what h
                           〈1 line〉
                        dde and vnknowne qualitie standeth it? If it be n that the ministers vse all one apparell, then it is maruel
                           〈1 line〉
                         that this being so strong a bonde to holde them together in godlie vnitie, that it was neuer commaunded of Christe, nor practised of Prophets or Apostles, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ether of no other re
                           〈1 line〉
                        ormed Churches. I had thought wholly, that those things whiche the Lorde oppoynteth to mayntayne and keepe vnitie with, and 
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        specially the holie Sacramentes of Baptisme, and of the Lordes Supper, had bene strong ynough to haue fyrste of all knitte vs vnto the Lorde, and therefore also to his doctrine, and then one of vs to an other, and that the dissentings in suche a Ceremonie as a Surplice. &c. neyther should nor could in those that 
                           〈◊〉
                         vnto God, breake the vnitie of the Spirite, which is bounde with the bonde of truthe. And although there bee whyche lyke not this apparell, that thinke otherwyse than eyther theyr brethren, or than in deede they oughte to doe, yet a man may fynde greater dissent amongest those, whiche are vnyted in Surplice and Cope. &c. than there is amongest those whyche weare them not, eyther wyth them selues, or with them that weare them. For howe many there are that weare Surplices, whiche woulde bee 
                           〈◊〉
                         to saye a Masse, than to heare a Sermon, lette all the worlde iudge. And of those that 
                           〈◊〉
                         weare this apparell, and be otherwyse well mynded to the Gospell, are there not whiche wyl
                           〈1 line〉
                         weare the Surplice and not the cappe: other that will weare bothe cap end surplice, but not the tippet: and yet a thirde sorte, that will weare surplice, cappe, and tippet, but not the cop
                           〈1 line〉
                        ? It hathe bene the manner alwayes of wyse and learned men to esteeme of things by the causes, an
                           〈1 line〉
                         not by the euent, and that especially in matters of religion, for if they should be esteemed of the euent, who is there which wil not condemne the Israelites battel agaynst Aye, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         agaynst the Bemamites? which notwithstandyng, the cause which was Gods wil, and Gods 
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        maundement, iustifyeth. And therfore in a word I answer, that if there be such con
                           〈1 line〉
                        ent 
                           〈1 line〉
                        mongst those which like well of this apparel, and such 
                           〈1 line〉
                        arres amongst those yt like it not, as M. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
woulde make the worlde beleeue) neyther is the w
                           〈1 line〉
                        aryng of a surplice. &c. cause of that consent in thē, nor the not wearing, cause of that disagrement in the other. But as our knowledge and loue is vnperfect here in this world, so is our agreement and consent of iudgement vnperfect. And yet all these hard speaches of yours, or vncharitable suspicions of papisme, Anabaptisme, catharisme, dona
                           〈1 line〉
                        sme. &c. wherby you do as much (as lyeth in you) to cut vs cleane of from you, shall not be able so to estrange vs or separate vs from you, but that we will by gods grace holde, whatsoeuer you holde well, and kepe that vnitie of spirit, which is the bond of truth, euen with you Master Doctor whom we s
                           〈1 line〉
                        ppose as appeareth by this your booke, to haue set yourselfe further frō vs, than numbers of those, whiche althoughe they be content to receiue the apparell, and beare with things, yet would haue bene loth to haue set downe that against the sinceritie of the Gospell, and hind
                           〈1 line〉
                        rance of reformation, which you haue bone.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Such lawes & orders as kepe godly peace and vnitie in the Church do 
                              〈◊〉
                           , but the lawes for apparell kepe godly peace & vnitie in the Church, Ergo, they edifie. The M
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              nor I proue by experience of such as are subiect to these lawes & by the euent: which is a probable kinde of reasoning, though it be not necessarie: neither may the examples of a few improue that, which is generally true almost in all.
                        These persons, that you talke of, which be thus contrarily mynded (if there be any such, as I thinke you do but faine) yet do they kepe the peace of the Church, they condemne not their brethren, neither yet the apparel that they them selues (peraduenture for some speciall cause) weare not.
                        Some I know there are, which agrée with vs in wearing the apparell, and ioyne with you in contention: subscribe to all our orders & articles, and yet in certaine places and companies mainteine your opinions, but of such we make no accompt, neither I thinke do you, further than they may serue your turne.
                        Againe I confesse that there be some which haue not receiued the apparell, and yet greatly mislike many of your opinions, and kéepe with vs the vnitie of the Churche, whom I for my part haue alwayes reuerenced, & do reuerence not onely for their singular vertue & learning, but for their modestie also. Wherfore when I speake eyther of the one or of the other, I speake not of all, but of the most part.
                        Certaine it is, that those things which the Lord appointeth to kepe vnitie with, and especially the sacraments ought to be the especiall bond of the same: & that nothing should separate those, that are coupled and ioyned therein: but we sée it fall out othe
                              〈1 line〉
                           wise, such is the crooked & rebellious nature of mā, & therfore hath God also appointed Magistrats, and giuen them a
                              〈1 line〉
                           thoritie to make orders & lawes to mainteine the peace and vnitie of the Churche, that those which of conscience and good disposition will not, by suche lawes and orders may be constrained at the least to kéepe the externall peace and vnitie of the Churche. Doe you take this to be a good reason: The Sacrament
                              〈1 line〉
                            are bond
                              〈1 line〉
                            to kepe and mainteyne the v
                              〈1 line〉
                           itie of the spirite, therefore there 
                              〈◊〉
                            no lawes or MagistratesT. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . imagineth suche a perfection as is not to be 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ounde. to prouide for the externall peace and quietnesse of the Churche? your imagination throughoute your whole booke is of suche a perfection in men, as thoughe they néeded no lawes or Magistrates to gouerne them, but that euery man mighte be as it were a lawe to himselfe, whiche wherevnto it tendeth may easily be coniectured.
                        I haue not set downe any thing (I trust) to the hinderance of the Gospell, or of reformation▪ but I séeke to reforme such contentious spirites as be enimyes vnto both. And I beléeue that when some other (not onely such as you meane, but such as you least thinke of) shall vnderstande the depth of your opinions, together with the strangenesse, vntruth, da
                              〈1 line〉
                           gerousnesse & other circumstances ioyned with them, they will thinke that I haue spoken or written nothing eyther vntruely, or vnnecessarily. In the meane tyme I discharge my conscience and duetie, and so will doe (God willing) as long as I can either speake or write.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 7. the eight Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 239. Sect. 4.
                     I here omit that which I might as iustly bring for this kynde of apparell, as you do for sitting at the cōmunion: I meane a fit & profitable signification, wherof M. Martyr speaketh in the Epistle before mentioned on this sort: I vvill not here say, that they vvhich stand to theP. Martyr. defence of this matter, may pretend some honest and iuste significatiō of the apparell, and that not dissenting from the vvorde of God, vvhich is this: the Ministers of the Church (as the Prophet Malachie vvitnesseth) be Angels and Gods messengers: but Angels for the most parte appeared, beyng clothed in vvhite garmentes. I pray you hovv shall vve debarre the church of this libertie, that it can not signifie some good thing in setting forth their rites and ceremonies, especially being so done, that no manner of Gods honour is attributed vnto them, and that they be in sight comely, and in number fevve, and that Christian people be not vvith them ouerburdened, and matters of greater importance be omitted.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 59. Line. 5.
                     The white apparell which is a note and a true representation of the glory and purenesse in the Angels, should be a lying signe, and pretence of that, which is not in the Ministers, which are miserableMaster Mar
                              〈1 line〉
                           yrs words pe
                              〈1 line〉
                           uer. ted▪
                         and sinfull men. And our sauiour Christ, which was the minister of God, and pure from sinne, and therefore meetest to weare the markes of purenesse, vsed no suche kinde of wede, sauing onely for that small time, wherein he would giue to his disciples in the mount, a taste of that glory which he should enioy for euer, and they with him: where for the time his apparell appeared as white as snow. And if it be meete that ye ministers should represent the Angels in their apparell, it is much more meete, that they should haue a paire of winges as the Angels are described to haue, to put them in remembrance of their readinesse and quicknesse to execute their office, which may & ought to be in them, than to weare white apparell, which is a token of purenesse from sinne and infection, and of a glory, which neither they haue, nor can haue, nor ought so much as to desire to haue, as long as they be in this worlde. And whereas the mainteyners of this apparell, haue for theyr greatest defence, that it is a thing meere ciuill: to let passe, that they confounde ecclesiasticall orders with ciuill (which they can no more iustly doe, than to confounde the Churche wyth the common wealth) I saye to let that passe, they doe by this meanes not onely make it an Ecclesiasticall ceremonye, but also a matter of conscience. For if 
                           〈1 line〉
                        o be that the white apparell of the Minister haue any force, eyther to moue the people, or the Minister vnto greater purenesse, or to any other godlynesse whatsoeue
                           〈1 line〉
                        , then it is that which ought to be commaunded, and to be obeyed of necessitie, and to be reteyned, although the contrarie were forbidden. And then also if there be a vertue in a whitegarment, and the 
                           〈◊〉
                         thereof be so strong to worke godlynesse, it were meete that order were taken, Here you play with a feather. that the whitest cloth
                           〈1 line〉
                         shoulde be bought, that should be often (at the leaste euery weeke once) washed by a very good la
                           〈1 line〉
                        nder, and with sope: for if the white You vnderstand not this topicall place: for it ho
                              〈1 line〉
                           deth in those 
                              〈1 line〉
                           hings on ly, quae ꝑ 
                              〈◊〉
                            aliquid 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ac. unt. helpe, more white helpeth more, and that whych is most white, helpeth moste of all to godlynesse. Although
                           〈1 line〉
                         the Churche haue authoritie to make Ceremonyes (so they be accordyng to the rules before recited of Gods glory, and profiting the congregation) I coulde for all that neuer yet learne that it had power to gyue newe significations, as it were to institute newe Sacramentes. And by thys meanes is taken cleane away from vs, the holde whiche we haue agaynst the Papistes, whereby (agaynst all the goodly shewes which they make by the colour of these significations) we saye that the worde of God, and the Sacramentes of Baptisme, and of the Supper of the Lorde, are sufficient to teache, to admoni
                           〈1 line〉
                        he, and to put vs in remembraunce of all duetie whatsoeuer. So we are nowe come to the superstition of the Grecians, for as they wyll haue neyther grauen nor car
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        ed image in theyr Churches, but paynted, so will we neyther haue grauen nor carued, nor paynted, but wouen. And truely I see no cause why w
                           〈1 line〉
                         may not haue as wel holy water and holy bread, if thys reason which is heere, be good: for I am sure the significations of them are as glorious as this of the surplice, and call to remembrance as necessarie things. And if it be sayde, that it maye not be, leaste the number of Ceremonyes shoulde be to to greate, it maye be easily answered, that these whiche we haue maye be taken awaye, and those set in place of them. And therefore althoughe the surplice haue a blacke spottè, when it is whitest, yet is it not so blacke as you make it wyth your white significations, nor the cause so cu
                           〈1 line〉
                        ll, as you d
                           〈1 line〉
                        fende it.

If you presse me wyth M. Martyrs and M. Bucers authoritie, An easie kind of answering. I first say they were men, 
                           〈1 line〉
                         therefore (although otherwyse very watchfull) yet such as slept some times. And then I appeale from their Apocryphas, vnto their knowne writings, and from theyr priuate letters vnto theyr publike recordes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue here onely set downe M. Martyrs words to shew that I might as iustly bring in a fit and profitable signification of the apparell, as the authors of the Admonition doe of sitting at the communion. I dyd not allow their signification of sitting, neyther doe I approue any suche signification of Apparell: but yet you will gyue me leaue to set the one agaynste the other, and to shewe that I mighte aswell doe the one as they doe the other.
                        You peruert Master Martyrs wordes: for he sayth that for as muche as Angels appearedMeere ciuill things may haue signification. in white apparell, and the Ministers of the Churche be Angels and Gods messengers, therefore the Churche maye appoynt to hir Ministers suche apparell in signification of their office. Which you doe not answere, but range vp and downe at your pleasure like vnto a spaniell not taughte to followe his game. M. Martyr doth not say that the apparell is a signe of purenesse that is in the Minister: and therefore all this that youThe forme of apparell may put a man in minde of 
                                 〈◊〉
                               dutie. write in confuting of that, myght haue bene cutte off, and very well spared. But if Master Martyr shoulde haue sayde that it maye be a signe of the purenesse that oughte to be in Ministers, you are to séeke for an answere as yet. Christ beyng puritie it selfe néeded nothyng to put hym in mynde thereof, but man beyng impure may haue externall instrumentes to byd hym (as it were) remember what he ought to be. I thinke that seuerall kyndes of habites be appoynted to men of diuerse degrées and calling, partly for that purpose: and if a man in graue apparell vse hymselfe lightly or wantonly, we vse commonly to saye suche behauiour becommeth not that apparell, meanyng that hys habite and apparell oughte to put him in mynde of modestie and grauitie: and thys doth argue that euen méere ciuill things maye haue significations, whiche ouerthroweth an other argument of yours, whereby you woulde proue that the apparell muste of necessitie be an ecclesiasticall ceremonie, bycause there is attributed vnto it some signification. Whether it be a matter meare ciuill, or meare Ecclesiasticall, or mixt of both, is not now the questiō, neither yet whether the Church may be confounded wyth the common wealth or no, and therfore I will not here deale with anye of them, leaste I shoulde confounde both the matter, and the Reader: onely I speake of your argument, whiche is confuted by common vsage: for seuerall habites in the vniuersities signifie seuerall degrées in learnyng: seuerall kynde of apparell, seuerall callings and functions in the common wealthe: and thys apparell doth put euerie man in mynde of hys duetie, and yet they are not longer to be reteined than the Magistrate and the lawes doe permitte: but are alterable accordyng to tymes, places, and persons: No man sayth that there is vertue in such garmentes or power to worke godlynesse, and therefore your pretie iestes builded vpon that ground are vayne and toyish, and your topicall place not rightly vnderstanded: for it is ment of such things, quae per se aliquid faciunt.
                        
                        Euery thing that signifieth any thing is not a sacrament, for then were Matrimonie asacrament, and so were laying on of hands, and such like.
                        The Papistes vsed vnlawfull signes, and attributed vnto them life and death, for they made them necessarie to saluation.
                        Images whether they be grauen, paynted or wouen, are agaynste the expresse commaundement of God, and therefore these be vnapte similitudes, neyther woulde you haue vsed them, if you had well considered M. Martyrs wordes.
                        The same I answere to your allegation of holy water and holy bread, they be pseudoadiaphora, and haue annexed vnto them opinion of saluation and of worship: all which we vtterly remoue from these orders.
                        
                           Your answere to M. Martyrs & M. Bucers authoritie is sure, but not greatly commendable:T. C. refuseth ye iudgement of learned men, whē he cannot otherwise anwere them. In mens wri tings the circumstances of time and place must be distin guished. for it is the easiest, but the worst answere that can be to denie the authoritie of wise, learned, & famous men, & that without reason, & onely by cauilling. These be their knowne writings, and they be written of purpose vpon these controuersies according to the circumstances of time, place and person, and therefore if any thing in their publike writings séeme to be against their iudgements here, distinguishe the tyme and other circumstances, and I doubt not but they will well agrée with themselues. Interim, you doe your endeuour to deface them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the ninth Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They haue the shewe of euill, (seing the Popishe priesthood is euill.)
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 240. Sect. 2.
                        When they were a signe and token of the Popishe priesthood, thenHow apparell is a signe of euill, and how otherwise. were they euil, euen as the thing was, which they signified: but now they be the tokens & the signes of the ministers of the worde of God which are good, & therfore also they be good: no man in this Church of England is so ignorant, but that he knoweth this apparell not to be nowe the signes of a Massing Priest, but of a lawfull Minister: wherfore it is a shew of good: euen as it is in the like manner in the vniuersities a shewe and signe of degrees in learning, and therefore a shewe of good, excepte you will also condemne degrees of learning. Neither is it any straunge matter, for the selfe same thing in diuerse respects, and at diuerse times, to be the signe both of good and euill. The bels were a signe of euill, whē they were rung to cal to Masse, and to stay stormes and tempests, the selfe same bels are now a signe of good, when they be rung to Sermons and other godly actions. The Churches themselues were a signe of euil, whē Idolatrie was committed in them, & false doctrine preached: now they be a signe of good, when God is rightly worshipped in them: & his worde truely preached. Many such examples I could bring, but a reasonable mā can gather of these sufficiently to confute your error. Futhermore when we be willed to absteyne from all shewe of euill, it is ment of euill life, and euil doctrine, least we doe any thing with a scrupulous conscience.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 59. tovvardes the ende.
                     M. Doctor proceedeth to proue that they are signes & shewes of good & not of euil, as ye authors of the Admonition alleage. To the proofe whereof, although (according to his manner) he repeateth diuerse things before alleaged, yet the summe of all he hathe comprehended in an argument, which is, that for so muche as the ministers are good which weare them, therefore they are also good: and bicause the ministers, whereof the apparell are notes, and markes, be good: therefore those be good notes and good markes: so the reason is, they are notes, and notes of good ministers, therefore they be good notes of the ministers. So I will proue the names of Idols to be fit and conuenient names for good men to be called by. Beltshaser, Saddrake, Misacke, and Abed-nego were names of Daniell and his three companions, and they were the names of good men, therefore they are good names of men. And so the names of the Babilonian Idols, are by this reason of M. Doctor iustified to be good names. Againe the golden calfe, was a signe. Also it was Vntruth. a signe of the true God: therefore it was a true signe of God. Concerning the notes of ciuill professions, and what difference is betwene those and this cause, I haue spoken before.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Admonition sayth thus: they haue the shew of euill, seing ye popish priesthood is euill. To this I answer that whē they were a signe & token of the popish priesthood, then they were euill, & a signe of euill, bicause the thing was euill, which they signified: but now they are tokens of the Ministers of the Gospell which are good, and therfore they are good, & the signes of good. The reason is M. Bucers: I am not ashamed of my author, and it is stronger than you can ouerthrowe. For let me heare howe you will answere this argument: whatsoeuer signifieth and noteth that which is good, is a signe of good: but this apparell signifieth that which is good, Ergo, it is a signe of good. The Maior is euident. The Minor is thus proued. The ministerie of the Gospell is good: but this apparel is a signe of the ministerie of the Gospell, Ergo it is a signe of good. All the Logike you haue can not answere this argument, except you will denie the apparell to be the signe of the ministerie of the Gospel, which were to denie yt which is subiect to the senses: the other examples that I haue vsed, doth make this matter more manifest. I referre it to the Reader to iudge how fitly you haue answered them.
                        Whether they be good signes, or no, is not nowe the question, but whether they be signes of good, for that the Admonition denieth. If you can conclude that they be euill, bicause they be signes of euill, why may not I likewise say that they be good, bicause they be signes of good. We commonly call that a good signe, which is a signe of good, neyther can you place this reason in any fallacian, it is a signe of good, Ergo, it is a good signe: for it is called a good signe in this respect onely, that it signifieth that, which is good.
                        Those names in respect of those whom they signified were good: in the respect of theExternall things may be both good and euill in diuers respects. The diuers 
                                 〈◊〉
                               vsed b
                                 〈1 line〉
                               T. C. in answering. Idols, to whome they properly belonged, they were euill: for such externall things in diuers respects may be both good & euill. The golden calfe was an Idoll made to be worshipped, no signe of the true God, and therfore vndiscretly here brought in.
                        Wheresoeuer I haue before alleaged these things you speake of, yet be they answered neither here nor there: & this the Reader may note if he list, that whersoeuer you cannot answere, there either you frumpe & girde after your maner, or you cauill and confute your owne imagination, or closely passe the matter ouer in silence, or poste it ouer to some other place, where you speake nothing of it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the tenth Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They worke discorde, they hinder the preaching of the Gospell.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 241. Sect. 2.
                        This is an argumente à non causa ad causam: it is not the apparell thatNon causa procausa. worketh discorde, or hindereth the preaching of the Gospell, no, no more than it is the worde of God that engendreth heresies, or wyne that maketh drunke, or the sworde that murthereth, or the law that worketh iniurie. &c. But it is the sinister affection, the rebellious nature, the contentious minde of man. For who began this contention, or when was it begon? Truely if the lawe for apparell were vtterly abrogated, yet would not your contentiō cease, nay, it would burst out muche more vehemently, and in farre greater matters, as this your Admonition declareth. And therefore I thinke rather, that the lawe for apparell will stay further contentions, especially if it be duely executed.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 60. Sect. 1.
                     You say the cause of disorder is not in the apparell, but in the mindes of men. You meane I am sure, those that refuse the apparell, but if you make them authors of discorde, bycause they consente not wyth you in wearing, do you not see it is It is as sone sayd but not so truely, bycause the one ret
                              〈1 line〉
                           yneth order, and the other breaketh it. assone sayd, that you are the causers of discord, bycause you doe not consent with those which weare not? For as there should be vnitie in that point if all did weare that apparell, so shoulde there be, if all did weare none of it. It is a very vnequall comparison that you compare the vse of this apparell, with the vse of wyne, and of a sworde, which are profitable and necessarie, but it is more intollerable, that you match it with the worde of God. I coulde throwe it as farre downe, as you li
                           〈1 line〉
                        te it vp, but I will not doe so. This onely I wyll say, if there were no harme in it, and that it were also profitable, yet forasmuch as it is not commaū
                        ded of God expressely, but a thing (as you say) indifferent, and notwithstanding is cause of so manie incommodities, and so abused (as I haue before declared) it ought to be sufficient reason to abolishe them: seing that the brasen serpent, which was instituted of the Lorde himselfe, and conteyned a profitable remembrance of the wonderfull benefite of God towardes his people, was beaten to pouder, when as it beganne to be an occasion of falling vnto the children of Israell: and seeing that S. Paule after the loue feastes (which were kepte at the administration of the Lordes1. Cor. 11. Supper, and were meanes to nourish
                           〈1 line〉
                         loue amongst the Churches) were abused and drawne to another vse than they were first ordeyned, did vtterly take them away, and commaunde that they should not be vsed any more.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           I may answere you almost in the selfe same wordes and maner, that M. Zuinglius answered one Balthazar an Anabaptist, who charged him then, as you charge vs nowZuinglius ad. Balt. in this place: consider, saith he, who be the authors and causes of dissention: whether we that attempt nothing of our owne priuate authoritie, but haue submitted our selues to the iudgement of the Church, and of those that be gouernours of the same, or rather you, who so arrogantly, without any such authoritie doe what you list, speake what you list, allow and condemne at your pleasure▪ 
                           But for further tryall hereof, I referre you to such notes, as I haue collected out of Zuinglius and others, and placed in the second edition of myPag. 19. &c. Answere to the Admonition.
                        
                        Our consenting is according to our duetie required of vs by the worde of God towards such as be in authoritie: your dissenting is contrarie to your dutie of obedience in such cases inioyned vnto you by the word of God. If all refused the apparell wyth you, yet would you not be quiet, for you make this the least cause of your schisme. I do not compare this apparell with the word of God, but by these examples I shew the vnaptnesse of such arguments as be à non causa ad causam. You haue throwne it downe as low as you can, and if you could cast it lower, your will is good, & therfore to say you coulde do it and wil not, is as great an offence as was the midwiues lying to Pharao.
                        I haue shewed in my answere, that as the case now standeth, it is rather commodious: as for abuses in it, as it is nowe vsed, you haue hitherto shewed none, & if it were abused, yet doth it not follow that therefore it is to be remoued, except the abuse coulde not be taken away without the abolishing of the thing, as it was in the brasen serpent: which serpent though it was by God commaūded to be set vp, yet was it (as M. Martyr saith) but for that time, wherin power was giuen vnto it to heale and cure those that were bitten of the serpents, Num. 21. and therfore being but temporal, and thus abused,Num. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . was lawfully takē away, neither would the Idolatrie committed vnto it otherwise haue ceased. But do you thinke that any man doth worship the apparell, as the Israelites did worship the serpent? S. Paul in that Chapter of the. 1. Cor. reproueth1. Cor. 11. them for certaine abuses about the Lords Supper, whereof this was one of the chiefe, that they made it an occasion of feasting and banquetting, which maner of feasting in the Church was not onely borowed of the gentils, as M. Bullinger sayth, but occasion also of much contention, and very vnséemely for that time and place. And as Master Caluine sayth vpon that place. The Corinthians are reproued, bycause they had mingledCaluine. prophane banquettes (and that also with the contumely of the poore) with that holy and spirituall feast: and therefore expedient it was, that they shoulde betaken awaye, and if you can shewe the like vncurable abuse in the apparell, I will crye away with it, as fast as you do.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 7. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They keepe the memorie of Egypt still amongst vs, and put vs in minde of that abhomination wherevnto they in times past haue serued, they bring the ministerie into contempt, they offende the weake, they encorage the obstinate.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 241. Sect. 3. 4. 5.
                        You saye, they keepe the memorie of Egypt still amongst vs. &c. No truely, no more than dothe the Churche, the Pulpit, the Bells. &c. but they teache vs the true vse of Christian libertie: and that all things be cleane to those that be cleane. Finally, that godly men may well vse that which wicked haue abused, howsoeuer vngodly.
                        
                           They bring the ministerie into contempte: Onely with you, and suche as you (by your continuall crying out agaynst them) haue deluded: contemners of good orders, lawes, and statutes, are to be seuerely punished for their contempt. Good lawes, orders, and statutes are not to be altered or dissolued, bicause by suche as forget their dueties, they are contemned.
                        
                           They offende the weake, and encourage the obstinate: Those that be offended with them, thinke themselues moste strong, and glorie therin with condemning of others. The obstinate be encouraged throughe the schismes, & contentions, that you trouble the Church, and slaunder the Gospell with: which one day you will vnderstande, if in tyme you doe not repent.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 60. Sect. 2.
                     The rest of that whiche followeth in this matter, is nothing else, but eyther that whiche hath bin oftenti
                           〈1 line〉
                        es repeated, or else reprochefull words, or vniust accusations of contempt of Magistrates, withou
                           〈1 line〉
                         any proofe at all, and therefore are suche as eyther are answered, or which I will not voutchs
                           〈1 line〉
                        e to answere, especially seeing I meane not to T
                              〈1 line〉
                           ue, for 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           aue 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            for one. giue reproche and reuiling for reuiling: and seeing that I haue before protested of our humble submission, and louing feare or reuerence, whiche we beare to the Prince, and those whiche are appoynted Magistrates vnderneathe hir.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is a shorte answere, to say you will not voutchsafe to answere. What reprochfull wordes, or vniust accusations are héere vttered by me? excepte this offende you, that I saye, contemners of good orders, lawes, and statutes, are to be seuerely punished for their contempt. Good lawes, orders, and statutes are not to be altered and dissolued, bicause by suche as forget their dueties, they be contemned. If this cast you into that choler, I can not mende it: you must beare with me when I speake the truthe.
                        Whether of vs two haue more offended in reprochings and reuilings, bicause we are both partiall in our owne causes, let vs referre it to the indifferent Readers. How farre you are from performing that in déede to the Magistrates, that you protest in worde, is in another place declared.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the twelfth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 60. Sect. 3.
                     And therefore I will conclude, that forsomuche as the ceremonies of Antichristianitie, are not, nor can not be, the fittest to set foorthe the Gospell, and for that they are occasions of fall to

some, of hinderaunce to other some, of griefe and alienation of mindes vnto others (the contrarie of all which ought to be considered in establishing of things indifferent in the Churche) therefore neyther is this apparell fittest for the minister of the Gospell, and if it were, yet considering the incommodities that come of the vse of it, it should be remoued.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This conclusion consisteth wholly vpon false principles, whereof though some of them haue bin before spoken, yet not one of them proued: for tryall wherof I referr
                              〈1 line〉
                            the Reader to that, which we haue bothe written of this matter.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Admonition.
                     The twelfth. Then as God gaue vtterance Iohn. 6. 38. Ioh. 12. 49. 1. Co. 11. 23 they preached the worde onely: Now they reade Homelyes, Articles, Iniunctions. &c.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 62. Sect. 3.
                        Heere you quote in the margente the sixte of Iohn, verse. 38. where Christ sayth, that he came dovvne from heauen not to doe his ovvne vvill, but the vvill of his father that sente him. Likewyse the twelfth of Iohn, verse. 49. where also he saythe, that he hathe not spoken of him selfe, but the father that sent him, gaue him commaundement vvhat he shoulde say, and what he shoulde speake. And the first to the Corinthians. 11. Chapter, verse. 23. where S. Paule sayth, that he receyued of the Lorde that vvhiche he deliuered vnto them. No man denieth but that the worde of God onely ought to be preached, and that as God giueth vtterance. But doe you meane that we may not studie for our sermons, or that we may speake nothing but the veryScriptures may be amplified. texte of Scripture, without amplifying or expounding the same? when I knowe your meaning heerein, you shall vnderstande more of my minde. In the meane tyme, this I am sure of, that the Homilies appoynted to be read in the Churche, are learned, godly, agreable to Gods worde, and more effectuall to edification, than a number of your Sermons, whiche consiste in wordes onely, and entreate of little else, but of cappe, surplesse. &c. Archbishop, Lorde Bishop. &c. the ende whereof is not edification, but contention. Homilies read in the Churche haue alwayes beene commendable,Homilies red in the Church are commendable. and vsuall euen from the beginning, looke Augustine, Chrysostome and others: and why maye not Articles and Iniunctions, beeing collected to the setting foorthe of true Religion and good orders in the Churche be read there also as in a moste meete place? But I perceyue you are enimies to reading, bicause you loue so wel to heare your selues talking, I will say no worse.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 60. Sect. 4.
                     You know they allowe studying for sermons, and amplifying & expounding of the scriptures, and why then doe you aske? But by this question you would haue your Reader thinke, or at the least haue the Authors of the Admonition in suspicion, that they lyked not of studie for sermons. God make vs more careful of the good name of our brethren, than by suche light and vngrounded suspicions, nay without any suspicion, nay, contrarie to that which is dayly seene & hard, to rayse vp suche slanderous reportes of them. But Homilies are smally beholding vnto you, which to proue that they may be read in the Churche, alleage that Augustine and Chrysostome made sermons in their Churches: for that which we call a sermon, they called of the Greeke worde an Homilie, so that the argument is, that Augustine and Chrysostome preached sermons or homilies in their Churches, therefore we may reade Homilies in ours. But peraduenture you haue some better thing to say for them afterwarde.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue heard some fautors of theirs earnestly reason agaynst studying for sermons, and it is not long since it was almoste in playne termes in the Pulpit preached. I thinke they studie for their sermons, but howe diligently they studie, or whether they would séeme to studie, or no, I knowe not: the wordes of the Admonition are very suspicious.
                        That whiche I speake of Augustine and Chrysostome aptly serueth for my purpose: for althoughe they were Augustines and Chrysostomes sermons, yet in that they haue bothe committed them to writing, and lefte them to their posteritie, it argueth that they thought them to be very profitable for the Church: Neyther do I sée any cause why they should rather nowe be thought vnlawfull to be read, than they were then to be preached: but yet one thing we may note, that bothe Augustine and Chrysostome writte their Homilies or sermons, and therefore it may be that they did also sometime reade them in the Churche.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of Archebishops, Metropolitanes, Bishops, Archedeacons. &c. Tract. 8.
            
               The reasons of T. C. answered, whereby he goeth about to take away the superfluous loppe (as he termeth it) of these offyces.
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The thirtenth and fourtenth. Then 1. Tim. 3. 1. it was paynefull: nowe gaynefull. Phil. 4. 11. 2. Cor. 6. 4. 8. 10. Then poore and ignominious: nowe riche and glorious.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 63. Sect. vlt.
                        It was then as it vseth to be vnder the crosse. And it is now as it
                              Scil the ministerie. vseth to be when God doth blesse it with peace, quietnesse, and godly Magistrates: And yet surely euen now it is more paynefull than gaynefull, more ignomious than riche and glorious: and that doe those knowe that beare the heate of the daye. But it is the moreThe ministerie is nowe more payneful than gaineful▪
                            paynfull and ignominious for you, who ceasse not with rayling and spitefull words in Pulpits and at tables, to depraue and backebite your brethren, & to trouble the whole state with your factions and dayly inuented newe opinions: the persecution of the sworde ceasseth, but the persecution of the tongue is extreme hotte: and we who gayne so muche, and be so glorious, are molested aswell by you, as by the Papist, and Atheist: and therfore not very glorious.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 61. Sect. 1.
                     A hundreth poundes by yere is taken of some benefice, for whiche foure sermons onely are preached, and those sometimes by an other. If this be more paynefull than gaynefull, it is bicause the horseleeche hath two daughters, giue, giue. &c. And I can not seehowe they can be more glorious,Pro. 30. vnlesse the Palace were turned into a Court, and their chayre into a throne. There are diuersThe twelfth of Mat. straungely applyed. places that God hathe blessed with peace; where the ministers take more payne, and haueMath. 12. lesse gayne; and whiche make (*) lesse noyses, when they goe in the streates. We haue A vayne bragge, thoug
                              〈1 line〉
                            it were true. amongst vs which haue had Bishoprickes offered, and as things vnmeete for a minister of the Gospell, haue refuse
                           〈1 line〉
                         them▪ God be praysed the sunne shineth not so hotte in this countrey nowe, that you neede to complayne of any great heate, and if you feele any heate, you haue better shade than Ionas had by his gourde▪
                     
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It may be that he which hath an hundreth poundes by the yere, for whiche foure sermons onely are preached. &c. (if there be any suche) taketh more paynes for the Churche, is more carefull for the state of it, suffereth more opprobrious wordes, and false slaunders (whiche is not the least kinde of persecution) for dooing his duetie, and kéeping him selfe within the listes of obedience towardes God and his Prince, than those doe that glorie moste of persecution, and lacke of liuing. He that hathe muche, is also occasioned to spende muche: neyther is his paynes the lesse, but more, if he be once desirous to doe his duetie. And the higher he is in degrée, the more subiecte to the enuious backbiter, and to the slaunderous tongue.
                        Those that haue suche Palaces, and make suche noyse when they goe in the streates. &c. I thinke verily take more paynes and care in and for the Churche of God, profite their Countrey more in one moneth, than you and all your company do in a whole yere: Nay, I woulde to God it might be sayde you profited. Their pompe and their Palaces are by lawfull authoritie committed vnto them, and the true Martyrs of God haue occupied the same, or the like before them, and yet Martyrs too.
                        Who amongst you they be that haue had Bishoprickes offered vnto them, I knowe not: but if they boast of their deniall, and haue suborned you to make it knowne, they haue their rewarde. It maye be the Bishopricke was to little for them, and they looked for some greater, and so missed bothe: but I will not iudge: surely this bragge commeth héere out of place.
                        The heate of the tongue and backbiter, bothe I and other may greatly complayne of: and I hope we get not our liuing by going vp and downe the streates, and feasting dayly at other mens tables, or as Diogenes did, by disdayning and contemning all others. 
                              Melius est vinum bibere cum ratione, quàm aquam cum fastu & superbia, It is better to drinke wyne with discretion, than water with haughtinesse and pride. It is also more acceptable to God to dwell in a Palace, and liue in abundance, with dooing a mans duetie towarde God and his Churche, than to lye in prison for disdayne and contempte. Godly men may enioy preferment, and suche as be arrogant and wilfull, may séeme to contemne the same.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     And therefore titles, liuings, & offices by Antichrist deuised, are giuen to them, as Metropolitane, Archebishop, Lordes grace, Lorde Bishop, Suffragane, Deane, Archedeacon, Prelate of the garter, Earle, Countie Palatine, Honor, highe Commissioners, Iustices of Peace and Quorum. &c. All whiche togither with their offices, as they are straunge and vnhearde of in Christes Churche, nay playnly Ma. 23. 11. 12. Luc. 22. 25. 1. Cor. 4. 1. 1. Pet. 5. 2. 3 in Christes worde forbidden: so are they vtterly with speede out of the same to be remoued.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 64. Sect. 2.
                        Heere you are in your ruffe, but you shewe your ignorance and contemptuous stomacke. You haue giuen sentence that the names of Metropolitane, Archebishoppe. &c. and their offyces, were deuised by Antichriste. Likewise that they are strange and vnheard of in Christes Church. Also that they be playnely in Gods worde forbidden: and laste that they are vtterly with speede to be remoued. If you can proue all these poyntes, it is tyme the Churche were transformed, and the whole kynde of gouernment of this Realme altered. But if you can not proue them, then is it highe tyme that suche insolencie shoulde bee repressed, and perturbers of Churches and common wealthes refourmed. Well, I muste doe the best I can to improue all these poyntes, whiche

I mighte doe sufficiently, if I shoulde as barely denie them, as you haue affirmed them: but I will not deale so nakedly in so great a matter.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 61. Sect. 2.
                     Of those offices something hathe bin spoken before, where it hathe bin proued out of the words of Christ, that neyther the names, nor offices of Archbishop, or Archdeacons do agree to the ministerie of the Gospell. Now as M. Doctor bestoweth great cost heere, and trauell in digging about them, and laying (as it were) newe earth to their rootes, that they beeing halfe deade, if it were possible, might be recouered and quickened agayne. So I 1. Bicause they florishe more prosperously, than the enuious man can well beare. (bicause these trees mounte vp so highe, and spread their boughes and armes so brode, that for the colde shade of them, nothing can growe and thriue by them) will before I come to answere these things that are heere alleaged, set downe certayne reasons (as it were instrumentes) to take away the superfiuous loppe and spread of their immoderate offices.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        T. C. hathe a speciall quarell agaynst Archebishops, Bishops, and other that haueT. C. maketh his chief quarell agaynst those in authoritie in the Churche, and whye he so doth. What kinde of equalitie is pretended. the name of authoritie and degrée in the Churche. For he perceyueth that they be the principal stoppes and hinderances of his confused platforme, and that also they be the enimies vnto sectes and contentions, wherwith he is so greatly delighted. Moreouer he and many of his adherents, be of that nature whereof Cesar and Pompey were reported to be: the one could abide no superiour, the other no equall: euen so is it with them, as it is well knowne to those that haue bin conuersant with some of them. And although they pretende equalitie in words, yet if you marke well their writings, it shall easily appeare, that they meane it in others, not in them selues, for they would haue him to be the best rewarded, & most reuerenced, that hath the most & best giftes, which euery one of these chiefe captaynes persuaded himselfe to haue: so that in ye end there would be as great a do (after their maner) which of them should be the chiefe, as euer there was betwixt the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops, or betwixt Canterburie and Yorke in times past. In the meane time you may easily vnderstande, if you please, that notwithstanding they themselues would be exempted from the iurisdiction of Archbishop, Lorde Bishop. &c. yet doe they chalenge vnto themselues as great iurisdiction ouer their Parishes, and as loftie dominion ouer Prince, Nobles, and all, as euer the Pope did ouer the whole Church, as shall (God willing) be more fully declared, when I come to speake of their seigniory and kinde of gouernment. Nowe to his Reply.
                        Where hath something bin spoken before of these offices & names? Or what arguments haue you hitherto vsed to proue that they do not agrée to the Ministers of the Gospell: If you haue so done, I trust you are fully answered in that same place. But I promise you I doe not presently remember where you haue hitherto done it. If you meane the places of Math. 20. &c. you haue your full answere.
                        I haue bestowed the more cost and labour in this matter, bicause I sée your chiefe force bent agaynst it. For marke you who will, all your drift is agaynst superiours. But let vs heare your reasons.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 61. Sect. 3.
                     And for the names first, I desire the reader, that we be not thought studious of contention, bicause we striue about the name of Archbishop. &c. For this is not to striue about words, vnlesse it be counted a strife of words, which is taken for the maintenāce of the word of God, as it hath before appeared out of the Euangelistes. Then it must be remembred which Aristotle sayth very well in his Elenches, that 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         which is, that names are imitations, or as it were, expresse images of the things whereof they are names, and doe for the moste parte bring to him that heareth them, knowledge of the things that are signified by them. Howsoeuer the thing be it selfe, yet oftentimes it is supposed to be as the name pretendeth, & therevpon followeth that a man may be easily deceyued, when the names doe not answere to the things wherof they are names. There may be (I graunt) a free and more licencious vse of names, but that licence is more tollerable in any thing, rather thā in matters of the Church & saluation. And if there be some cases, wherin names that are not so proper, may be borne with, yet are there also whiche are intollerable. As who can abide that a minister of the Gospel should be called by the name of

                        
                           〈1 line〉
                         Leui
                           〈1 line〉
                        e, or sacrificer, vnlesse it be he which would not care muche, if the remembrance of the death and resurrection of our sauiour Christ, were plucked out of his minde? Agayne it is vnlawful for any man to take vpon him those titles which are proper to our sauiour Christ: but the title If Christ be called an Archbishop, then is not the title deuised by Anti
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           hrist. of an Archbishop is onely proper to our sauiour Christ, therfore no man may take that vnto him. That it is proper to our sauiour Christ, appeareth by that which S. Peter sayth, where he calleth him1. Epist. 5. Heb. 13. Act. 3. 5. Heb. 1
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , which is Archesheph
                           〈1 line〉
                        ard, or Archbishop: for Bishop and shepheard are all one. And in the Hebrues where he is called the great shepheard of the sheepe: and in the Actes, and Hebrues, archeleader of life & of saluation, which titles are neuer founde to be giuen vnto any, but vnt
                           〈1 line〉
                         our sauiour Christ, and are proper titles of his mediation, and therefore can not be without 
                           〈1 line〉
                        olde presumption, applied vnto any mortall man.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To contende about names, when there is an agréement of the ma
                              〈1 line〉
                           ter and substance, hath alwaye
                              〈1 line〉
                            bin taken for a manifest note of a contentious Sophister. But your answere is ready that you contende for the substance also, whiche 
                              〈◊〉
                            true you mighte haue cut of the most part of this section, whereby you would excuse your selfe for improuing the name of an Archebishop. But to come to the purpose, you say It is vnlawful for any man to take vpon him those titles, which are proper to our sauiour Christ: but the title of Archbishop is onely proper to our sauiour Christ, therefore. &c. The minor you proue by the wordes of S Peter. 1. Epist. chap. 5. where he calleth him 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            and Actes. 3. 5. and. 13. to the Hebrues. &c. where he is called the great shephearde of the sheepe, archeleader. &c. But before I come to your minor, I muste a little better searche your maior, for you passe it ouer smothly, as though there could be nothing said vnto it.
                        I graunt that those names which be proper vnto God, can not be giuen to any other,Names proper to God maye in some respect be attributed to other. in that respecte that they are proper vnto God: but that they can in no other respect be attributed to any other, it is vntrue, and agaynst the manyfest words of the scriptures. What name is more proper vnto God, than is this name, God. And yet is the same also attributed vnto man. Moses Exod. 7. is called Pharaoes God, bicause he was Gods minister to speake vnto Phar
                              〈1 line〉
                           o in his name, and to execute his iudgements vpon him. Nec verò (as M. Caluin
                              〈1 line〉
                            sayth) 
                              quicquā sibi detr
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 xit Deus. &c.
                              Cal. in Harm. Neyther did God derogate any thing from himselfe, in that he transferred (his name) vnto Moses, bicause he doth so communicate that, which is proper to himselfe with his ser
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ants, that he still remayneth whole. In the. 22. of Exod. the Iudges are called Gods, 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            in the. 82. Psalme, Magistrates are called Gods also. In the. 23 of Math. Christ speaketh of the names of Master, Father, & Doctor, as proper to himselfe, for he sayth, be not y
                                 〈1 line〉
                               called Rabbi, for one is your master, to wit Christ. &c. And call no man your father vpon earth, for there is but one your father, which is in heauen. Be not called Doctors for one is your Doctor, euen Christ, and yet no man is so ignorant that he wil denie these names to be common to others, though not in the same respectes, as I haue shewed before. Christ also calleth himselfe a Pastor, Ioh. 10. and so doth S. Peter call him Bishop and Pastor, 1. Epist. 3. and so he is properly & of himselfe, & yet these names be cōmunicated with other. In the. 8. of Ioh. he is called Lux mundi, which is a most proper name, aptly giuen vnto him, & yet doth he himself giue the same name to his Disciples, Mat. 5. Diuers such exāples might I shew for ye improuing of your maior, but these be sufficient.
                        Thus therefore I answere in fewe wordes, bothe to your maior & minor, that someHowe ye name Archbishop may be trans
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              rred to other than Christ. names that be proper to God are also attributed vnto man, but not in the same respect: for they belong vnto God properly and per s
                                 〈1 line〉
                              , to man per accidens, and in respecte that he is the minister of God, and suche other like causes. And therfore although this name Archshepheard, or (if you will) Archbishop, be proper to Christe in the respecte that he is not onely the chiefe shepheard, but also the onely shephearde, to whome the shéepe doe properly perteyne, and to whome all the other shepheards muste of necessitie submit themselues, and in whose name, and vnder whome onely, the Churche is gouerned, yet in the respect of the externall pollicie of the Churche, & of Pastors and Bishops that are to be kept & directed in such things as perteyne to their du
                              〈1 line〉
                           tie, the same name of Archbishop may aptly & fitly be attributed vnto him, that hathe the ordering and direction of the rest, in the externall gouernment of the Churche.
                        
                           But whiles you confound the spirituall and the external regiment of the churche,The 
                                 〈◊〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              nd externall gou
                                 〈1 line〉
                              rnment confounded. you confounde both your selfe and your reader also: In the spirituall regiment Christ is only the pastor: and al other be his shéep. In the externall regiment there be manie other Pastors: In the spirituall regiment Christe is only the Archbishop, and gouerneth all to whom all other must make their accompt, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           nt in the externall gouernment there be many Archbishops, as the state of euery church requireth. In the spirituall gouernment Christe is only the prince, the king, the iudge, and in respecte of him all other be subiects: but in the externall gouernment, there be seueral countreys, seuerall kings, princes, magistrates, iudges. Again in the spiritual kingdome of Christ, & regiment of his Churche, there is no respect of pe
                              〈1 line〉
                           sons, but all be equal: In the external regiment & gouernment there is and must be degrées of persons: To be short, in respect of Christ and his spirituall gouernmente, there is neyther Magistrate nor Archbishop. &c. But in the respecte of men, and the externall face of the Churche, there are bothe, and that according to Christes owne order, as shall hereafter be declared. So that nowe you maye perceyue your errour to be in not rightly distinguishing the states, and tymes of the Churche and gouernment.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 61. Sect. 4.
                     And if any man will replie and say, that it is not sayd that our sauior Christe is only Archbishop: I answere that he is not only sayd the head, and yet notwithstanding ther is no more heades or the church but he: And i
                           〈1 line〉
                         it be further sayd, that these Archbishops are but vnder and as it were subordinate Archbishops, I say that a man may as wel say, that men may be also vnderheades of the churche, whiche is the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ame whiche is alleadged for the Pope. Whiche thing is not only true in those wordes which doe signifie and set vnlawfull things before our eyes, but euen in those names also which hauing no corruption in their owne nature, yet thorough the corrupte vse of menne, haue 
                           〈1 line〉
                        s it were gotten suche a tacke of that corruption, that the vse of them can not be without offence.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        He is only Archbishop and Bishop in respecte of his spirituall gouernment which he kéepeth only vnto himselfe, and in the respect that all other be vnder him, & haue their authoritie from him. But this name may also aptly be giuen vnto 
                              〈◊〉
                            that haue the ouersight of other bishops in the externall gouernment of the Churche in the which as I haue sayd, Magistrates be called Gods.
                        Christ is the only head of the Church, if by the head you vnderstande that which giuethHow Christ
                                 〈1 line〉
                               is the onely head of the churche. the bodie lyfe, sense, and motion: For Christ only by his spirite doth giue life and nutriment to his bodie: He only doth poure spirituall blessings into it, and doth inwardly direct and gouerne it. Likewise he is only the head of the whole Church, for that title can not agree to any other: But if by the head you vnderstande an 
                              〈1 line〉
                           xternall ruler or gouernour of any particular nation, or Church, (in which signification head is vsually taken) then I doe not perceiue why the Magistrate maye notHow the ma gistrat
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               be called 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of the church. as well be called the head of the Churche, that is the chiefe gouernour of it in the externall policie, as he is called the head of the people, and of the common weal
                              〈1 line〉
                           h. And as it is no absurditie to say, that the ciuill magistrate is heade of the common wealth, next and immediatly vnder God (for it is moste true) so is it none to say, that vnder God also he is head of the Churche, that is chiefe gouernour as I haue before sayde. Constantine in an Epistle that he writeth to the people of Alexandria,Bishops called heades of churches, and yet ye Popes supremacie i
                                 〈1 line〉
                               vsurped. as it is reported by Athanasius Apol. 2. calleth Bishoppes Ecclesiarum capita, the heades of their Churches. And yet is the Popes Supremacie vsurp
                              〈1 line〉
                           d, bothe bicause it taketh from Magistrates that whiche is due vnto them, and also vsurpeth the authoritie of Chryste in remittyng and retaynyng synnes, in making Lawes contrarye to Gods Lawes, whyche he sayeth be necessarie to Saluation, in makyng hys Supremacie a matter of Saluation, and in chalengyng authoritie

ouer the whole Churche of Christ, and an hundreth suche lyke presumptions.
                        The Archbishop being both vnder God and his Prince, hath his name onely in respecte of his authoritie in certaine causes aboue other Bishops, and that but in one prouince or kingdome only, neyther can eyther the name or vse of it (as it is in this Church) offende any but such as be offended with all superiors, and think that none ought to be better than themselues.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 62. Sect. 1. 2.
                     In the primitiue church, the * name of a Pope was honest, & was al one with the name of a goodTertull. lib. de 
                              〈◊〉
                            Cyp. li. 27. Hierome in his epistles to Augustine. pastor: but nowe by the ambition of the man of Rome, it is so defyled that euery good man shaketh at the very mention of it.
                     The name of a tyrant was fyrst honorable, and the same with a king, and yet through crueltie and vniust rule of certaine, it is become nowe so hatefull, that no vpright and iust dealing Prince, none that gouerneth with equitie, and to the commoditie of his subiectes, woulde beare to be called tyranne: wherby it may appeare that it is not for nought, that we doe stande of these names.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Papa signifieth a father, and was in tymes paste common to all Bishops, but nowe it is proper to the bishop of Rome, and therefore hated for his sake, whome it nowe signifieth. So tyrannus. sometyme signified a king generally, no
                              〈1 line〉
                           e it signinifyethA lawfull name maye remaine; though it hath bene abused. a cruell king, and a bloudie gouernoure, and therefore also abhorred. But an Archbishop though the persons at sometime haue degenerated, yet the name hath continued in the same signification, and therfore the reasen is nothing lyke, except you wil also for the lyke cause cōdemne the name of a Bishop, or of a king, for there haue bene many euill men called by the name of bishops; and many tyrants by the name of kings, and yet the names neuer the worsse. If names shoulde be chaunged so ofte as they be abused, some had nede to haue an office only to inuent new names. There was a certaine kinde of heretikes that called themselues Apostolike, and yet the name of an Apostle is neuer the worse. A lawfull name of a lawfull office may remaine together with the office, howesoeuer before tyme it hath bin abused.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 62. Sect. 2.
                     Nowe if the names ought to be odious, being both horribly abused, and also Petitio principii, for you haue not yet proued this. forbidden by our Sauior Christ, the things themselues, must be in greater hatred: the vnlawfulnesse whereof may thus appeare.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is a manifest petition of the principle, and in no pointe as yet proued. But let vs heare the reasons why the office should be condemned.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 62. Sect. 3.
                     First of all the ministerie is by the word of God, and heauenly, and not left to the wil of men toScriptures willingly falsified▪ to make them serue his turne. deuise at their pleasure, as appereth by that whych is noted of S. Iohn, where the The Phariseys made false arguments, and so do you in fo
                              〈1 line〉
                           owing them. Phariseys cō ming to S. Iohn Baptist, after he had denyed to be eyther Chryst or Elias, or an other prophet The Phariseys made false arguments, and so do you in fo
                              〈1 line〉
                           owing them. conclude if thou be neither Christ, nor Elias, nor of ye Prophets, why baptizest thou? whych had ben no good argument if S. Iohn might haue ben of some other function thā of those which were ordinarie in the churche, and instituted of God. And therfore S. Iohn to establish his singular and extraordinarie function, alledgeth the worde of God, whereby appeareth, that as it was not lawfull to bring in any strange doctrine, so it was not lawfull to teach the true doctrine vnder the name of any other function, than was instituted by God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is your fyrst argument, the Phariseys comming to S. Iohn Baptist, after he had denyed to be eyther Christ or Elias, or an other Prophet, conclude, if thou be neyther Chryste

nor Elias, nor of the Prophets, why baptizest thou? Ergo, there may be no Archbishops, which is your meaning. But least you shoulde thinke that I cauill, I will vse your owne conclusion, which is this, Ergo there was no other ordinarie function in the Churche. This argument hath neyther head nor foote, forme nor matter: is this your exquisitenesseThe disordered argument of ye Replier. in Logike? First your antecedent is vntrue, and builded vpon the false allegation of the Scripture. For the Phariseys doe not say vnto him: If thou bee neyther Christ, nor Elias, nor of the Prophets, but these be the wordes of the text, If thou bee not the Christ, nor Elias, nor the prophet, now there is a great difference betwixt these two kynde of speaches, if thou be not of the Prophets, and if thou be not the Prophet. For the first signifieth that they should aske him, whether he were any of the Prophets, the other whether he were that prophet whom they looked for to be suche a one as Moyses was, according to that which is written Deut. 18. vers. 15. for else Iohn woldDeut. 18. not haue denied himself to haue bin a Prophet, seeing that Christ sayth he was one, Math. 11. Moreouer they aske him not of those ordinarie functions that were then inMath. 11▪
                            the Church, but of such extraordinarie persons as they looked for to come, as Christ, Elias, or that prophete. Thirdly, they did not recite all the ordinarie functions, as Leuite and Priest, whiche were then most ordinarie and almost only at that tyme: so that your reason hath neyther forme, nor truth in it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the eight Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 62. Sect. 4.
                     Let the whole practise of the church vnder the law be looked vpon, & it shall not be founde that any other ecclesiastcal ministerie was appointed, thā those orders of high priest, and priests and Leuites. &c. which were apointed by the law of God, and if there were any raised extraordinarily, the fame had their calling confirmed from heauen, either by signes or miracles, or by playne and cleere testimonies of the mouth of God, or by extraordinarie exciting and mouing of the spirite of God. So that it appeareth that the ministerie of the gospell and the functions therof, ought to be from heauen, and of God, and not inuented by the braines of men: from heauen I say and heauenly, bicause although it be executed by earthly men, and the ministers also are chosen by men like vnto themselues: yet bicause it is done by the worde and institution of god, that hath not only ordeyned, that the worde should be preached, but hath ordeined also in what order and by whome it should be preached, it may be well accompted to come from heauen and from god.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Neyther is there any new ministerie or order appointed in this churche, bicauseThe Archbishop no new ministerie. there be Archbishops. For Archbishops be ministers of the word and Sacramentes, and Quoad ministerium do not differ from other pastors (in respect of whom they are called Archbishops) but touching order & gouernment, as you may reade afterwarde in the answere to the admonition. So that all this which is here spoken is grounded vpon a false principle. For you would make the reader beléeue, that to institute an Archbishop, is to institute a newe ministerie, wherein you are maruellously ouershot. The Iewes had gouernment in their church, and superioritie in the ecclesiasticall estate, and so haue we. But you may not tie the church of Christ to the patterne of the Iewes synagoge, for that were to make it seruile.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 62. Sect. 5.
                     Seing therfore that these functions of the Archbishop and Archdeacon, are not in the wordeW
                              〈1 line〉
                           ake proofes must needes inferre a weak
                              〈1 line〉
                            conclusion. of god, it followeth that they are of the earth, and so can do no good but much harme in the church, And if any man will say that we do the Church great iniurie, bicause we doe tye hir to a certayne number of orders of ministers, as it were to a stake, so that we may not deuise new functions: I say that both the church and Christ dothe accuse him againe: Christ esteemeth himself to haue iniurie, bicause that by this meanes he is imagined not to haue bene carefull and prouident enough for his churche, in that he hath left the ministerie, wherin doth consist the lyfe of the church (being that whereby it is begotten) so rawly and vnperfect, that by permitting it to the ordering of men, there is a greate danger of errour, whiche he might haue set without all daunger, by a woorde or two speaking.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your proofes hitherto alleadged are moste insufficient to iustiste this conclusion, and yet doe you boldly goe on as though all were sure. This is but beldenesse and confidencie, it is not sounde and pithie dealing. I still denie that there is any other ministerie in the Churche, bycause there are Archebishops, than is by the worde of God confirmed: But you haue not yet proued by either Scripture or reason, that there oughte not to be gouernours or superiors among the ministers of the Gospel, to whome any other names may be giuen, than is expressed in the word, which you ought to proue, else you doe but dallie, and studie with vayne wordes to enlarge your booke.
                        It is manyfest that Christ hath left the gouernment of his Church, touching the externall policie in sundrie points to the ordering of men, who haue to make orders and lawes for the same, as tyme, place, and person requireth, so that nothing bée done contrary to his worde, as it is before proued, 
                              Tract. 2. and shall be more hereafter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 62. Sect. 6.
                     The Churche of the other syde ryseth against him, for that he maketh Christ lesse careful for hir, than he was for that vnder the law. For 
                           〈◊〉
                         me in the whole volume of the testament, is there any kinde or degree of ministerie, wherof God is not the certaine and expresse author? Was there euer any man (I except Ieroboam and such prophane men) either so holie or so wyse, or of such great knowledge yt euer did so much as dreame of instituting of a newe ministerie? After the long wandring of the arke in the wildernesse, when it came to be placed in Ierusalem, tell me if any besydes the Leuites and priests, the ordinarie ministers, and the prophetes whiche were unmediatly stirred vp of God, were found to haue ordeined any office or title which was not commaunded or whether there was at any tyme any thing added or enioyned to those offices of priesthobe, and Leuiteship, which was not by the lawe prescribed.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely here is nothing but vaine repetitions of that false principle, whervpon thys tantalogie and multiplication of wordes is buylded, that is, yt the institution ofT. C, faulteth still in the petition of the principle. an Archbishop is the institution of a new ministerie, as though the apostle S. Paule whē he placed Timothie at Ephesus & Titus at Creta, did institute a new ministerie, bicause he gaue thē authoritie & iurisdiction ouer ye rest, as it is afterward proued: or the Church whē it did apoynt one amōg the Bishops to gouern the rest 
                              in Scismatis remedium, to remedie schismes, as Hierom sayth, & as it shall more at large hereafter be declared. Neyther can it therfore be sayde, that Christe doth shew him selfe lesseChriste is not lesse carefull for this churche than for that vnder the lawe. carefull for his church, than he did for that vnder the lawe: For his carefulnesse appeareth and consisteth in this that he hath nowe muche more playnly set down the doctrine of saluation in all pointes, than it was in the law, and hath also ordeyned that there shoulde be not only fit ministers to publish that doctrine, but offices also to gouerne the people in godlinesse. As for names and titles & other externall things variable according to diuers circumstances, he hath left them to the libertie of his Churche, as I haue before declared: which is one part of his singular goodnesse towardes the Churche, in that it is not so seruilely tyed to externall things, and to the letter as it was vnder the lawe.
                        And it is euidēt, that vnder the law, there were offices & titles in the church, whichTitles & offices in ye church vnder the law where God is not ye chief author. are not cōmaunded in the scripture, nor wherof we reade God to haue bene the expresse author. As 
                              Archisynagogus, Mar. 5. Scribae, or legis doctores,
                            
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , or 
                              magistratus seu duces templi. Luc. 22. vers. 52. and those seniores populi, and that 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            whervpon you ground your seigniorie. For M. Caluin vpon the. 18. of Math. sayth, that this 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            was apoynted after the children of Israell returned from the captiuitie of Babylon.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the eleuenth Diuision.
                  
                     T C. Page. 63. Sect. 1.
                     All men know that the Arke of Noah was a figure of the church. Noah was both a wise and a

godlie man: yet what doth the Lorde leaue to his wisedome, when as he appointeth the matter, the forme, the length, the breadth, the height, the wood, the kynd and sorte of wood?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        All men knowe howe vncertaine a reason it is that is grounded vpon figures andUncertaine reaso
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ing of figures and allegories. 
                                 〈◊〉
                               le
                                 〈1 line〉
                              t to 
                                 〈◊〉
                               no
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              ded. 
                                 Gen. 8.
                            types, excepte the application therof may be founde in the Scriptures. For a man may applie them as it pleaseth him, euen as he may doe allegories, and yet was there manie things required to the Arke whereof there is no expresse mention made, and namely nayles or pinnes to ioyn it together, neither is it expressed whether the window was of glasse or of chrystal, or of neyther. Moreouer he is not prescribed to make a couer for it, and yet it had one as is declared cap. 8. The ouerseers and maisters of the woorke lykewyse are not there appoynted, but lefte to the discretion of Noah. There are many other thinges required to the making of suche an Arke, whereof there is no expresse mention in that place. To conclude, Noah beeing in the Arke, did thinges which the Scripture dothe not expresse that he was commaunded to do, as when he sente out the Rauen and the Doue. &c. cap. 8. Wherefore I say with M.Caluin. in. 6. genes. Caluin: Arcam fuisse Ecclesiae imaginem certum est, teste Petro, verùm singulas eius parteis ad ecclesiam aptare minime consentaneum est. It is certaine that the Arke was a figure of the church by the testimonie of Peter, but it is not mete to applie euerie parte thereof vnto the Churche.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the twelfth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 63. Sect. 4.
                     In the tabernacle the Church is yet more expressely shewed foorth. Moyses that was the ouerseer of the worke was a wise and godly man, the artificers that wrought it Bezalaell and Aholiab, most cunning workmen, and yet obserue how the Lord▪ leaueth nothing to their will: but telleth not only of the bourdes, of the courtanes, of the apparell, but also of the barres, of the rings, of the strings of the bookes, of the beesoms, of the snuffers, and of the thinges, the matter, and the form
                           〈1 line〉
                        .
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is well knowen that the Israelites had long continued among the Egyptians, aWhy God ap pointed so ma ny ceremonies to the Israelites. most superstitious kind of people, without any law of God written, and therfore now being deliuered from them, and yet inclined to their Idolatrie, God (as most writers thinke) of his infinite wisedome did so charge them with ceremonies of his owne institution, that they should neyther haue leysure to vse any other, nor yet desire the Egiptiacall kind of worshipping.
                        Touching the tabernacle and the particular description of things perteining to thePellican. same, I say with Pellicane These things are particularly described according to the word of the Lord, that the people might know that they ought not so much to obey Moyses precepts as the will of God, in building the Tabernacle, and in freely offering to the same their gold, their siluer, their brasse, their purple. &c. the which otherwise they would haue abused to their owne vanities: and that also they might not be without that bewtie in ceremonies and worshipping of God, which they see among the Gentiles. Moreouer that they mighte haue matter to occupie them with, least they shoulde fall to slothfulnesse and idlenesse. So that of this place it may be well gathered, that nothing wherein the worship of God doth consist, is to be vsed without his prescription, but how you can aptly apply thys figure to the externall gouernment, and pollicie of the Church, I cannot well vnderstand: and if you may so vse it, yet do you but allegory, which is no good kind of proofe bycause allegories may be applyed according to euery particular mans inuention. But all that can be truely gathered of this figure is (as I haue saide before) that,Calui
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e. 35. Exo. in. expos 2. praecept
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              ▪
                            no kynde of worship may be broughte into the Churche of God, whiche is not grounded vppon hys woorde, and therefore Ma. Caluine speaking of thys tabernacle saythe that God gaue preceptes of the tabernacle and thynges perteyning to it.
                           
                           
                              Ne externa pietatis exercitia, quae vidimus fuisse admodùm necessaria, populum deficerent, Least the people should wante the outwarde exercises of godlynesse, which we see to haue bene verie necessarie. And againe he sayth, that when Moyses in the mountaine dydde sée the example of the Tabernacle, he was then instructed 
                              De vero Dei cultu & mysterijs. of the true worship of God and of heauenly mysteries. And againe speaking of this Tabernacle he sayth: 
                              Lex Iudaeos ad spiritualem solum Dei cultum instituit, sed ceremonijs vestitum, vt ferebat temporis ratio. The lawe did institute the Iewes only to the spirituall vvorship of God, but yet couered with ceremonies, as the tyme required. Therfore in this figure there was only expressed what shoulde be done in the worshipping of God, and not in the externall policie and gouernment of the Churche.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 63. Sect. 3.
                     Let vs come to the temple, which as it was more nere the tyme of Chryst: so it doth more liuely expresse the Chur
                           〈1 line〉
                        he of God whiche nowe is. Salomon the wyse
                           〈1 line〉
                        t man that euer was, or shall be, doth nothyng in it, neyther for the temple, nor for the vessels of the temple, nor 
                           〈1 line〉
                        or the beautie of it, but according to the forme that was enioyned him, as appeareth in the first of the kings, and the second of the Chronicles. And in the restoring of that temple, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        zechiell is witnes
                           〈1 line〉
                        e, how the ange
                           〈1 line〉
                        l by the commaundement of God doth parte by parte, appoint all to b
                           〈1 line〉
                         done bothe in the temple and in the furniture therof.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These two examples of the Tabernacle, and of the temple, tende to one ende, and might more aptly haue bene alleaged in the title of Ceremonies than of the gouernment of the Church, bicause whatsoeuer is here spoken of 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ither of them perteyneth to Ceremonies, and to the worshipping of God, and not to externall policie and gouernment of the church, and therfore moste vnaptely alleadged agaynste Archebishops.The Replier 
                                 〈◊〉
                               by his own wordes. 
                                 Pag. 22. sect. 1.
                            &c.
                        But what néede I labor much in this matter, when you your self in the. 22. pag. of your booke, offer for one thing that I shall bring lefte to the order of this Church, to shewe me, that the Israelites had twentie that were vndecided by the expresse woorde.
                        And it is certaine that both Dauid and Salomon appoynted orders, the one about the Tabernacle, the other about the Temple, whyche wée reade not in Scripture they were commaunded to doe. And Dauid appoynted degrées of officers in the Temple, and Salomon workmen and ouerseers, whereof we doe not reade, that they had any speciall commaundement.1. Par. 24.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the seuenth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 63. Sect. 4.
                     Nowe if the holie Ghoste in figures and tropes doth so carefully, (and as a man may speake) 
                           〈1 line〉
                        uriously comprehende all things, in the truth it selfe, howe muche more is it to be thoughte that he hath performed this? If in the shadowes, how much more in the body? If he haue doone this in earthly things, and whiche shall perishe, howe is it to be thought, that he hathe 
                           〈◊〉
                         performed it in heauenly, and those whyche abyde for euer? And then tell me, what are those tymes of which it was sayd, the Mel▪sias when he commeth will tell vs all? Is it a lyke thing that he which did not only appoynt the temple and the tabernacle, but the ornaments of them, would not only neglect the ornaments of the church, but also that without the which (as we are borne in hand) it cannot long stand? Shal we thinke that he which remembred the barres there, hath forgotten the pillers here? or he yt there remembred the pinnes, did here forget the maister builders? how he should there remember the besoms, and here forget Archbishops, if any had bene needful? that he should there make mention of the snuffers to purge the lights, and here passe by the lightes themselues? And to conclude, that he shuld make mention there of the moates, and here say nothing of the beames? there recken vp the gnattes, here kepe silence of the camel
                           〈1 line〉
                        es? What is this else but that which Aristotle sayth, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , that is, to looke to smal things, and not to looke to great, which if it can not fall into the Lorde, l
                           〈1 line〉
                        t it be a shame to say, that the chief piller and vpholder of the Church is not expressed in the scripture, nor can not be concluded of it.
                     
                        
                        Io Whitgifte.
                        You haue before confessed Pag. 15. that certaine things are left to the order of the Church,T. C. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              reth by 
                                 〈◊◊◊〉
                              
                            bycause they are of that nature which are varied by times, places, persons & other circumstāces. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . which is sufficient to answere whatsoeuer you haue here spokē of the care
                              〈1 line〉
                           ulnesse of the holy ghost in the truth it selfe, aboue figures and tropes. Although there is no doubte but the holy ghost was as carefull in the one as in the other, and loued the one people as wel as the other, and therefore it may be an argument à paribus, but not 
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                               minori, as you seeme to make it. I haue told you before also why god did more particularly prescribe euery ceremonie to the Israelites in the law, than he hath done to his p
                              〈1 line〉
                           ople in the Gospell.
                        God hath in his Gospell performed and fulfilled all the tropes and sig
                              〈1 line〉
                           res of the lawIob
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . 2
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . whatsoeuer. Christ which is the Messias hath told vs all things that are necessary to saluation, Iohn. 20. and so is that place in the. 4. of Iohn to be vnderstanded.
                        We make not an Archbyshop necessary to saluation, but profitable for the gouernment of the Church, and therefore consonant to the word of God, as shall be declared. We know the Church of Christ is not builded vpon any man, eyther as vpon foundation, or pillers, if we speake properly, but vpon Christ himselfe, and his worde, which remaine vnmoueable: we know also, that the same Church may stand wit
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           out the external help of man But yet hath God appointed functions in his Churche, both ecclesiasticall, and ciuill, as meanes to kéepe it in externall peace, di
                              〈1 line〉
                           cipline, and or
                              〈1 line〉
                           er: and though he hath not expressed the names, yet hath he allowed the 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Among men the chiefe piller that vpholdeth the Churche is the Christian prince and magistrate, and yet where haue you in the Gospell any such expresse mention made thereof, as there is in the appointing of the tabernacle of Beesoms, snuffers. &c. whiche e
                              〈1 line〉
                           amples you vse in derision: suche is your modestie and reuerence. We knowe that all things nec
                              〈1 line〉
                           ssary to saluation are much more plainly expressed in the Gospell, than in the law: We are also well assured that Christ in his word hath fully and playnly comprehended all things requisite to faith and good life: but yet hath he committed certaine orders of ceremonies, and kind of gouernmente, to the disposition of his Churche, the generall rules giuen in his worde being obserued, and nothing being done contrary to his will and commaundement therein conteyned, as 
                              〈1 line〉
                            haue proued before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 63. Sect. 5.
                     Moreouer A 
                              〈◊〉
                            ma
                              〈1 line〉
                           or. these ministeries without the which the Church is fully builded, and broughte to perfec
                           〈1 line〉
                        ion and complete vnitie, are An vntr
                              〈1 line〉
                            minor. not to be reteyned in the Church: but without the ministeries of Archbyshop. &c. the Churche may be fully bu
                           〈1 line〉
                        lded and brought to perfection, therefore these ministeries are not to be reteyned.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your minor is vntrue. For the Church in a kingdome where it hath an external gouernmēt, where it includeth both good and bad, where it is molested with contentious persons, with schismes, heresies &c. cannot enioy complete vnitie, nor be perfectlyThe maior tendeth to th
                                 〈1 line〉
                               shu
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ing out of the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               magistrate. The Church must not only be brought to persection, but also be preserued therem▪
                            gouerned touching the externall forme and gouernment, without such offices and gouernours. Your maior also conteyneth daungerous doctrine, including as well the christian magistrate as the Archbyshop. And it is in effect all one with thys argument: The Church is fully builded and brought to perfection and complete vnit
                              〈1 line〉
                           e without the Christian magistrate: Therefore Christian magistrates are not to be reteyned, which is the very argument of the Anabaptists against Christian magistrates. You must therefore vndersta
                              〈1 line〉
                           d, that the Churche must as well be preserued and kept in perfection, peace and vnitie, as builded and brought therevnto, and that such offices

and functious are lawfull as tend to that end, and be therefore by lawfull authoritie appointed, howsoeuer some weyward persons thinke the contrary.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 63. Sect. 6.
                     And that without these ministeries the Church may be complete, it appeareth by that which is in the fourth to the Ephesians, where it is said that Christ gaue some Apostles, some Euangelists, some Pastors and Doctors, to the restoring of the saincts vnto the worke of the ministerie, vntill we all come to the vnitie of faith, and of the knowledge of the Sonne of God, and vnto a perfect man.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In that place to the Ephesians there is no mention made of Deacons and widowes,The place in the. 4. Ephe. discussed. nor of your elders, and therefore it maketh as much against them as it dothe against Archbyshops. Moreouer it hath Apostles, Euangelists, and Prophets, all which you seclude from the state of this Church. Thirdly it conteyneth those ministeries only which are occupied in the word and administration of the sacramentes, not those whiche perteyne to order and discipline as you afterwarde your selfe confesse, and therefore I vnderstand not how that place can help you any thing at all.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 63. Sect. vlt.
                     The learned writers haue thus reasoned against the Pope: that forasmuch as Apostles, Prophets. &c. are sufficient for the building of the Church, therefore there ought to be no Pope. The argument and necessitie of the conclusion is as strong againste the Archbyshop and all one. For by the same reason that the Pope is cast away as a superfluous thing, for that these offices are able to make perfect the Churche, is the Archbyshop likewise throwen out of the Churche, as a knobbe or some lumpe of flesh, which being no member of the body doth both burden it and disfigure it. And as they say that God gaue no Pope to his Churche, therefore the Pope can do no good: so we may well say God gaue no Archbyshop to his Churche, therefore the Archbyshop can do no good.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If there were no stronger places than this against the Pope of Rome his vsurped authoritie, it might stand still, for any thing that I know: bycause this place speaketh only of the offices occupied in preaching the worde and administrating the sacraments, as I haue said, not of any office of gouernment. Neyther is it a perfect patterne bycause it hath omitted those offices before mentioned. I haue tolde you before that a negatiue argument from the scripture (except it be in matters of saluation) is but weake. Likewise that an Archbyshop is no new ministery, but may well be conteyned in the number of those, of whome the Apostle there speaketh. For the name of a Pastor doth comprehende both Archbishops and Byshops. The name dothe but signify an office of gouernment conuenient for the state of the Church in the external pollicy of it. And if it did preuaile againste the Pope, yet dothe it not so againste theThe great difference betwixt the Pope and the Archbyshop. Archbyshop. For the Pope dothe chalenge hys authoritie by succession from Peter, so dothe not the Archbyshop. The Pope saythe that he is the head of the vniuersall Churche of Christe, so dothe not the Archbyshop. The Pope saith that to be subiect to him is necessary to saluation, the Archbyshop thinketh no suche matter. The Pope chalengeth power to remitte and retayne sinnes, to dispense with the word of God, to make newe articles of faythe. &c. so dothe not the Archbyshop. To be shorte the Pope claymeth authoritie ouer kings and princes, and saithe that they haue authoritie

from him: but the Archbyshops (if you speake of ours) acknowledge themselues to be subiects to their Prince, and to haue that authoritie and iurisdiction from hir, which they practise ouer and aboue that that other byshops do, and therefore▪ on must needes be reproued here, either of great lacke of discretion, or else of gresse ignorance, or purposed malice. You mighte saye that God gaue no magistrate in that place to his Church, Ergo, the magistrate can do no good. Surely I thinke that if you should well consider how néere your arguments approch to the Anabaptists, you would eyther more circumspectly vse them, or else quite cast them away.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 64. Sect. 1.
                     Neyther did God giue any Archdeacon to his Church therefore he cannot profyte ye Church. But it will be said that this argument followeth not, bycause no mention is made here of the deacon or of the elder, which notwithstanding are both necessary in the Churche, and therefore that there are functions profitable in the Church wherof no mention is made here. But how It is easily knowne and as easily 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            of you, as appeareth af
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           wards. easily do all men know that the Apostle speaketh of those functions here only, whiche are conuersant in the worde, and haue to do with the preaching thereof: and therefore made hereno mention of the Deacon or elder. It is said agayne that in the epistle to the Corinthians, S. Paule speaketh only1. Cor. 12. of Apostles, Prophets and Doctors, leauing out Euangelists and Pastors and yet Euangelists and Pastors necessary: and so although Archbyshops are not spoken o
                           〈1 line〉
                         in the place to the Ephesians, yet they may not be therefore shut out as vnnecessary. But they that saye so, shoulde haue considered that the diuersitie of the matter which the Apostle handleth in these two places, bred a diuerse kind of speach. For in the epistle to the Corinthians, going about to condemne the ambition of men, whiche will thrust themselues into other mens callings, and take vpon them to do all themselues, and to be as it were eye, and eare, and hand and all: S. Paule proueth that the Church is a body wherein there are many members, and the same diuerse one from another, and that it is not one member only. And to proue that, it was sufficient to say that he placed some Apostles, some Prophets, some Doctors, without rehearsing al ye kinds of functions. But in the Epistle to the Ephesians, meaning to shew the liberalitie of our sauioure Christ in giuing those which shuld be able by doctrine and teaching to make perfect and absolute his Church, it was necessary that he should recken vp all those functions whereby that worke is done.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue in this place your selfe answered your former reasons touching theT. C. hath answered him selfe touching the place 
                                 Ephe. 4.
                            place to the Ephesians. For I haue tolde you that the names of Archbyshops and Archdeacon be names of iurisdiction and gouernmente, not of any newe ministerie and therefore suche byshops and ministers, as be so called to haue those names, not in the respect of the ministerie of the word, but of order and pollicie.
                        The obiection made of the place of the. 1. to the Corinth. Cap. 12. is of more weight than you can be able to remoue with all the might you haue. For the Apostle there as well declareth the diuersitie of offices in the Church, as he doth in that Epistle to the Ephesians: yea and more perfectly to, as the place it selfe and the very order that the Apostle kéepeth doth declare. your distinction is but in vaine inuented for a shift only, against both reason and authoritie: against reason bycause the Apostle hauing before made a perfect diuision of gifts in the Church, it is not like but now speaking of offices he doth the same. Moreouer he doth reherse them in order saying, firste Apostles, then Prophets, thirdly Doctors. &c. Lastly he reciteth here more offices thā he doth there, for here he reciteth eight and there only fiue at the most. Authoritie both of learned writers, and of the manifest words of the Apostle himselfe is against it. Peter Martyr saith that in this place 
                              Recenset singulatim quas parteis habeat boc corpus heP. Martyr 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  12. 1. Cor rehearseth particularly what parts this body hath, meaning the Church. And the Apostle himselfe recyting the diuerse parts of the body and functions of the same to declare the diuerse functions that be in the Church, doth no doubt make as perfect a diuision here as he doth in any other place, so that this shift cannot serue your turne, and if it did, yet haue you proued nothing by it, for you your selfe haue giuen the salution saying That in the place to the Ephesians he only speaketh of suche functions as are conuersant in the word, which is true.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 64. Sect. 2.
                     But how commeth it to passe that S. Paule neyther in the one place, neyther in the other nor else where maketh mention of the Archbyshop, which is said to be the chefest piller and vndersetter of the Church? Now I heare what is said to this, that vnder the Pastor is conteyned byshop, he is not conteyned but is the same that byshop. How then? Forsooth say they an Archbyshop is byshop? well then of byshops some are Archbyshops some are what? Here I see that they You imagin that they are hāged and therfore help before you be d
                              〈1 line〉
                           sired. are hanged in the bush, but I will help them, of by shops some are Archbyshops, some are by the commō name byshops. For if they answer not thus, what haue they to say? But what an absurd thing were that to say that S. Paule comprehended an Archbyshop vnder a Pastor or byshop, whych neyther was at that time nor certaine hundred yeares after? this were not to deinde but to prophecie. And how is it that they neuer marked that S. Paule speaketh of those functions whiche were in the Church, and not of those which should be afterward? and of those that God had giuen, and not of those which he would giue▪ For the words are and he hath giuen.
                     
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        No man can denie, but a bishop may aptly be comprehended vnder this name Pastor, and Archbyshop vnder the name of a Byshop: and it may as well be saide that of byshops some be called Archbyshops, and some by the name of byshops, as it may be saide of kings some be called Emperours, some by the common name of kings: of Dukes, some Archdukes some by the common name of Dukes: of Iustices, some chiefe Iustices, some by the common name of Iustices.
                        What if the name of an Archbyshop were not in S. Paules time? Doth it thereforeThings may be lawfull which were not in Paules time. follow that the thing signifyed by the name was not in his time? This worde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            was not in S. Paules time, but afterward inuented in the councel of Nice. Yet was the thing thereby signifyed in S. Paules time, and from the beginning. Other names there be also whiche were inuented since the Apostles time, and yet both lawfully and necessarily vsed. The authoritie and thing whereof the Archbyshop hath his name, was in Paules time and therefore the name lawfull: and if it hád not bin in S. Paules time, yet were both the name and the office lawfull bycause it perteyneth to the externall policie and regiment of the Church, which is variable according to the place, time, person, and other circumstances. Shall not the authoritie that Christian Princes haue in matters ecclesiasticall be thought lawfull, bycause there were no such Princes in S. Paules time? Dr shall not they haue the chiefe authoritie in ruling and gouerning the Church in exteruall policie and regiment bycause there is no suche expresse mention of them in those two places of S. Paule?
                        But you shall answer yourselfe, for you say that in those places S. Paule speaketh of such functions as were then in the church, not of such as should be afterward, whiche is true. And therefore I conclude that as all those offices (by your owne confession before) are not necessary for all times in the Church: so are they not only, for all times of the Church, but other may be brought in méete for the gouernment of the same. I know your meaning is nothing lesse, yet this is my collection which I thinke you will very hardly answer.
                        How many hundred yeares the name of Archbyshop was after the Apostles time, shall appeare in another place.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 20. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 64. Sect. 3.
                     Moreouer, if so be vnder the Pastor the Apostle comprehended an Archbyshop, thē the Archbyshop is necessary, and such as the Church cannot be without, and commaunded of God, & therfore not taken vp by the pollicie of the Church for the tune, countrey, and other circumstances, and such also as cannot be put downe at the will of the Church, which is contrary to the iudgemente of those which are the Archbyshops Patrones.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your argument if it be thus framed, Pastors are necessary at all times in all estates of the Church, and in all places, and cannot be put downe at the will of the Church: Archbyshops are Pastors, therfore they be necessary at all times. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . I denie your argumente, bycause the maior in the first figure cannot be particular. If you make your maior vniuersall, then I do denie it, and put you to the proofe. If you say that to preach the word and to administer the sacramēts (which is, the office of a Pastor) is necessary at all times: then I confesse it to be true, and distinguish the minor on this sort: that an Archbyshop in respect of the ministery of the worde and sacraments, is at all times necessary, not in the respect of policie and gouernment, in consideration whereof he hath the name of an Archbyshop.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 21. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 64. Sect. 3. 4. 5.
                     The last You 
                              〈◊〉
                            that against your selfe nov▪ which before you were glad to vse as a 
                              〈◊〉
                            for your selfe. refuge is, that the Apostle made mention of those functions whiche haue to doe with the ministring of the word and sacraments, and not of those whiche haue to do with order and discipline.
                     Speake in good earnest, had the Apostles Here he confuteth his owne shadow. nothing to do with discipline and order? with what face can you take away the raines of gouernment out of the Apostles handes, and put them in the Archby shops and Archdeacons hands? what a peruersnesse is this that the ministeries inuented by men should be preferred to all the ministeries appointed and commaunded of God.
                     The Apostles for sooth haue in common with the Archbyshops and Archdeacons the power of ministring of the worde and of the Sacraments, of binding and losing, and thus farre as good as the Archbyshops and Archdeacons. But for discipline and order the Apostles haue nothing to doe, but herein Archbyshops and Archdeacons are aboue them and better than they.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You wonderfully forget your selfe, for it is your owne distinction as it appearethPage. 64. li. 5. in the. 5. line of the same page of your booke: and thereby you shifted off the obiection of Deacons and Elders. I know no man that taketh the raines of gouernmente out of the Apostles hāds and giueth it to any to whome it is not due by the word of God. But is your meaning that the Apostles should now execute it themselues? else Quorsum bae
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            Surely you are so full of passions that you forget the matter. I knowe the Apostles had in their time togyther with the ministerie of the word and sacraments, power to exercise ecclesiasticall discipline and order: But truly I vnderstand not your meaning, for neuer any such thing as you here fancie entred once into my cogitation. I rather say that bycause in the Apostles there was ioyned the administration of discipline with the ministerie of the word and sacraments, therefore it may be so likewise now in Archbyshops and Byshops. For that authoritie of discipline and gouernment that the Apostles had in their time, is now for the most part executed by Archbyshops and Byshops, which is the ouerthrow of your whole assertion.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 22. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 64. Sect. vlt.
                     Now sir if I would follow your vaine of making so many exclamations, as oh the impudencie, oh the insolencie with twentie other such great ohes, you see Indeede 
                              〈◊〉
                            haue made your selfe 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            sion. I haue occasion both here and else where. But I would not gladly declaime, especially when I shoulde dispute, nor make outcries in stead of reasons.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Where haue I vsed these exclamations? or what cause haue you so suddenly to burst into them at this time? except it be to set some countenance vppon your euill fauoured reasons. But I will let you alone in such toyes, and suffer you to play with your selfe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 23. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 65. Sect. 1.
                     But to come to this distinction, I had thought before this time, that the Apostles had bin the Surely the man is in a dreame. chiefe builders in setting vp the Church, now I perceiue you make the archbyshops and Archdeacons the chiefe builders, and the Apostles vnder carpenters or common masons, to serue and to1. Cor. 3▪
                         take the commaundement of the Archbyshop and Archdeacon. And whereas it is saide that the ministeries which S. Paule speaketh of are in the words and sacraments, binding and losing only, and that there be other whiche are besides these (occupied in the order and discipline of the Church) (of which number are Archbyshops and Archdeacons) let vs marke a little what deepe diuinitie here is.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely you wander you know not whether, without doubt your mind, whē you writte this, was vpō some other thing than vpon my booke. For wher haue I made this comparison betwixte the Apostles and Archbyshops? or what haue I spoken sounding that way? I would haue you to deale honestly and plainly. If you meane the booke in latin, whereof you after ward speake, the words of that booke sounding any thing this way be these. 
                              Archiepisiopi ab èpiscopis quoad ministerium non differunt (omnes enim paripotestate docendi, baptizandi, ligandi & soluendi praediti sunt:) sed quoad ordinem et politiam: ordinis enim & politiae causa quaedam vltra episcopos Archiepiscopis cencessa sunt. Archbyshops differ not from byshops in respect of the ministerie (for they are all endued with equall authoritie to teach, to baptise, to bind and lose) but in respect of order and policie. For some things are graunted to Archbyshops for order and policies sake aboue the byshops. And further answering that place to the Ephesians it saith: 
                              Apostolus eo in loco eos tantiòn ministr
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 s & ministeria enumerat quae in precibus, verbo, & administratione sacramentorum versantur, non eorum quae ad ordinem & disciplinam instituuntur, qualia sunt Archiepiscoporum & Archidiaconorum The Apostle in that place doth only recite those ministers and ministeries, which are occupied in prayer, the word and the administration of the Sacraments, not of them whiche are instituted for order and discipline, suche as are the functions of Archbyshops and Archdeacons. The which selfesame distinction for that place you vsePag. 64. lin. 5. in the beginning of the 64. Page of your bóoke, these only words excepted (qualia sunt Archiepiscoporum & Archidiaconorum) as I haue before shewed and your owne words declare. And I am sure these words do not make the Archbyshops and Archdeacons chiefe builders and the Apostles vnder carpenters as it pleaseth you to collect, but this is your modestie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 23. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 65. Sect. 2.
                     And first of all I would gladly aske them with what aduise they hauelaide on a greater (*)What burden? who hath laid it on▪
                         burden and weight of the Archbyshops and Archdeacons shoulders, than the Apostles were able to sustaine.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        When you haue told where they haue laid on this greater burden and waight, or what the burden and waight is that you say they haue laid on, or who they be that haue layde it on, then shall your question be answered, in the meane time let this suffice the reader, that you do but forge matter to encrease your volumes, and to sport your selfe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 24. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 65. Sect. 3.
                     Secondarily I aske with what boldnesse and vppon the confidence of what giftes, any man dare take vpon him both that which the Apostles did, and more to?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To this I answer as to the former.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 25. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 65. Sect. 3.
                     Then I say that it is too too vnskilfully done, to separate order and discipline from then that haue the ministerie of the woorde in hand, as though the Church without Archbishops and Archdeacons▪ were acōfused heape and a disordered lumpe, when as S. Paule teacheth it to be without them, a bodie consisting of all his partes and members, comely knitte and ioyned together, wherein nothing wanteth, nor nothing is to much.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Order and discipline are not separated from the ministery of the worde, although all suchAuthoritie to execute discipline, is not equally giuen to all. as be ministers of the woorde haue not the like authoritie to execute them. For as it is sayd in that Latine booke, for order and policies sake more is graunted to the Archbishop than to the Bishop, neither will any learned man so greatly maruayle at this, seing the practise thereof was in the Apostles time. For Paule had more large and ample authoritie than Timothie, and Timothie than the resse of the ministers of Ephesus.
                        What if the Church without Archbishops and Archdeacons were perfect in S. Paules time, and may be perfect at other times, doth it therefore follow that the Church in no time or stare may haue them, or rather that they be not necessarie at some time for the Churche? In S. Paules time Apostles, Prophets, workers of miracles, giftes of healing, diuersitie of tongs were counted necessarie, and principall partes of this body, which not with standing you confesse now to be cut of, and yet the bodie perfect: So that you see this is no reason at all, to say that the Church in S. Paules time was a perfect body without Archbyshops and Archdeacons: Ergo, they are not necessary in the Church of Christ. For I might as well reason thus: The Church of Christe in S. Paules time was not perfect without Apostles, Prophets, doers of miracles, giftes of healing, diuersitie of tongs, therefore it is not now perfect being without them. And likewise it was then perfect without Christian magistrates,The vnskilfull reasoning of T. C. openeth a bore to Anabaptisme. 
                           Ergo, Christian magistrates are to be remoued from the Church. This kinde of reasoning, as it is vnskilfull, bicause it doth not distinguish the times of the Churche, neither considereth necessarie circumstances, so it is moste perilous and openeth a dore to Anabaptisme and confusion.
                        Moreouer I told you before, that although this name Archbishop is not expressedThe office of the Archbishop expressed in scripture. in the Scripture yet is the office and function, as it is euidently to be séene in the examples of Timothie, and Titus, yea and in the Apostles themselues, whose office of planting Churches thorough the whole world is ceassed, but their care for the good gouernment of those Churches which were planted, and their authoritie ouer those Pastors whom they placed, doth and must remayne in such places where there are Churches. And therefore M. Bucer writing vpon the fourth to the Ephesians saythBucer in 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Eph. thus: 
                              Miletum Presbiteros Ecclesiae Ephesinae conuocat: tamen quia vnus inter eos praeerat alijs & primam Ecclesiaecuram habebat, in eo propriè residebat nomen Episcopi. In the Actes Paule calleth the same men Bishops and Elders, when as he called together the ministers of the Church of Ephesus vnto Miletum: yet bicause one amongst them did rule ouer the reste and had the chiefe care of the Churche, the name of Bishop did properly remayne in him So that this superioritie and iurisdiction which we speake of, was euen in the Apostles time, as it is more at large afterward proued.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 26. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 65. Sect. 3.
                     Doth it not pertayne to order that the Apostle sayth that God hath set first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers? are not these wordes, First, Second, Thirde, differences of order? if this be not order, surely I know not what order is. And yet neyther Archbishop nor Archdeacon author of this, and it was kept also before they were hatched.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Yes, but will you haue the same order now? then muste you haue Apostles, and Prophets, which you denie, so that this order you sée is not perpetuall, wherefore from time to time that order among the ministers of the woorde muste be obserued,That order multe be obserued which is conuenient for the state. that is most conuenient for the state of the Church. Neyther is any agaynst such order, but those that will not liue in order. Did euer any man denie but that there was order in the Apostles tyme? All this is but to make the reader beleue that some such thing is in that Latin booke, when there is not one woorde whereof any such thing can be gathered: is this your simplicitie?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 27. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 65. Sect. 4.
                     Let vs see of discipline and gouernment, which we may see to be cōmitted to those which haue the preaching of the worde and to others also which did not preach the worde, when S. Paule1. Tim. 5. sayth, that the elders which gouerne well are worthie double honour especially those which trauell in the word: where he appoynteth the gouernment to the ministers of the word, & to those also that were not ministers of the worde. And therevpon it followeth that the ministers of the Church ar not seuered one from an other, as you, bycause some haue the ministration of the worde and Sacraments only, and some with the administration of the Sacraments and worde, haue also the gouernment and discipline in their handes: but cleane contrarywise S. Paule distinguisheth them, and sheweth that all the ministers in the Church haue the gouernment, but all haue not the worde to handle, so that he distinguisheth the ministery into that which is occupied in the worde and gouernment, and into that which is occupied in the gouernment onely. But in this distinction you do not onely forget S. Paule, but you forget your selfe. For if S. Paule speake in that place of those that meddle with the ministring of the worde and sacraments You falsifie my woordes, by displacing the worde (only). only: why doth the bishop which is one of the ministers that S. Paule speaketh of (beyng the same that pastor is) why I say doth he meddle with the discipline and order of the Church, seyng that belongeth not to him by your distinction? why doth also the Archbyshop (whom you say is a byshop), meddle with it? And thus you see you neede no other aduersary than your selfe to confute you.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The reader should better haue vnderstoode what you had gone aboute, if you had set before his eyes the wordes that you confute. Now I scarce vnderstand your meaning my selfe. You shote altogether without a marke. I know no man that denieth discipline and gouernment to be committed to those that haue the preaching of the worde, and to others also which preach not the worde. But if you meane that eyther all kinde of ecclesiasticall discipline and gouernment, is committed to all such as preach the worde, or in as ample manner to one as to another, you haue not yet proued it, neyther will you be hable to proue it with all the learning that you thinke your selfe to haue.
                        That in 1. Tim. 5. doth proue no such matter, as you pretende. For what dothWhat it is to rule well. S. Paule meane there, by gouerning well? Christ
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  & Ecclesiae suae tum doctrina tum integritate vitae fideliter inseruire, non suased quae Dei sunt quaerere: to serue Christ and his Church faythfully both in doctrine and integritie of lyfe, to seeke not those things which are his, but those which are Gods. Thus do the learned interpreters expound, bene praeesse, in this place. Is not the office of teaching, exhorting, reprouing, an office of ruling and gouerning? But you say that the Apostle doth make two kinde of gouernours, one that trauayleth in the worde, the other that doth not. And what then? he that diligently doth that office that is committed vnto him, whether it be in preaching the worde, prouiding for the poore, visiting the sicke, or any such lyke function, doth rule well. But doth it therefore follow that all haue like authoritie, or that there is no kinde of Ecclesiasticall gouernment or discipline, but that which is common to all the ministers of the worde? Certayne it is, that euery Pastor that doth his duetie inAll ministers gouerne but not alike. preaching ruleth well, and so do they also that duely and truly administer the Sacraments, relieue the poore, visite the sicke, priuately admonish, &c. But is there therefore none that hath superioritie ouer them, to procure that those things be done accordingly, to correct them if they be not done, to sée that euery man be kept in order, be

obedient to lawes, teach true doctrine, breake not vnitie. &c? This place therefore helpeth you not. For although all ministers of the woorde rule and gouerne after a sort, yet do not they al so, in all kinde of gouernment, nor equally, for they also must haue gouernours.
                        But consider your reason or at the least the end of your drifte. All ministers of theWherevnto 
                                 〈◊〉
                               dust of the 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                              . worde gouerne their parishes by preaching the woorde, rebuking sinne. &c. Ergo, th
                              〈1 line〉
                           y must haue none to gouerne them, and kéepe them in order, and sée that they do their duetie: it is all one with this. Euery Master of a familie ruleth ouer his familie▪ and therefore he must haue no superïour to rule ouer him: or euery chiefe officer of Cities or Townes be rulers and gouernours of those places, therfore they must haue none to rule and gouerne either their cities and townes, or themselues. In déed this is a plausible doctrine to make euery Pastor chiefe gouernour within his owne parishe, and to make euery citie and towne a kingdome within it selfe: but it is a pestilent doctrine, for in short time there would be as many Popes as Pastors, as many religions as parishes, as many sectes as families, and in the end an ouerthrow both of religion, the Churche, and the kingdome. Neyther coulde there possibly haue bene inuented a more readier way for the Pope to make his entrie in hither againe.
                        Of your distinction of Presbyter, I will speake in a more fitte place.
                        I haue not forgot my selfe, but you neyther vnderstande (as it appeareth) my writings, neyther yet your own, for hyther to you haue fought wythout an aduersarie.
                        And yet I muste put you in minde of your falsehoode and subtill dealing: for whereas I saye that the Apostle in the. 4. Ephe. speaketh onely of those ministers and ministeries, which are occupied in prayers, the worde and administration of the sacraments. you by displacing the woorde, only, make your Reader beléeue, that I affirme the Apostle to speake in that place, of those that meddle with the ministring of the word and Sacraments onely, as if I shoulde seclude the ministers of the worde from all kinde of gouernment.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 28. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 65. Sect. 5.
                     And least any man should say I confute my owne shadow, I must let him to vnderstand that there is a Pamphlet in Latin, which is called the The booke 
                              〈1 line〉
                            named but 
                              〈◊〉
                            you haue consuted your shadow, and not the boke as hath appeared boke of the Doctors, which goeth from hande to hande and especially (so far as they could bring to passe) to those only that they thought to fauour that opinion, in the which booke, all these answeres vnto the place of the Ephesians are conteyned, and almost all that which is comprehended in this defense of Archbyshops and Archdeacons, wyth other things also which are founde in this booke of M. Doctors: and therefore it is very likely that he hauing no other way to vent his rapsodies, and rackings togither, thought he would bring them to light after this sort. But how much better had it bene that this mishapen thing had had the mothers wombe for the graue, or being brought out had bene hidden as the former is, in some benchhole or darke place, where it shoulde neuer haue seene any light, nor no mans eye should euer haue loked of it?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It had bene much for your credite if you had set downe the wordes of that booke the which you and your fautors in derision cal the booke of Doctors. Which you haue only named and not cōfuted. The booke dare abide the light, and the Author also, but so dare not you. To the rest of your woordes my answere is onely this, that you bewray your spirite: for further proofe hereof I referre the reader to the third Chapter of S. Iames, from the tenth verse to the end.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 29. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 65. Sect. 5.
                     And thus al these clowds being scattered by the sunne of the truth, you see that the place to the Ephesians standeth strong against the Archbyshop and Archedeacon.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Nothing lesse: but the contrary for any thing that you haue spoken yet.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 30. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 65. Sect. 5. & Pag 66. Sect. 1.
                     Nowe I will reason also after this sort out of the place of the Ephesians and Corinthians ioyned together. There is no function but hath giftes fit and apte to discharge it, annexed and gyuen vnto it: wherevpon the Apostle by a Metonomie, doth call the Apostles, Prophets, &c. giftes, bycause they haue alwayes giftes ioyned with them. This being graunted (as no man can denie it) I reason thus.
                     
                        Syllogisme without all forme. Those functions only are sufficent for the church, which haue all the gifts needefull, eyther for the ministring of the worde and sacraments, or for the gouernment of the churche: but all these functions reckened of S. Paule to the Ephesians, with those which S. Paule calleth 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         and 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         (which are the Deacons and elders) haue the giftes needful either for the gouernment of the church, either else for the ministring of the worde and sacraments: therefore these functions only are sufficient for the church. For it is a superfluous thing to make more offices than ther be gifts to furnish them, for so they that should haue them, should rather be Idols than officers. And therefore for asmuch as there is no gift which falleth not into some of these 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nnctions, it is altogither a vaine and vnprositable thing to bring more offices and functions into the Church besides these.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You saye there is no function, but hath giftes apt and fitte to discharge it, annexed and giuenIn what sense euery function is sayde to haue giftes to discharge it. vnto it. If you meane that there is no function but there is giftes méete for it, which God hath in his power to bestowe, it is most true: But if your meaning be, that the giftes be so annexed to the function, that of necessitie whosoeuer is called to that function muste also haue those giftes, it is moste vntrue. For experience dothe teache that euery man hath not giftes according to his function, althoughe he bée lawfully there vnto called, touching his externall calling: for the in warde calling none knoweth but God himselfe, and a mans owne conscience. But you put mée in remembraunce of that whiche maister Bullinger writeth of the Anabaptistes 
                              lib. 5. cap. 1. wher he (confuting the reason they vse to proue that Christians ought not to haue magistrates, bicause Christians be so perfect of themselues that they can gouerne themselues, and therfore néede not to be subiect to any other superiour authoritie saith thus: 
                              Solent autem Anabaptistae libenter ea imaginari & animo suo fingere quae nunquàm
                              Bullinger. lib. 5. aduersus anab. cap. 1. 
                              fueru
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 t, ne
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  extant, aut posthaec futura sunt. The Anabaptistes willingly vse to imagine and conceyue those things in their myndes whiche neuer hath bene, nor are, nor hereafter shall bee. Euen so I say vnto you, that in imagining the giftes perteyning to euery function so to be 
                              〈◊〉
                            vnto the function, that he whiche hath the one must of necessitie haue the other, you phansie that whiche neuer was, is, or shall be: and in so reasoning what do you else, than vse that argument against superioritie in the Ecclesiasticall estate, which the Anabaptists vse both against Ecclesiasticall & Ciuill magistrates? But I answere you as M. Bullinger answered them: Excepte you were blinded with pertinacie you might easily see in your selfe iuste cause why there shoulde bee magistratesIdem. and Superiours.
                        
                        Moreouer God dothe not tie his giftes to any certayne and definite number of names or titles of offices, but bestoweth them as it pleaseth him, to the commoditie of his Church, vpon such as be méete to vse them, by what name or title soeuer they be called. Wherefore this assertion of yours is eyther vnaduisedly auouched, or else doth it conteyne some secrete poyson not yet vttered.
                        This being sayde, to the ground that you haue layde, thus I answere to your argument:The deformed argument of T. C. it is in no mode, and in déede to bad for any boye to vse in his Sophismes. It is in forme the same with this: Those things onely are sufficient for saluation which are conteyned in the Scriptures, but al those things in the Aue Maria are conteyned in the Scriptures, therefore those things only which are in the Aue Maria are sufficient to saluation. Or this, those onely are men which are indued with reason,

but all the Cosrardmongers in London are indued with reason, therefore the Costardmongers of London onely are men. Besides this, the Maior is particular, which 
                              〈◊〉
                            agaynst all forme of Syllogisme in the first or second figure: to be shorte, in your Maior you haue this woorde (onely) in your Medium and in the Minor is left out. And therefore your conclusion followeth not, except you had sayd in your Minor, that only these functions reckened of S. Paule to the Ephesians &c. haue all giftes needefull for the ministring of the woorde and sacraments and for the gouernment of the Church: And yet if it were so, your argument should be of no force, being ex solis particularibus. So that in your Syllogisme there is no manner of forme, and therefore not woorthie of any other answere, vntill it be better framed. Although I could say vnto you that all those functions haue giftes necessary for them: but not only those functions: bycause there be other not mencioned of you which haue giftes necessary also, and which the Apostle rehearseth. 1. Corinth. 12. So lykewise could I answere that moste of those functions (according to your owne opinion) be not perpetuall but for a time, and therfore your reason is no good reason. Likewise that the Apostle hath not made in eyther of these places any perfect diuision of offices which were euen at that time in the Churche. For in the first to the Corinthians the. 12. chap. he leaueth out Euangelistes, Pastors, Byshops, Deacons, widdowes: and in the fourth to the Ephesians: Deacons, widdowes, workers of miracles, &c. So that he hath not lefte any perpetuall paterne of offices, or names in eyther of those twoo places. To conclude I could tell you that God hath lefte to his Church authoritie to appoynt both names and offices, as shall be for the same most conuenient and profitable, the which authoritie the Church hath also from the beginning vsed, as in appoynting Catechistes, Lectors, and such lyke, not superfluons but moste necessarie offices, and profitable for the Churche, in those times wherein they were.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 31. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag 66. Sect. 2.
                     And so it may be thus reasoned. If men may make and crect new ministeries, they must eyther giue giftes for to dischardge them, or assure men that they shall haue giftes of God, whereby they may be able to answere them. But they can neyther giue giftes, nor assure men of any giftes necessary to discharge those functions, therefore they may make or erect no new ministeries.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        First there is no new ministery erected. But among the ministers some are appoynted to gouerne the rest, and to haue the chiefe direction of them, and such are chosen to that superioritie, vpon whom God (as farre as man can iudge) hath bestowed giftes méete for the same. Secondly, it is not necessary that those that appoynt any office, should be able to giue gyftes incident there vnto. For then no man might appoynt any office. It is therefore sufficient if he appoynt such Persons as God hath indued with giftes méete for such an office, and such offices as there may be persones méete to execute: which being obserued, your argument is soone answered.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 32. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 66. Sect. 3.
                     Last of all to conclude agaynst these made and diuised ministeries of Archbyshops and Archbeacons after this sorte,The 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           . if men may adde ministeries, they may also take away: for those both belong to one authoritie:The 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           . but they can not take away those ministeries that God hath placed in his Churche, therefore they cannot adde to those that are placed in the Churche. And this foundation I thought first to lay or euer I entred into M. Doctours not reasons, but authorities, not of God but of men, in confuting of which there will fall forth also other arguments, against both these offices of Archbyshop and Archdeacon.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your whole booke is for the moste parte buylded vpon that false founded argument,The Replie grounded vpō the petition of the principle. that is called Petitio principij. For this will not be graunted vnto you, which you haue so oftentimes repeated, and wherevpon all your arguments are grounded, that to appoynt Archbyshops or Archdeacons, is to appoynt a new ministery. It is (as I tolde you before) but to kéepe an order in the ministery and in the Churche, and to execute that office of gouernment which the Apostles themselues did. When Hierome sayde, That for the auoyding of Schismes the ministers appoynted one among themselues to gouerne the rest. Did he meane that they instituted a new ministerie? A man may sée by this, how vnable you are to defend your cause, seing you are enforced to frame principles vnto your selfe, agaynst the which you may reason, that the ignorant reader may thinke your quarell to be iuste. But nowe to your argument. The Maior is not true, for men may adde ministeries to those that be, and breake not the will and commaundement of God, bicause they may be helpes and furtheraunces to those ministeries that God hath appoynted: But he can not take away such ministeries as God hath placed in his Churche, to be perpetuall, without breache of his will and commaundement. Moreouer, besides those ministeries that God hath appoynted in his woorde as necessary at all times, there may be some added that be cōuenient for some times, and yet the Churche that hath authoritie to adde these, hath not the lyke authoritie to take awaye the other: So that your Maior lacketh proofe. Your Minor also is ambiguous: for man can not take away those ministeries that God hath appoynted to be perpetuall in the Churche, but he may take away those that be but temporall, as occasion serueth.
                        If your foūdation be no sounder than this that you haue hitherto layde, surely your buylding cannot long stande, and M. Doctors authorities may well ynough encounter with all your reasons.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               That the names of Metropolitane, Archbishop, &c. be not Antichristian.
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 65. Sect. 1.
                     Firste therefore I proue that the names of Metropolitane andThe antiquitie of Archbishops. Archbishop &c. be not Antichristian names, that is, names inuented by Antichrist, but most aūciēt: yea that they were in the Church, lōg before the Gospell was publiquely embraced by any Prince or in any kingdome. 
                           Polidore Virgil lib. 4. De inuentoribus rerum, Cap. 12. saith that Clement in his boke entituled Compēdiarium Christianae religionis, testifieth, that the Apostle Peter did in euery Prouince appoynt one Archbyshop, whom all other Byshops of the same prouince shoulde obey. He sayth also that the same Archbishop was called Primas, Patriarcha, and Metropolitanus. Peter was not Antichrist, Ergo, the name of an Archbishop is no Antichristian name.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 66. Sect. 4. 5. 6. 7. & Pag. 67. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Now I will come to the examining of your witnesses, whereof some of them are so bored in the eares and branded in their foreheades, that no man neede to feare any credite they shall gette

before any iudge wheresoeuer, or before whom soeuer they come, but in the Romish courte, and the Papistes onely excepted. For to let go Polidore Uirgile bycause whatsoeuer he sayth he sayth of the credite of another, let vs come to Clement which is the author of this you speake. And what is he? Is there any so blind that knoweth not that this was nothing lesse than Clement, of whom S. Paule speaketh, and which some thinke was the first Bishop of Rome ordeined by Peter, andPhil. 4. Tertul. de praescript. aduers. haeret. not rather a wicked helhounde into whome the Lorde had sent Satan to be a lying spirite in his mouth, to deceiue them for their vnthankful receyuing of the gospell? And he must witnesse for the Archbishop: a worthie witnesse. For as all that Popish Hierarchie came out of the bottomlesse pit of hell: so to vpholde the Archbishop the necke of it, wherevpon the Romish monster standeth, are raysed vp from hell bastards, Clemens and Anacletus, and indeede as it may appeare, the very naturall sonnes of Satan, and the sworne souldiours of Antichrist.
                     A man would haue thought that the Bishop of Salisburie, M. Iuel had so pulled of the painting of the face of this Clement, that all good men woulde haue had him in detestation: so farre of would they haue bene to haue alledged out of him to proue any thing that is in controuersie.
                     The Bishop alledgeth both Eusebius, and S. Hierome, to proue that none of those woorkesIn the replie to M. Hard. which go in his name are his: and although the proofes be strong which the Bishop vseth beeing the witnesse of vnsuspected witnesses: yet bicause the law, although it allow two witnesses, notwithstanding doth like the better of three, I will set downe here also Ireneus which was a great while before them both, and followed hard after the time of the true and vncounterfeyte Clement,Li. 3. cap. 3. and therefore coulde best tell of him, and of his wrytings, and yet he maketh mention but of one Epistle, which vpō occasion amongst the Corinthians he wrote to them. Indeed in an other place of that booke he sheweth, that it is verie probable, that Clementalso eyther wrote or turned the Epistle to the Hebrues. Nowe if that Epistle to the Counthes were extant, we shoulde easily see by comparing those that are nowe in his name wyth that, what a misshapen thing this is.
                     And if so be that Ireneus coniecture be good, that Clement was the authour or interpreter of the Epstle to the Hebrues, then what horrible iniurie is done to the holy Ghost, while the same is supposed the wryter of thys booke to the Hebrues, which is the authour of suche beggerie as thys Clement brought into the worlde? And I pray you do you holde that it is the true Christian religion which that booke conteyneth? Could none of these considerations driue you from the testimonie of this Clement? It goeth verie harde with the Archbishop, when these Clements, and Anacletusses must be brought to vnderprop him.
                     But what if there be no such booke as this is, which you name, (when you say in his booke intituled Compendiarium religionis Christianae) it is like you know not him, nor what he saith, when you cannot tell so much as his name. Onely bicause Polidore wryteth that Clement sayth this in a certaine short and summarie booke of christian religion, you haue set downe that he wryteth thus in a booke intituled Compendiarium Christianae religionis, where there is no such tytle neither in the Councels where his Epistles are, neyther yet in all other his workes.
                     Thought you to disguise him with this newe name of the booke, that he should not be knowne? or ment you to occupie your answerer in seeking of a booke which bicause he should neuer finde, he should neuer answere? The place which Polidore meaneth is in the first Epistle which he wryteth vnto Iames the brother of the Lord, which is as the rest are both ridiculous in the maner of writing, and in the matter oftner tymes wicked and blasphemous, which I speake to this ende, that the reader through the commendation that M. Doctor hath giuen to this Clement, in taking him as one of his witnesses in so great a matter be not abused.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Here is much more labour spent than is necessarie. No man denyeth but that the Epistles attributed to Clement are Counterfeyte, neyther do I otherwise alledge him or Anacletus, or any such like, than both M. Caluine, M. Iewell, and many other learned men do, as it is euident in their writings. That testimonie whiche I vse is out of Polidore, and therefore haue I quoted both the booke and Chapter. Polidore wryteth as other doe that intreate of such matters, and for as muche as he was learned, and of purpose gaue himselfe to the searching out of such things, his report is not lightly to be reiected. But (God be thanked) neyther the name nor the anthoritie of an Arfhbishop dependeth vpon these witnesses, neyther do I vse them as sure groundes, but as probable testimonies of the antiquitie of the name. You haue cited the Canons of the Apostles thrise at the least in this your booke, and Higinus likewise, and vsed them as proofes, and yet is there as great suspicion in the counterfeyting of them, as there is of this booke of Clements. I pray you therefore giue me that libertie in recyting Authours, that you take to your selfe, and that no man refuseth when they serue to his purpose. For I protest vnto you, that I haue as euil an opinion of many of them, and think as great corruption to be in them as any man doth, and that not only bicause I haue so red in other mens writings of them: but also for that I my self in reading of thē haue noted the same. But I am well assured

that Polidore ment that Clement which is supposed to be the first Bishop of Rome, how he was therein deceyued (béeing so learned a man) I leaue it to others to iudge.
                        It is not like that Polydore ment that Epistle, for hée knewe what difference there was betwixt an Epistle and a booke: neyther doth the length or the matter of that Epistle giue anie occasion that it shoulde so be called: wherefore it is like that Polydore had it out of some booke attributed vnto Clement vnder that title, thoughe the same be not extant. For there be diuerse woorkes of auncient fathers, whiche bée not now ertant in print, and yet in some places to be had. But I will not stande longer in this matter. The wordes of Polydore be these. Sicut D. Clemens in suo Christianae religionis compendiario libello perhibet, &c.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the second Deuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 67. Sect. 3.
                     For answere vnto him, although he be not worth the answering, I say first it may bee well sayd here of the office of the Archbishop, that the father of it was an Amorite, and mother an Hittite, that is that it commeth of verie infamous parentage, the beginning thereof beeing of the Idolatrous nations.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be but wordes of pleasure: it will appeare in this discourse that the parents and authours both of the office, and of the name, be such as ought with greater reuerence to be spoken of, and with greater signification of duetie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the thirde Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 67. Sect. 4.
                     And whereas Clement maketh S. Peter the Apostle to make it as it were his adopted sonne, therby to wipe away the shame of his birth, it doth S. Peter shamefull iniurie. For besides that it was farre from S. Peter to take this authoritie to himself, not only of making Archbishops thorowout euery Prouince but also instituting a new order or of fice, without the counsell of the rest of the Apostles, which none else of the Apostles did, and which is cōtrarie to the practise of S. Peter, both in the first and sixt of the Actes, contrarie also to the practise of the Apostles which after shall appeare. I say besydes this, is it like that S. Peter woulde graffe the noblest plant as it is sayd of the ministerie of the Gospell, in such a rotten stock of that which was most abhominable in all Idolatrie? For the greater they were in the seruice of the Idolles, the more detestable were they before God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I do not take vpon me the defense of Clements wordes in that Epistle, or of Polydore in the booke and Chapter before recyted, in all things that they spake touching the matter. But I cannot suffer your vaine reasons to serue for an answere. For if Saint Peter did thus place Archbishoppes, yet did he not appoynt any newe order or office, as you haue bene oftentymes tolde. Of all Byshops there is one order orOne ministerie of bishops, but diuerse degrees. ministerie, but diuerse degrées. Betwéene an Archbyshop and a Bishop there is onely a difference of degrée and dignitie, not of order or ministerie: as diuerse learned men giue vnto Peter, aboue the rest of the Apostles the preheminence of honour for orders sake, but not of power. Moreouer Peter in appoynting them without the consent of the other Apostles, did no otherwise than the Apostle S. Paule whē he placed Timothie at Ephesus, and Titus at Creta. It may be also that in some places where there were before Archiflamines he placed such as were called Archbishops, &c. whiche might be done in respect of ye city & place, and not in respect of the idolatrous priests.

For Archiflamines were but in great Cities, which being conuerted vnto Christ, might haue in the place of their Archiflamines, Godly and learned Archbishops, to ouersée and direct the rest of the Bishops and Preachers, that vnitie and order might be obserued. Thus Paule did at Ephesus and Creta. And why might not Peter do it in other places likewise?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 67. Sect. 5. 6. 7. 8.
                     The Lorde when he woulde giue lawes of woorshipping to his people, in the things that were indifferent, of shauing and cutting, and apparell wearing, sayth to his people, that they should not do so, and so, bicause the Gentiles did so, yea euen in those things, the vse whereof was otherwise verie profitable, and incommodious to forbeare, he woulde haue them notwithstanding to absteyne from, as from swines flesh, Conies. &c. to the ende that he might haue them seuered as appeareth by S. Paule, by a great and high wall from other Nations.Eph. 2.
                     
                     And therefore it is verie vnlike that S. Peter woulde frame the ministerie of the Gospel (which is no ceremonie but of the substance of the gospel.) by the example of the heathenish and ydolatrous functions.
                     If one had sayde that the Lorde had shapen this common wealth by the paterne of other common wealthes, although it had bene most vntrue (all other flourishing common wealthes of Athens, Lacedemon, and Rome, borowing their good lawes of the Lordes common wealth) yet had it beene more tollerable: but to say he framed the ministerie of the Gospell by the Priesthoode of Idolatrie, is to fet chastitie out of Sodome, and to seeke for heauen in hell.
                     And if so be that the Lord had delighted in this Hierarchie, he woulde rather haue taken of his owne, than borowed of others: of his owne Church, than of the Synagog of Satan. For vnder the law besydes the Leuites there were Priests and aboue them a high Priest.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        God gaue vnto the Israelites a king, though other Nations had so in like maner.The Israelites had some things like to the Gentiles. And he ordeyned degrées of Priests among them, to offer vnto him Sacrifices though the Gentiles had the like: and what inconuenience could there come by placing Archbyshops (which shoulde faythfully preache the worde of God, and carefully gouerne the Church of Christ) euen in those places where there were Archiflamines, who did deface Christianitie, and persecute the Christians? For by these meanes there could no harme come vnto them, as there might haue done to the Israelites by vsing of such things of the Gentiles as he forbad vnto them, but the contrarie: For this was a meanes to plucke them from all their superstition and Idolatrie. Neither is this in any respect a framing of the ministerie of the Gospell by the examples of Idolatrous & heathnish functions. Except you will say also that bycause the Gentiles had Flamines, and the Christians had Bishops, therefore the Christian Bishops were framed according to the example of the Gentiles Flamines. If you cannot say so truely in Bishops, neyther can you iustly affirme it of Archbishops: for the reason is all one. Do you thinke this to be a good collection: where in the Popes time there was a Massing priest, now is there placed a Minister of the Gospell, Ergo the ministerie of the Gospell is framed according to the example of Massing priests? And yet thus do you conclude, that bycause there are nowadays Archbishops where before there were Archiflamines, therfore the ministerie of the Gospell is framed according to the heathnish and ydolatrous functions.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 68. Sect. 1.
                     And to say that Peter appoynted Archbishops and Bishops (*) by the example of Idolaters,
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            No man hat
                              〈1 line〉
                            sayde so. 
                        Esay. 2. is after a sort to make the law to come out of Egypt or Babilon, and not out of Sion or Ierusalem, as the Prophete sayth.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Neyther Clement in that Epistle, nor Polidore in that booke, nor Gratian dist. 80. sayth that Peter appoynted Archbyshops and byshops by the example of Idolaters, but this onely they say, that in those Cities where there were before Archiflamines there were placed Archbyshops, and where th
                              〈1 line〉
                           re were Flamines, there byshops. There is greate difference betwixt their kinde of speach and yours. Howsoeuer the authors please you, or displease you, yet report their w
                              〈1 line〉
                           rdes truly. M. Foxe Tom. 1. Pag. 14. is of this iudgement that where before there were Archiflamines, &c. there were placed Patriarches &c. His woordes be these: Thus it is made playne how theM. Foxe, tom. 1. Pag. 14. byshop of the firste seate, or firste byshop or Primate is none other, but he which then was called Patriarche, and belonged not onely to the Churche of Rome, but to all such cities and places, whereas before among the Gentiles were Primiflamines &c. Dist. 80. cap. 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 rbes & loca, & in illis.
                            Hitherto M. Foxe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 68. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                     You say after that Iames was an Archbyshop, if he were, he was the fyrst and placed ouer the Iewes.
                     And although S. Peter might, to gayne the Gent
                           〈1 line〉
                        es, be c
                           〈1 line〉
                        ntent to vse their 
                           〈1 line〉
                        dolatrous functions, with a little chaunge of their names, yet there is none so madde to thinke that he woulde translate any such function, from the Gentiles to the Iewes, which were neuer before accustomed with any such Flamines or Archiflamines. And this I dare generally and at once say, againstMath. 5. 10. 9. you and your Element, that the Lorde translated diuerse things out of the Lawe into the Gospell as the Presbetery, or eldership, excommunication, and the office of Deacons (as it is thought) for that the Sadducees, of whom so often mention is made in the gospell, are thought to haue had that office to prouide for the poore, for those that knowe the Hebrue tong, do vnderstande that Tsadi
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           im
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         and Tsidkah, do not onely signifie Iustices and iuste menne, but also almes and almesmen: I say these and others more translated from the lawe vnto the gospell: but neyther you nor your Clement, shall euer be 
                           〈◊〉
                         to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        hew, that the Lord euer translated any thing from Gentelisme into the gospell.
                     Wee reade in the Actes, that all the Gentiles were commaunded, to conforme themselues vntoAct. 15. the Iewes in the ab
                           〈1 line〉
                        ayning from bloud and strangled meate for a tyme, but we can n
                           〈1 line〉
                        er finde that the Iewes were commaunded to conforme themselues to the Gentiles in their 
                           〈◊〉
                        , the reason whereof is, bycause the one was sometyme the lawe of God, and therefore he that had conscience in it, was to be borne with, and the other came from menne and out of their forge which the L
                           〈1 line〉
                        rd would neuer g
                           〈1 line〉
                        ue so much honor vnto, as to make other men by any meanes subiect vnto them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you had not learned that poynt of Sophistrie which is called Petitio princip
                                 〈1 line〉
                              j, (whereof I haue so o
                              〈1 line〉
                           tentimes told you) without doubt you had lacked much matter, and your booke would haue ben very thinne. For all this adoe in this place is nothing but discanting vpon a false playne song. The offices of an Archbishop and Byshop are no Idolatrous functions but Christian, and méete both for Iewe and Gentile conuerted vnto Christ: neyther are they translated from the Gentiles, but grounded vpō the woorde of God, practised in the Apostles time, approued by the best councells as is declared in the answere to the Admonition, and shall be more amplie hereafter, occasion being offered. Wherefore all this that you haue here sayde, (the ground being taken away) serueth for no purpose.
                        Your coniecture of the Deaconship to be taken from the Iewes, is but a mere coniecture, if there had bene any such office in the law, it would haue bene specified in one place or other of the old Testament.
                        Touching your eldership wée shall sée what you haue to say for it in place. I will not trouble my selfe and the reader with bye matters not incident to this question.

And yet I would gladly learne of you in what portion of the lawe your presbyterie is commaunded or prescribed, for I tolde you before out of M. Caluine, that it was appoynted after the returne of the Iewes from the captiuitie of Babylon.
                        Your reason why there should be no orders or ceremonies taken from the Gentiles is not sufficient: for it is a negatiue reason ab authoritate. But to speake of that matter is now from the purpose bycause I haue denied these offices to be taken from the Gentiles.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the seuenth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 68. Sect. 4.
                     B
                           〈1 line〉
                        t what if there were no such offices among the Gentiles and Paganes as Archiflamine
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         and Protoflamines? whereof before I shew the coniectures which I haue, I must giue the gentle reader to vnderstand, that I am not ignorant that there are diuerse which say there were such offices among the Gentiles, and namely here in England: that there were. 25. Flamines and three Archiflamines, wherof were made three Archbishops of London, Canterbury, and Yorke, and. 25. Byshops as Platine hath in the chapter E
                           〈1 line〉
                        eutherius. And Ga
                           〈1 line〉
                        frydus Monemutensis in his second booke and first chapter. And 
                           〈1 line〉
                        s I thinke Gildas also, and Lumbard in his fourth booke speaketh of it, as a generall thing that was in all places where Paganisme was. But if so be that the religion of other Paganes did follow, and was like vnto that of the Romaynes (which is very probable) they being then the rulers of the whole worlde in a manner, vnto whose example all men do lightly conforme themselues euen without commaundement, then there is greate lykelyhood, there were no such Archiflamines or Protoflamines out of Tullie, which sheweth that there were among the Romaines diuerse kindes of Priestes whereof some were called Flamines of a seuerall attire which they ware alwayes on there heads, other Pontifices, and a third sorte were called Salij, and the chiefe of those Flamines was called Flamen dialis, who was als
                           〈1 line〉
                         distinguished from the reste by a white hatte: but of any Archiflamines, or Protoflamines, he maketh no mention at al: and therefore it is lyke that there was neuer any such office amongst the Paganes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Whether there were such offices among the Gentiles or no, the matter is not great, nor woorthie of deciding. But that there were such it is manifest, if any credite is to be giuen to so many Histories and wryters bothe Eccles
                              〈1 line〉
                           asticall and prophane,Archiflamin
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            not onely those whom you haue reported, but Gratian, Polydore, and others. But as a sufficient confutation of all this that you haue here written, and as an argument of your vnskilfulnesse in stories, I will set downe the woordes of Master Foxe, Tom. 1. Pag. 146. which be these: Lette vs returne to Eleutherius the good byshop, whoM. Foxe, tom. 1. fol. 146. hearing the requeste of the King and gladde to see the godly towardnesse of his well disposed minde, sendeth him certayne teachers and preachers: called Fugatius, or by some Fagamus, and Damianus or Dimianus, which conuerted first the King and people of Britayne, and baptised them with the baptisme and sacrament of Christes fayth. The Temples of Idolatrie and other monuments of Gentilitie they subuerted, conuerting the people from their diuerse and many Goddes, to serue one liuing God. Thus true religion with sincere fayth increasing, superstition decayed with all rites of Idolatrie. There were then in Britayne. 28. head Priestes which they called Flamines, and three Archpriestes among them which were called Archiflamines hauing the ouersight of their manners, as iudges ouer the reste. These. 28. Flamines they turned to. 28. Bishops, and the three Archiflamines to three Archbyshops hauing then their 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              eates in three principall Cities of the realme: that is in London, in Yorke, and in Glamorgantia, videlicet in vrbe legionum, by VVales. Your coniecture therefore is but vayne, and cannot counteruayle so many witnesses.
                        Moreouer your argument is negatiue from humane authoritie: for you argue that there were no Archiflamines among the Paganes, bycause Tullie maketh no mention of them, and therefore of no credite. Besides why might not the Grecians

call those Archiflamines whom Tullie called Flamines diales. But the matter is not woorthie the labour, and therefore thus briefly to haue answered it shall suffice: o
                              〈1 line〉
                           ly I would haue the Reader by the way to note the antiquitie of Archbishops here in England, euen from the first beginning of the publike profession of Christiani
                              〈1 line〉
                           e;Archbyshops in England, An. Do. 180. which was Anno. 180. or there about.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 68. Sect. 5.
                     And if there were, I haue shewed how wicked it is to say that Peter framed the ministerie of the Gospell by it. Now let it be seene of all men how strongly you haue concluded, that the names of Archbyshops are not Antichristian, when as it is most certayne that he was a piller of Antichrist, vpon whom your reason is grounded.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Though it be certayne that Peter framed not the ministerie of the gospell by any custome of the Paganes, yet y
                              〈1 line〉
                           ur arguments are of no force, to proue that he did not place ministers of the gospell, where there were before priests of the Paganes, call them by what other name you will
                              〈1 line〉
                           or that in the chie
                              〈1 line〉
                            Cities he placed not such as might direct and gouerne the rest: seing it is the consent of all wryters that the Apostles when they had planted Churches, did place Bishops, and other ministers in the Churches which were planted.
                        Whether he were a piller or no of Antichrist by whom I haue hitherto proued the names of Archbyshops not to be Antichristian, I leaue it to the learned to iudge. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           f you meane Clement of whom Polidore doth borrowe his report, it is euident that Polidore meaneth that Clement that was one of the first Bishops of Rome, who was no piller of Antichrist but a godly Bishop. Yf you meane Polidore himselfe vpon whose credite I take the report, then surely h
                              〈1 line〉
                           wsoeuer in diuerse poynts o
                              〈1 line〉
                            Papism
                              〈1 line〉
                            he erred, yet is he one that hath greatly detected and opened their supers
                              〈1 line〉
                           itions, and whose authoritie neyther your selfe nor any other learned man in many things will ref
                              〈1 line〉
                           se.
                        But if all this were true that you say, yet may we take reportes of antiquitiesRepor
                                 〈1 line〉
                              es of antiquitie may be taken from infi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ls. euen from Turkes, Paganes, Papistes, or 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ls must we condemne the most parte of Histories.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2 the ninth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 65. Sect. 2.
                     
                        Volusianus Bishop of Carthage, who liued Anno Do. 865. in one
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . of his Epistles which he write to Nicholas the first in the defense of the marriage of Priests, sayth that Dionisius Areopagi
                              〈1 line〉
                           a S. Paules scholler, was by S. Paule made Archbishop of Athens.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 68. Sect. vlt.
                     The times wherein Uolusianus liued declare sufficiently how littell credite is to be giuen to his testimonie, which were when the masse had place, if not so wicked as it was after, yet notwithstanding farre differing from the simplicitie of the supper which was left by our Sauiour Christ. And Eusebius is of more credite in this than Uolusianus, which in the thirde booke and fourth chapter, & in the fourth booke and thre & twentie chapter, sayth of the report of Dionysius bishop of 
                           〈1 line〉
                        orinth. That S. Paule 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ade Dionysius Arcopagita A notable 
                              〈◊〉
                           . byshop of Athens: he sayth not Archbis
                           〈1 line〉
                        op but Bishop, although he spake twi
                           〈1 line〉
                        e of it, & in the preface before his workes it is sayd that after his conuersion he went to Rome to Clement, and was sent with others of Clement into the weste partes, and that he came to Paris and was there executed, whether soeuer of these opinions is true that falleth which Uolusianus affirmeth. And if eyther Uolus
                           〈1 line〉
                        anus or you, will haue vs beleeue that Dionysius Areopagita was Archbyshop of Athens you must shewe some better authoritie than Eusebius, or Dionysius byshop of 
                           〈1 line〉
                        orinth, and then your cause shall haue at the least some more colour of truth.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Thus indéede may you easily wype away all authoritie of Histories, and Fathers. But this shifte will not serue your turne with wyse and learned men. Uolusianus was very well learned, and a very godly Bishop in his tyme, neyther is it to be thoughte that he woulde wryte any thing in suche a matter whiche he had not certaynely learned of worthy wryters. Your reason broughte out of Eusebius, to proue the contrarie, fayleth in two respectes. First, bicause it is negatiue from authoritie and that of man: For thus you conclude: Eusebius did not call him Archbishop, Ergo, he was no Archebishop: whiche kinde of argument is neuer good in any respecte, when it is taken from the authoritie of man. Secondly, your argument fayleth, bicause Histories be not so curious in cal
                              〈1 line〉
                           ing men by their seuerall titles. They thinke it sufficient, if they vse the common and moste vsuall name, eu
                              〈1 line〉
                           n as it is the common vse amongest vs, to call the Archbishops of Canterbury and Yorke oftener by the names of Bishops of Canterbury and Yorke, than by the names of Archbishops. So that in déede your argument béeing denied, you are not able by any sounde reason to confirme it. If Eusebius or Dionisius had denied 
                              〈1 line〉
                           him to be an Archbishop, your argument had bin good.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 65. Sect. 3.
                     Erasmus in his argument of the Epistle to Titus, saythe that Paule made Titus Archebishop of Creta, but Antichrist was not in Paules time, Ergo, the name of an Archbishop was not inuented by Antichrist.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 69. Sect. 1.
                     Erasmus followeth, which sayth Titus was Archbishop of Crete, whom I could answere with his owne words. For I am sure he will graunt me, that Titus and Timothie had one office, the one in Ephesus, ye other in Crete, but it appeareth by Erasmus his own words that Timothie was but a Bishop of Ephesus, therfore Titus was but Bishop of Crete. A slender proofe. For Eras
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        us in his argument vpon the first Epistle of Timothie, sayth that S. Paule did informe Timothie of the office of a Bishop, and of the discipline of the Churche. If eyther he had bin an archebishop, or an Archbishop had bin so necessarie as it is made, he woulde haue instructed him in that also.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This maketh wholly agaynst your selfe, for héereby it appeareth that the wryters vse not any greate curiositie in obseruing proper titles, but they thinke it sufficient, if that name of office be vsed that comprehendeth all. Where dothe Erasmus saye, that Timothie was but a Bishop? Will you not learne to deale playnely? But let vs heare your argument: Erasmus sayth, that S. Paule dyd informe Timothie of the office of a Bishop, and of the discipline of the Churche, Ergo, Erasmus sayth that Timothie was no Archbishop. Undoubtedly you had néede beare with other mens vnskilfulnesse in Logike, if you vse suche reasons in good earnest. This argument also is negatiue ab bumana authoritate, Whatsoeuer is necessarie for a Bishop is necessarie forThe differēce betwixte an Archbishop & a Bishop. an Archebishop, and the office of a Bishop is the office of an Archebishop. There is no difference of Bishop and Archebishop, but onely this, that the Archebishop hathe authoritie ouer other Bishops, to call them togither when occasion serueth, to sée that they walke according to the lawes and rules prescribed to kéepe vnitie and concorde in the Churche, and suche lyke. There is no difference 
                              quantum ad ministerium, in respecte of their ministerie and function, but onely 
                              quoad politiam & ordinem, in respect of pollicie and order, as I haue sayde before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 69. Sect. 2.
                     And I pray you tell me whether Erasmus or the greeke Scoliaste be more to be beleeued in this poynt, out of whome is taken that which is in the latter ende of the Epistles to Timothie and Titus, where they bothe are called the first elected Bishops that euer were, eyther of Ephesus or Creta: for my parte I thinke they were neyther Bishops nor Archbishops, but This is often promised, but neuer per
                              〈1 line〉
                           ormed. Euangelists, as shall appeare afterwards. But it may be sufficient to haue set agaynst Erasmus authoritie, the authoritie of the Scholiast. And heere if you will cauill, and say that the Scholiast which sayth he was Bishop, denieth not but that he also was an Archbishop, bicause an Archbishop is a Bishop, it may be answered easily, that the Scholiast did not speake nor write so vnproperly, as to cal them by the generall name of Bishop, whome he might as easily haue called (if the truthe woulde haue let him) by a more proper and particular name of Archbishop. And further in This diuision is not so strange as you make it. this diuision of the ministers, the Archbishop and the Bishop are members of one diuision, and therefore one of them can not be affirmed and sayde of an other, for that were contrarie to the nature of a true diuision.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I tell you that Erasmus and the grecke Scholiaste, doe very well agrée, and the one dothe expounde the other. I tell you also that your negatiue argumentes are not worthe a rushe, vse them as ofte as you liste. What you thinke of Thimothie or Titus béeing Archebishops or Bishops, is not materiall, but of what force your reasons are shall be considered, when you vtter them. If Erasmus and the Gréeke Scholiaste were of diuers iudgements in this poynte (as they be not) yet were it an vnlearned answere to set the one agaynst the other.
                        He that calleth an Archbishop a Bishop, speaketh properly, for so he is in the respecte of his ministerie, and substance of his office, the name of Archebishop he hathe onely in respecte of order and pollicie. Archbishop and Bishop are members of one diuision, as chiefe Iustice and Iustice is. Euery chiefe Iustice is a Iustice, but euery Iustice is not a chiefe Iustice: euen so euery Archbishop is a Bishop, but euery Bishop is not an Archbishop: neyther is this suche a straunge diuision as you thinke it to be. For Aristotle dyd in like maner deuide 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            in Regnum, Aristocratiam, & 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            that is, that which is commonly called 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 69. Sect. 3.
                     And yet I haue a further answere both to Erasmus and Uolusianus, and whatsoeuer other haue written after this sorte, that they spake and gaue titles to those men they wrote of, not according to that which they were, but according to the custome & maner of that age wherin they wrote. And so we may reade that Uincentius and Nicephorus writing of Uictor, speake farre otherwiseVinc. 10. li. cap. 124. Nicep. 4. li. cap. 38. of him than Eusebius doth, which notwithstanding wrote of the same man whiche they did. The one calleth Uictor the Pope of Rome: Nicephorus falsified. and the other fayth, that in glorie he passed all the Bishops before him, which Eusebius neuer maketh any word of. Euen so Uolusianus & Erasmus, liuing in the times when as they which were ye most esteemed in the ministerie, were called archbishops, call Titus and Dionisius Archebishops, vpon whome depended the chiefe care of those Churches which they gouerned.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is no answere at all, first bicause Erasmus woulde then haue giuen to Timothie the same title also: secondly bicause Erasmus béeing a man of so singular knowledge and iudgement, woulde not otherwyse than truely report of any man, especially in suche a case, and handling matters of diuinitie. Thirdly, bicause when he wrote, there was neyther Bishop nor Archbishop at Creta, as there was at Rome, when Vincentius and Nicephorus writte. And if this were true that you saye, then shoulde Eusebius when he wrote of Victor, haue termed him a Patriarke or an Archbishop, or Metropolitane at the least. For these names were vsuall in Eusebius his time.

But why doe you vntruely reporte of Nicephorus? for in that booke and chapter he giueth vnto Victor no other name and title, than the same that Eusebius dothe, for he calleth him by the bare name of Victor, without any other title, neyther dothe he saye, that in glorie he passed all the Bishops before him, but this he sayth, that the other Bishops which were with him, did diswade him from excommunicating the Bishops of Asia, and addeth: 
                              Et acrius seuerius
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                 cum illo qui gloria eos anteiret egerunt: They delt more sharply and seuerely with him that excelled them in glorie. Therefore he saythe that he did excell in glorie those Bishops that were then, not those which were before him. But what is this to your purpose? If he had giuen vnto Victor any other title than was vsuall when he liued, dothe it therfore followe that Erasmus and Volusianus had done so in like maner? will you answere suche learned and notable mens authoritie, with so vayne and childishe coniectures.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 65. Sect. 4. & Pag. 66. Sect. 1.
                     I omitte Anacletus a godly Bishop and Martyr, who liued Anno Domini. 85. whiche in his Epistle, Tom. 1. conci. diuers times maketh mention of Archbishops, Patriarkes, Primates, Metropolitanes, and sayth, that S. Iames, which was called Iustus, was the first Archbishop of Ierusalem.
                     I omitte also Anicetus, who liued Anno Domini. 155. whiche likewyse in his Epistle maketh mention of Archebishops. Bicause these Epistles are not without iust cause suspected eyther to be none of theirs, or else in diuers poyntes corrupted.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 69. Sect. 3.
                     There followeth Anacletus, an other of these witnesses which must depose that the name of an Archebishop is not Antichristian, of whom, as of Clement that went before, & Anicetus which followeth after, the common prouerbe may be verified: Aske my fell
                           〈1 line〉
                        we it I be a theefe. And althoughe the Answerer be ashamed of him, and sayth therfore, he will omit him: yet euen This is 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           s will appea
                              〈1 line〉
                            in the ende. very neede driueth him, to bring him in, and to make him speake the vttermost he can. And this 
                           〈◊〉
                         man sayth, that Iames was the first Archbishop of Ierusalem: but Eusebius sayth, Iames wasIbi. 2. 23. Bishop, not Archbishop of Ierusalem, and appoynted by the Apostles. And in the thirde booke, It is the▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            chapter. 22▪ chapter, he sayth, that the Apostles did appoynt after his death, Simeon the sonne of Cleophas Bishop of Ierusalem. And Ireneus in his fourth booke. 63. chapter, saythe that the Apostles in all places appoynted Bishops vnto the Churches, whereby it may appeare what an idle dreame it is of Clement, Uolusianus, and Anacletus, eyther that Peter dyd this by his owne authoritie, or that the primitiue Church was euer stayned with these ambicious titles of Patriarke, primate, Metropolitane, or Archbishop: when as the stories make mention, that throughout euery Churche, not euery prouince, not by Peter or Paule, but by Apostles, a Bishop, not an Archbishop was appoynted.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If they be the A
                                 〈1 line〉
                              acletus, or Clemens, or Anicetus that commonly they are taken for, and these writings were theirs vncorrupted, then were their witnesse sufficient, althoughe they were Bishops of Rome. But I neyther will defende their writings, neyther doe I thinke them to be worthy any defense, onely I require but that libertie of vsing them, that no learned man refuseth when they serue his turne. Master Caluine doth alleage this Anacletus his authoritie to proue that the peoples consentCaluin. M. F
                                 〈1 line〉
                              xe. was required in ye appoynting of ministers. 
                              Instit. cap. 8. Sect. 61. So doth M. Foxe 
                              tom. 1. pag. 12. who writeth thus: VVherfore as we must needes graunt the Bishop of Rome to be called a Metropolitane, or an Archbishop by the Councell of Nice: so we will not greatly sticke in this also, to haue him numbred with Patriarkes or Primates: whiche title seemed in olde tyme to be common to moe Cities than to Rome, both by the Epistle of Anacletus, of Pope Stephanus, and Pope Iulius, and Leo. &c.
                        
                        
                           Master Iewell also himselfe dothe vse his authoritie in that sorte that I doe. But what néede you be so curious, who haue so often alleaged the Canons of the Apostles: and in your. 95. page you vse the authoritie of Higinus or Pelagius, as greate a counterfeite as this Anacletus is. I speake not this to winne any credite to Anacletus hisM Iewell. Pag. 95. sec. 4 Epistles or decrées, but to auoyde your cauils, and to shewe that in citing him in this manner and forme that I doe, I doe no otherwyse than other godly and learned men haue done. You shal vnderstande ere I come to an ende, that I haue not alleadged him for any néede.
                        Your argument to proue that Iames was no Archebishop, bicause Eusebius and other doe call him Bishop and not Archebishop, is of the same nature that your other arguments be, that is, ab authoritate negatiuè: and therefore must be sent away with the same answere.
                        Whether the Apostles placed Iames and Simeon at Ierusalem, or no, is not the question. But you are something deceyued in your quotation, for you should in the place of the. 22. chapter of Eusebius, haue noted the. 11. chapter.
                        The place of Ireneus, thoughe it make not agaynst any thing that I haue spoken, if it were as you doe alleage it, yet muste I tell you, that it is by you not truely vnderstoode. For Ireneu
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            dothe not saye that the Apostles dyd togither in euery placeIrenaeu
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . appoynte Bishops, but he sayth, 
                              Secundum successiones Episcoporum, quibus illi eam, quae in vnoque
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  loco est ecclesiam tradiderunt. According to the succession of Bishops, to whome they committed the Churche that was in euery place. Meaning that euery one of the Apostles dyd appoynt Bishops in those Churches, whiche they had planted, as S. Paule did at Ephesus and Creta. And notwithstanding that in some Churches the Apostles togither dyd place Bishops, yet that in other Churches whiche they planted,Sometime one Apostle did appoynt Bishops. Tertulli. de praescript.
                            they dyd the same seuerally, it is manyfest, not onely by these examples of Timothie and Titus, but of sundry other, whereof we maye reade in ecclesiasticall histories, and namely of * Policarpus made Bishop of Smirna, by S. Iohn. And you your selfe testifie the same of S. Iohn out of Eusebius, euen in the nexte section. Moreouer, it can not be gathered, eyther out of the wordes of Ireneus, or any other ecclesiasticall historie, that the Apostles dyd place Bishops any where, but in the chiefe and principall Townes and Cities, committing vnto them the gouernment of other Uillages and Townes, and the appoynting of seuerall Pastors for them, as it is also euident in the foresayde examples of Timothie and Titus, and the wordes of Ireneus importe the same. But if they had in euery Hamlet placed Pastors, yet dothe it not followe, but that there mighte be some one in a Dioces or Prouince, by whome these Pastors shoulde be directed: As Timothie at Ephesus, Titus at Crete.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 69. Sect. vlt.
                     And heere you put me in remembrance of an other argument agaynst the Archbishop, which I will frame after this sorte. The maior false. If there should be any Archbishop in any place, the same shoulde be eyther in respect of the person or minister, and his excellencie, or in respect of the magnificence of the place: but the most excellent ministers that euer were, in the most famous places, were no Archebishops, but Bishops onely, therefore there is no cause why there shoulde be any Archebishop: For if there were euer minister of a congregation worthy, that was Iames. If there were euer any Citie that ought to haue this honor, as that the minister of it shoulde haue a more honorable title than the ministers of other cities and townes, that was Ierusalem, where the sonne of God preached, and from whence the Gospell issued out into all places. And afterwarde that Ierusalem decayed and the Churche there, Antioche was a place where the notablest men were, that euer haue bin since, whiche also deserued great honour, for that there the Disciples were first called Christians, but neyther was that called the first and chiefest Churche, neyther the ministers of it called the Arche or principall Bishops.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is a straunge matter that you should so grossely erre in making arguments, séeing you haue taken vpon you so great skill in that Arte. But I will not be occupied in examining the forme of it. Your maior is not true, for suche offices maye be appoynted rather in the respecte of the time, and of the persons that are to be gouerned,Why these offices are appoynted. than of the worthynesse of the minister, or the dignitie of the plate: and therefore your maior doth not conteyne a perfect and sufficient distribution. Agayne the worthinesse of the person, and the dignitie of the place, be not at all the causes why suche offices shoulde be appoynted in the Churche, but the suppression of sectes, the peace of the Churche, and the good gouernment of the same. The worthinesse of the person may make him méete for suche an office, and the place may be conuenient for suche officers to remayne in: but neyther of them bothe can be a sufficient cause why suche offices should be appoynted. I knowe the worthiest cities haue had the preheminence in suche matters, but it was bicause they were the most méetest places for that purpose, and the place dothe onely adde one péece of title to the office, but it is not the cause of the office. Lastly, you haue not yet proued that there was no Archbishops in those places, or that Iames had not that office.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 70. Lin. 9.This is contrar
                              〈1 line〉
                            to that whiche was immediatly affirmed before.
                     
                     And Eusebius to declare that this order was firme and durable, sheweth in the thirde booke 13. chapter, that Sainct Iohn the Apostle, whiche ouerliued the residue of the Apostles, ordeined Bishops in euery Citie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is no reason at all: S. Iohn ordeyned Bishops in euery Churche, therfore there was no one Bishop superiour vnto them to gouerne and directe them in matters ofThe office of an archbishop in S. Iohn. discipline, order a
                              〈1 line〉
                           d doctrine, if occasion serued: I thinke that S. Iohn him selfe was directer and gouernour of them all, and in effecte their Archebishop. And that dothe manifestly appeare in that thirde booke and. 23. chapter of Eusebius. For thus he sayth: In those dayes Iohn the Apostle and Euangelist, whome the Lorde loued, lyuedEuseb. lib. 3. cap. 2
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 
                                 ▪
                               as yet in Asia, whiche did gouerne the Churches there, after he was returned out of the Isle, from banishement, after the death of Domitian. And a little after he saythe, That he went beeing desired, ad vicina Gentium loca, vt partim constitueret Episcopos, partim tota
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  ecclesias componeret, partim clerum ex his quos spiritus sanctus iudicasset sorte deligeret: Vnto the places of the Gentiles adioyning, partly that he mighte appoynte Bishops, partly that he might establishe whole Churches, partly that he mighte by lotte choose suche into the Cleargie, as the holy Ghost shoulde assygne. So that whether he had the name of Archbishop, or no, certayne it is, that he had the gouernment and direction of the rest, and that he appoynted Bishops and other Ministers. Eusebius dothe not saye that he ordeyned Bishops in euery Churche, for his wordes be as I haue reported them. But if he had so sayde, it had not made any thing to your purpose, but agaynst you. For he appoynted them, not all the Apostles, nor the people, and he gouerned and directed them as their Archbishop.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 70. Sect. 1. 2.
                     These two Anacletus and Anicetus you say are I say not only suspected, but that they are not without iuste cause suspected suspected, why do you say suspected, when as they haue bin conuinced and condemned, and stande vpon the pillorie with the cause of forgerie

written in great letters, that he whiche runneth maye reade. Some of the Papistes them selues haue suspected them, but those whiche maynteyne the truthe, haue condemned them as full of poperie, full of blasphemie, and as those in whome was the very spirite of contradiction to the Apostles and their doctrine.
                     And doe you marke what you saye, when you saye that these are but suspected? Thus muche you say that it is suspected or in doubte, whether the whole body of Poperie and Antichristianitie were in the Apostles time, or soone after, or no. For Clement was in the Apostles time, and their scholer▪ and so you leaue it in doubte whether the Apostles appoynted and were the authors of poperie or no. I thinke if euer you had read the Epistles, you would neuer haue cited their authorities, nor haue spoken so fauourably of them as you doe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I say that they are not without iust cause suspected, whiche you haue left out, and therefore it appeareth that you haue layde aside sinceritie. I haue alleadged them with as little credite vnto them, as eyther master Caluine, or any other dothe. You your selfe haue sundrie times in this Replie vsed (as I haue sayde) as forged authors as these be, with lesse defacing of them. Turpe est doctori. &c. I can shew good proofe that I haue read their Epistles: but I am not disposed eyther to boast of my own reading, or to deface other mens: I leaue that to you.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 66. Lin. 5. & Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                     But that notable and famous Councell of Nice, muste be, and is of all wyse and learned men nexte vnto the scriptures themselues reuerenced, esteemed, and imbraced. That Councell celebrated Anno Domini. 330. (when as the Bishops of Rome were as yet learnedConcil. Nice. and godly men) doth not onely allow of the name, but also of the office of Metropolitane, Archbishop, Archdeacon. &c.
                     In the sixte Canon of that Councell it is thus written: ThisMetropolitane. Councell dothe determine him to be no Bishop, vvhich is made vvithout the consent Metropolitani Episcopi, of the Metropolitane.
                     
                     In the. 13. Canon mention is made of a Patriarche, and of anArchdeacon. Archedeacon diuers times, and his office there in diuers poyntes declared, as it is also in the seuenth Canon of the same Councel. In the. 25. Canon is named bothe Patriarche and Archebishop, andPatriarke. declared what authoritie they had in their Prouinces, and in admitting of Bishops. So is it likewise in the. 26. and. 27. Canons of the same Councell.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 70. Sect. 3.
                     You come after to the Councel of Nice, wherin I wil not sticke with you that you say it was holden the. 330. yere of the Lord, when it may appeare by Eusebius his computation, that it was holden Anno Domini. 320.
                     
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I know that there is some varietie among the writers, for the time of this Councell.Uar
                                 〈1 line〉
                              tie concerning the time of ye Nicen Councell. 
                           Musculus in his common places sayth, that it was celebrated 
                              Anno Domini. 313 the writers of the Magd. Historie, 
                              centu. 4. cap. 9. affirme (as they say) out of Eusebius that it was 
                              Anno Dom. 320. Master Foxe 
                              Tom. 1. fol. 12 thinketh that it was 
                              Anno Dom. 340. and so dothe Illyricus him selfe in his defense of the Magd. Historie, thoughe he séeme to be of a contrarie iudgement in the Historie it selfe. Pantaleon in his Cronographie placeth it 
                              Anno Do. 330. Some there be that say it was. 324. &c. So that to differ in the yere is no suche matter as deserueth any suche nippe. But if all circumstances

be well considered. It will fall oute that Eusebius himselfe confirmeth that which I haue set downe, touching the time of that Councell. For Constantine began his raigne according to Eusebius his Cronicle. Anno. 311. and this is noted also Cent. 4. fol. 62. But the Nicene Councell according to the sayde Centurie fol. 617. was holden Anno. 17. Constantini. So that it must néedes be by their owne collection Anno. 328. or very neare. But if we admitte Eusebius Cronicle for the beginning of Constantines raigne videlicet Anno. 311. it will fall out by Eusebius himselfe vpon the time which I haue appointed, for 
                              Lib. 4. de vita Constantini,
                            he sayth that the Nicene Councell was holden Anno vicesimo imperij Const. So that it must néedes be Anno. 330. or in the beginning. 331. at the vttermost, but vnder it cannot be.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 70. Sect. 3.
                     And here you take so great a leape, that it is enough to breake the Archbyshops necke, to skippe at once. 300. yeares without anye testimonye of anye, eyther father or storie of faythe and credite which maketh once mention of an Archbyshop.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This leape shall not hurt him one whit. For if there were no other testimonie butArchbyshops & Metropolitanes long before the Nicene Councel. 
                                 Concil. Niceni. Can. 6.
                            that Councell, it were of sufficient credite, and habilitie both to saue his necke, and his body from all kinde of harme. For séeing it is thus written in the sixth Canon of that Councell Antiqua consuetudo seruetur per Aegyptū, Libyam & Pentapolim, vt Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quia & vrbis Romae Episcopo parilis mos. est. &c. Let the auncient custome be kepte throughout Aegipt Libia and Pentapolis that the Byshop of Alexādria haue the gouernmēt of all these, for the Byshop of the citie of Rome hath the same order. Lykewise in Antioche and other Prouinces, let euery Churche reteine hir priuileges. But this is generally plaine that if any be made Byshop without the consent of his Metropolitane, the great Synod hath decreed that he ought to be no Byshop. And in the seuenth Canon, 
                              Quia consuetudo obtinuit & antiqua traditio, vt Aeliae
                              Can. 7. 
                              Episcopus honoretur, habeat honoris consequentiam salua metropolis dignitate. For as muche as custome & auncient tradition hath bene such, that the Byshop of Ierusalem be honoured, let him haue honour accordingly, not impairing the dignitie of the Metropolitane citie. It is plaine that Archbyshops and their office were long before the Councell of Nice, for else why should the Canon say, Let the olde custome be obserued. &c. And M. Foxe tom. 1. Pag. 12. reporting these two Canons sayth thus. First in the Councell ofM. Foxe. Nice which was the yeare of our Lorde. 340. and in the sixt Canon of the sayde Councell we finde it is so decreed that in euery Prouince, or Precinct some one Church & Byshop of the same was appoynted & set vp to haue the inspection & regiment of other Churches about him, Secundum morem antiquum, that is, after the auncient custome, as the wordes of the Councell do purport. So that the Byshop of Alexandria shoulde haue power of Libia, and Pentapolis in Egipt, for as much as the Byshop of the Citie of Rome hath the like or same manner. Nowe if I might as safely alleage the Canons of the Apostles as you doe, then coulde I tell you that in the. 33. Canon (which Canon is alleaged as good authoritie against the supremacie of the Byshop of Rome) you shall finde Archbyshops. For that Canon setting an order among Bishops willeth the Byshops of euery nation to knowe their first or chiefe Byshop, and him to be taken for the head of them. The wordes of the Canon be these. 
                              Cuius
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  gentis Episcopos oportet sc
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 re, quisnam
                              Cano. Apo. 33. alias. 35. 
                              inter ipsos primus sit, habere
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  ipsum quodammodo pro capite, neque sine illius voluntate quicquam agere insolitum. The Bishops of euery countrie must knowe who is chiefe among them, and must take him as it were for their head, neyther muste they doe any vnaccustomed thing without his will, and euery one must doe those things alone by him selfe which belong to his parishe and to the places that be vnder him: But neither must he do any thing without

the will of all them, for so shall concorde be kept, and God shall be glorified through our Lord in the holy Ghost. Now I pray you tell me what difference there is betwixt the first or chiefe Byshop, or head of the reste and Archbyshop: And least you shoulde thinke this Canon to be of small force (as suspected) you shall heare it almost verbatim repeated and confirmed by the Councell of Antioche, In euery countrey it is conuenient thatConcil. Antioc
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . Can. 9. the Byshops should knowe that their Metropolitane Byshop beareth the care of the whole Prouince. VVherefore let all those that haue any businesse repaire to the Metropolitane citie. And for this cause it is thought good that he both shoulde excell in honour, and that the other Bishops do no vnaccustomed thing without him, according to the auncient rule appointed of our fathers, sauing those things onely which belong to their owne Diocesse and to the places that are vnder them. For euery Byshop hath power ouer his owne parishe to rule them according to reuerence meete for euerye one, and to prouide for all the countrey that are vnder his citie, so that he ordeyne both Priests and Deacons and conteine all things with his iudgement. But further let him attempt nothing without the Metropolitane, neither let the Metropolitane do any thing without the aduise of the other. You haue now the Canon of the Apostles confirming Archbyshops, and the Councell of Nyce & Antioche alleaging olde custome for them, and confirming them also. And a little beforeIn the. 7. Diuision before. I declared vnto you out of M. Foxe that there were Archbyshops here in England Anno. 180. So that their fall cannot be very great.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 70. Sect. 3.
                     What? no mention of him in Theophilus Bishop of Antioche, none in Ignatius, none in Clemens Alexandrinus, none in Iustine Martyr, in Ireneus, in Tertullian, in Origine, in Cyprian, none in all those olde Historiographers, oute of the which Eusebius gathereth his storie? was it for his basenesse and smalnesse, that he coulde not be seene among the Byshops, Elders and Deacons, beyng the chiefe and principall of them all? Can the Cedar of Libanon be hyd among ye Boxe trees? Aristotle in his Rhethoricke ad Theodecten sayth that it is a token of contempt to forget the name of an other. Belike therefore if there were any Archbyshop, he had no chaire in the Churche, but was as it seemeth digging at the metalles, for otherwyse they that haue filled their booke with the often mentioning of Byshops, would haue no doubt remembred him.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And what then? is not the Councell of Nice, and of Antioche of as good credite as all these? Shall not Athanasius, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostome, Sozomene, &c. counteruaile them? and yet if you had read these authors, you might haue learned that in the most of them, the office of an Archbyshop is expressed, as my answere following declareth. But still you vse negatiue reasons ab authoritate, and that humane. Your tauntes and frumpes I let passe: they are confutation sufficient to them selues.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 20. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 70. Sect. 3. 4.
                     But let vs heare what the Councell of Nyce hath for these titles.
                     In the sixth Canon mention is made of a Metropolitane Byshop, what is that to the Metropolitane which nowe is? eyther to the name or to the office. Of the office it shall appeare afterwardes. In the name I thinke there is a great difference betwene a Metropolitane Byshop, and Metropolitane of England or of all England. A Metropolitane Byshop was nothing else but a Byshop of that place, which it pleased the Emperor or Magistrate, to make the chiefe citie of the Diocesse or shire, aad as for this name, An vntruth contrarie to the manifest wordes of the Councell of Nice. it maketh no more difference betwene Byshop and Byshop, than when I say a Minister of London and a Minister of Nuington. There is no man that is well aduised, which will gather of this saying, that there is as great difference in preheminence betwene those two Ministers as is betwene London and Nuington. For his office and preheminence we shall see hereafter.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        For the full answering of this it shall be sufficient to set downe the iudgement of certaine of the learned writers of our time, touching the true meaning of that CanonThe iudgement of learned writers of the. 6. can. con. N
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 cem. Caluine.
                              
                            of the Councell of Nyce, as the practise of the Church before that time, at that tyme, and since that time, haue expounded it.
                        
                           M. Caluine in his Institutions Chap. 8. Sect 54. sayth thus. That euery prouince had among their Byshops an Archbyshop, And that the Councel of Nice did appoynt Patriarkes which should be in order and dignitie aboue Archbyshops: it was for the preseruation of discipline. M. Caluine sayth the Councell of Nyce did appoint Patriarkes which shoulde be in order and dignitie aboue Archbyshops. He sayth also that euery Prouince had among their Byshops an Archbyshop.
                        
                        
                           Il
                                 〈1 line〉
                              yricus in his cataloge testium veritatis speaking of this Councel sayth thus: 
                              Constituit
                              Illyricus. 
                              quo
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  haec Synodus, vt singularum prouinciarum Metropolitani, potestatem habeant in suos Episcopos, sacerdotes & ecclesias, Alexandrinus in Aegypto, Antiochenus in Syria. &c. This Synode also appoynted that the Metropolitanes of euery prouince shoulde haue authoritie ouer their Byshops, Priestes, and Churches: The Byshop of Alexandria in Egypt, and the Byshop of Antioche in Syria. &c. And in his booke that he entituleth a refutation of the innectiue of Brunus against the Centuries, he doth interprete this Canon on this manner. Here we see plainely that the Nicene Councell first in this Canon doth giue a primacie to the Metropolitane in euery Prouince, and doth make subiecte vnto him all the Byshops and Priestes of his prouince. Moreouer, that it maketh all the Metropolitane Byshops, as of Alexandria, Rome, and Antioche, and of other Prouinces altogether of equall authoritie amongst them selues. And last, that the subiectes (if that I may so say) of an other, may not appeale to any other Metropolitane, and after this manner the sixth Councell of Carthage doth vnderstande, alleage, and vrge the foresaid Canon in the former Epistle.
                        
                        
                           M. Foxe who hath very diligently, and faithfully laboured in this matter, and searched out the truth of it as learnedly, as I knowe any man to haue done, in his firste Tom. Pag. 11. writeth thus. Then followed the Councell of Nyce wherein it was decreedM. Foxe. that throughout the vniuersitie of Christes Churche which was nowe farre spred ouer the world, certeine Prouinces and Precinctes to the number of foure were appoynted euery one to haue his head Churche and chiefe Byshop, called them Metropolitanes or Patriarkes to haue the ouersight of such Churches as did lye about him: and Pag. 12. he speaketh to the same effecte as it may appeare in his wordes which I haue before recited. And in the same Page he saith: VVherefore as we must needes graunt the Byshop of Rome to be called a Metropolitane or an Archbyshop by the Councell of Nyce: so we will not greatly sticke in this also, to haue him numbred with Patriarkes or Primates. &c.
                        
                        But the very wordes of the Canon it selfe doth condemne you of a great ouersight,T. C. condemned of vn truth by the words of the Canon. Can. 6. For this is the Canon, 
                              antiqua consuetudo seruetur per Aegyptū Libyam & Pentapolim: ita vt Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem &c. Let the auncient custome be kept throughout Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, that the Byshop of Alexandria haue the gouernment of all these. &c. as is said before.
                        How say you nowe? is not this for the name and for the office also of our Metropolitanes and Archbyshops? had not they iurisdiction of whole Prouinces, as ours haue?The authoritie of 
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              tropo. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ane. were not all other Byshops and Ministers of the Church subiect to them, as they be to ours? were not they Metropolitanes of Prouinces and countreys as ours be? And is this no more to differ, than a Minister of London and a Minister of Nuington? Truely I maruaile that you can be caryed vnto so manifest vntruthes, and palpable errors. But for the further declaration of the authoritie of a Metropolitane Byshop, though this which I haue said be sufficient, it may please you to take paines to peruse, in theCon. Antioc
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Councell of Antioche the. 9. Canon. 
                              Per singulas prouincias Episcopos conuenit nosse Metropolitanum Episcopum, solicitudinem totius prouinciae gerere. In euerye prouince it is conuenient that Byshops should know, that the Metropolitane Byshop hath the caryng for of the vvhole prouince. &c. as is mentioned before, in the first Canon of the

Councell of Ephesus. It is also euident that the Metropolitane of the Prouince (for so is he there called) had authoritie ouer all the Bishops in the same prouince. But to make short bycause I shall haue other occasion to speake of this matter, M. Foxe in the treatise before recited concludeth thus, VVhereby it is to be concluded, that to be false that Clement and Anacletus and Anicetus be reported (but falsly) to put a difference betwene Primates or Patriarkes, Metropolitanes, or Archbyshops, whereas by sufficient authoritie 
                                 〈◊〉
                               is to be proued, that in the olde Churche both Primates, first Byshops, Byshops of the firste seate, Patriarkes, Metropolitanes, Byshops of the mother Citie, and Archbyshops, were all one. First that Primates and Metropolitanes were both one, is before declared in the Canons of the Apostles, and by the Councel of Antioche aforesayd. The same doth Vilierius
                           Vilierius. affirme in his booke 
                              de statu primitiuae ecclesiae. Fol. 26. and proueth it out of Socrates verye manifestly: that is, that Metropolitanes and Patriarkes were all one at the first. I am not ignorant but there is some controuersie among both the Ciuilians and Canonistes whether a Metropolitane or an Archbyshop be all one or no, but in the ende this is the opinion of the most, so farre as I can reade or learne, that they be idem re, the same in déede, but differ nomine in name. For he is called an Archbyshop in respect of the other Byshops of whom he is the chiefe. But he is called Metropolitane in respecte of the Cities that be within his Prouince. But of Archbyshops and Metropolitanes more must be spoken hereafter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 20. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 70. Sect. vlt.
                     There are alleaged to proue the names of Archbishops, Patriarkes, Archdeacons, the. 13. 25. 26. and. 27. Canons of the Councell of Nice. For the. 25. 26. and. 27. there are no suche Canons of that Councell, and although there be a thirtenth Canon, there is no worde of Patriarke or Archdeacon there conteined. And I maruaile with what shame you can thrust vpon vs these These Canons differ onely in number, and not in matter from, those that are not counterfeit. counterfeite Canons, which come out of the Popes mint: yea and which are not to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        e founde. Theodorete saith, that there are but twentie Canons of the Councell of Nyce, and those twentie are in the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ome of the Councels, and in those there is no mention of any Patriarke, Archbyshop, Archdeacon.Li. 1. cap. 8. Li. 1. cap. 6. Ruffine also remembreth. 22. Canons, very little differing from those other twentie, but in length, & in none of those are founde any of these names of Archbishop, Archdeacon, or Patriarke, and it is as Not so, for that is repugnant to the true Canon
                              〈1 line〉
                           ; & therfore coūterfeit. lawfull for M. Harding to allcage the. 44. Canon of the Councell of Nyce to proue the Supremacie of the Pope of Rome, as it is for M. Doctor Whitgifte to alleage the. 25. 26. 27. to proue the name of Archbyshop, Archdeacon, Patriarke: for they are all of one stampe and haue lyke authoritie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I will not greatly sticke in the defense of those Canons, the fixth & the seuenth Canō do sufficiently verifie all that I haue alleaged out of the other, as is declared not onelyControuersie about the nū
                              ber of ye Canons conci. Niceni.
                            by the words of the Canons, but by the iudgement of those, whose learning & Religion was neuer as yet stained. I know that there is no small controuersie about the number of the Canons of that Synode. In the booke of the Coūcels there are only twentie, in Ruffine. 22. Athanasius in an Epistle that he (as some thinke) with the other Byshops of Egypt writte to Marcus Byshop of Rome (if any credite is to be giuen vntoCanons ascribed to the Nicene councell, not found in the number extant. Con. Arelat.
                            that Epistle) writeth that there were first. 80. and afterwards the same brought into 70. Canons. Isodorus in his preface to the Councell, sayth that in the decrées of Pope Iulius, there is mention made of. 70. Canons, so that for the number of the Canons there is great difference in the writers.
                        
                           Concilium Arelatense the second, Canon the. 24. doth recite a Canon of the Councell of Nice, touching infamous libels, which is not to be founde among the. 20.
                        Hierome in his preface vpon the booke of Iudith sayth that the Councell of Nice didHieronymus. recken that booke in the number of the holy scriptures, and yet there is no such thing to be founde among those. 20. Canons.
                        Ambrose 
                              Lib. 10. the Epistle. 82. attributeth another Canon to the Councell of NiceAmbrose. concerning second Mariages in clarkes, I could recite more Canons alledged by good writers out of that Councell, which are not to be founde in those. 20. or. 22. but it shall not néede.
                        
                           Wherefore though I haue alleaged moe Canons than are to be founde in the volume of Councels: yet I haue done nothing which is straunge, neither haue I alleaged any Canon that is not agréeable to the sixth and seuenth, wherof there is no doubt: and according to the true meaning of those two Canons, as they be interpreted by theThe. 25. 26. 27. Canons differ onely in number, not in substance from the true Canons. best learned. And in very déede, the. 25. 26. 27. Canons by me alleaged are the verye same with the. 6. &. 7. differing onely in number, wherin I followed the author that so placed them. And in the. 13. Canon the name of Archbyshop is added, wherof more shal be spoken hereafter (God willing).
                        
                           M. Hardings. 44. Canon is plaine repugnant to the sixth Canon, and therefore without all doubt a counterfeite. But the Canons that I haue alleaged agrée both with the sixth and seuenth, and therefore not vnlike to be truely attributed to that Councell, in these poyntes wherein I haue alleaged them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 21. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 71. Sect. 1.
                     I feare greatly some craftie dissembling Papist had his hand in this booke, who hauing a great deale of rotten stuffe, which 
                           〈◊〉
                         could not vtter vnder his owne name, being already 
                           〈1 line〉
                        oste, brought it vnto the author hereof You 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            you vse. which hath vpon his credit wythout further examination set it to sale. Peraduenture you will thinke scorne to be censured and reprehended of a poore minister of the countrey, and therefore I will turne you ouer for your lesson in this behalfe vnto the Byshop of Salisburie in his replie against M. Harding touching the article of the Supremacie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Feare not I warrant you, I haue alleaged nothing which I am not hable by sufficient testimonie to proue, that I haue read my selfe. And therefore your surmise is but grounded vpon your owne practise.
                        Whatsoeuer the Byshop of Salisbury sayth in his reply against Harding touchyng the Canon alleaged by him is most true, and I doe most willingly acknowlenge it so to be, neither doe I take any Canon of that Councell as vndoubtedly tru
                              〈1 line〉
                           , but these, 20. specified in the first Tome of Councels, the other I haue onely mentioned as 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ble, bicause they agrée with them, and yet all the Canons that I haue alleaged, be 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           tant in print and the booke is commonly to be solde, and therefore I haue not receiued them of any other.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 22. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 66. Sect. 3.
                     
                        Ambrose also that olde and learned father, both alloweth the nameAmbrose. and office of an Archbyshop, 
                           Lib. de dignitate Sacerdotum. cap. 5.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 71. Sect. 2.
                     If Ambrose i
                              〈1 line〉
                            little beholding to you, that cannot be accepted for a wi
                              〈1 line〉
                           nesse. all shoulde be allowed of that S. Ambrose alloweth of, then besydes other thyngs which he holdeth corruptly, the mariage of the Ministers should go very hard: but it is worthy to be obserued wyth what wordes Ambrose doth allowe of the Archbyshop, that all men may vnderstande,1. Lib. offi. cap. 50. howe lowe it goeth wyth M. Doctor, for his defence of the Archbyshop: and how the Archbyshop is so out of credit, that there cannot be gotten any to be suertie for his honestie. Ambrose complayning of the Ministers or Byshops in those dayes sayth, if a man aske them who preferred them to be Priests, answere is made by and by that the In those words Ambrose doth not dissa low the office, but the abuse of it by the person. Archbyshop for an hundred shillings ordeined me Byshop, to whome I gaue an hundred shillings that I myghte get the fauour to be Byshop, whych if I had not giuen I had not bene Byshop: and afterwarde he saythe that this greeued him, that the Archbyshop ordeyned Byshops carnally or for some carnall respect, and this is all the allowance that Ambrose sheweth of an Archbyshop. Your Archbyshop taketh all things in good part, so that his very dispraise he expoundeth to his commendation.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I know no man whose writings and workes are so perfect (the writers of the Canonical scriptures excepted) that all things in their bookes are to be allowed. But God forbyd that we should therefore reiect that which they haue well and truely spoken: you will doe little for Ambrose if you will not allowe him for an historicall witnesse of that which was in his tyme, this is therefore a shifting answere, but nothing commendable. It euidently appeareth by that place, that in his tyme there were Archbyshops, for what though he reproue the abuse of some Archbyshops in ordeyning Byshops & Ministers for monie, doth he therefore disalowe, either the name or the office? Nay this is rather to be concluded, that there were Archbyshops in Ambroses tyme, which had authoritie to ordeine Bishops, bycause Ambrose doth reproue suche Archbyshops as for carnall respects ordeined Byshops.
                        Your vndutifull and arrogant frumpes and scoffes I passe ouer. It séemeth by your so oft vsing them, that you are afraide, least you should be taken for a modest Christian.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 23. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 71. Sect. 3.
                     And there is great An vnlikely likelyhoode voyde of truth. likelyhoode, that the Archbyshop which Ambrose maketh mention of was no other than he which for the time ruled the action wherin Byshops were ordeyned, and after the action ended, had no more authoritie than the rest.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you had read any auncient storie or father: yea if you had but perused M. Caluines Institutions the. 8. Chapter, or any writer intreating of this matter, you would neuer haue vttered this vaine coniecture, nor shewed so manifest a token of greate ignorance, and no reading. For it shall appeare by sufficient testimonie, that neyther the name nor office of an Archbyshop was any thing at all straimge in this time. And the authors of the Centuries: 
                              Cent. 4. can tell you that Ambrose himselfe was 
                              Metropolitanus
                              Ambrose a Metropolitane. Cent. 4. cap. 10 
                              plurium coniunctarum ecclesiarum administratione fungens, A Metropolitane gouerning many Churches adioyning together.
                        
                        Your coniecture that this Archbishop should be no other, than he which for the time ruled the action, wherin Byshops were ordeined and after the action ended, had no more authoritie than the rest, is a méere phansie of your owne, contrarie to all authoritie, and withoute any grounde or similitude of reason, and yet you often repeate it, and make it the foundation of this your building. But let vs heare your coniectures.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 24. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 71. Sect. 4.
                     And I am moued so to thinke, First bicause it is not like, that one onely ordeyned Byshops, being contrarie to the olde Canons of the best Councels: but that there were other, and that this whō Ambrose calleth Archbyshop, did gather the voyces. &c.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue shewed before, that it was not so strange at this time for the Byshop alone to ordeine Ministers. And yet Ambrose in this place signifieth that the people hadAmbrose. somewhat to doe in this matter, for he calleth them 
                              populum nugacem & indoctum, qui talem sibi asciuerunt sacerdotem: a people that trifeleth and is vnlearned, that hath gotten vnto them such a priest. But I pray you where is now your distinction betwixt election & ordination? For Ambrose speaketh in this place of ordeyning and not of electing. If

you wyll néedes so distinguishe them that they maye not bée at any tyme, nor in any place confounded, then haue you answered youre selfe here, and wyth one coniecture ouerthrowne an other. But howesoeuer it is, coniectures can not preuayle agaynst so manyfest a truthe, being so silly coniectures. For tell mée where you euer redde that he was called an Archbishop that did only gather the voyces, or that this name was attributed to any during the action only, and no longer. This is verie newe Diuinitie vnhearde of in any good Authour that I haue readde, or can heare of.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 25. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 71. Sect. 5.
                     Secondly, bycause it was verie vnlyke that there was any absolutely aboue S. Ambrose in those partes where he complayneth of euill bishops or ministers made.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Why, to whom or for whom did Ambrose write this booke? for his owne prouince or Diocesse only? therein are you deceyued, that you thinke Ambrose to haue written this booke for his owne Prouince onely, when he writte it to profite the whole Churche, as it may appeare in the fyrst Chapter of that Booke. Neither doth he complaine of suche euill Bishoppes or ministers as were vnder him (for then should he haue complayned of himselfe, béeyng theyr Metropolitane) but of suche he complayneth, as were in other places and Prouinces, as may be séene by these wordes of his. 
                              Ita vt videas in Ecclesia passim, quos non merita sed pecuniae ad Episcopatus
                              De dig. Sacer cap. 5. 
                              ordinem prouexerunt, So that a man maye see euery where in the Churche suche as are promoted to the order of a Bishop, not by desertes but by money, and therefore this coniecture is soone answered.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 26. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 71. Sect. 6.
                     Thirdly, for that Ambrose in an other place (which you after cite) deuidyng all the Church into the cleargie and laytie, dothe subdeuide the cleargie into Byshoppes, Elders, and Deacons, and therefore it is not lyke, that there was any which had any continuall function of archebyshoppe: But as he was called 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         or leader of the daunce which commeth fyrst, and after commyng in agayne in the seconde or thyrde place, is no more so called, so that bishop was called Archebishop, which for the time present did gather the voyces of the rest of the bishops, which he by and by layde downe, with the dissoluyng of the meetyng. And that thys is not my coniecture only, that there was no ordinarye or absolute Archebishop Where, or which centurie
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         let the Centuries be seene Vntruth. whych alledge that place of Ambrose to proue that the office of an archebishop was not then come into the Churche, which was foure hundred yeares after Christ, and more also.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is a dauncing deuise in déede, withoute any shadow of truthe, as it maye appeare by that whiche already is alleadged, and shall do more and more by that which followeth. You are maruellous circumspect in your quotations least you shoulde be tripped, and therefore you saye let the Centuries be seene, but you tell not where. Surely you doe verie vntruely reporte the Centuries, for I haue redde them where they doe alleadge that place of Ambrose, and there is not to be founde any suche matter, but the cleane contrarie, as is to be séene in that placeCent. 4 cap. 7. by you alleadged of the fourth Cent. the wordes be these: 
                              Episcopi & Metropolitani dicebantur à praecipuis seu primarijs ciuitatibus, sicut Basilium Metropolitanū Capadocū, Zozomenus vocat lib. 3. cap. 16. Et Archiepiscopi, qualem Seleuciae fuisse Simeonem, idem retulit lib. 2. cap. 8. Patriarcha, totius alicuius prouinciae diceba
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ur Episcopus, vt Socrates indica
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  Lib. 5. cap. 8.

Bishoppes and Metropolianes were named of the chiefe and princip
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ll Cities, as Zozomenus calleth Basile the Metropolitane of Cappadocia, lib. 3. cap. 16. and Archebishoppes, suche as he reporteth that Simeon was of Seleucia lib. 2. cap. 8. Patriarke of some whole prouince was called a Bishop, as Socrates sheweth lib. 5. cap. 8. Wherefore it is too much boldnesse in you to auouche so manyfest vntruths. Neyther is it any maruel though you quote not the places, for forgerie séeketh corners.Forgerie seeketh corn
                                 〈1 line〉
                              rs.
                        
                        And although that whiche hath bin hytherto alleadged out of the Councells of Nice, and Antioche, with the iudgemente of so manie learned men interpretyng the same, might serue to perswade any reasonable man, that the office and name of Archebishoppe and Metropolitane is bothe of greate antiquitie and not for one action onely, or a dauncyng office (as you woulde haue it) but fixed and permanent: yet bycause I haue to doe wyth quarellers, before I goe any further in confuting, I will 
                              〈◊〉
                            downe the iudgement of other aunciente and famous wryters also, who allowe bothe of these names and offices: And fyrste I will recite suche as haue the names expressed with the offices, then suche as speake of the very thyng it sel
                              〈1 line〉
                           e withoute the names. I will begin with Councels.
                        The Councell of Nice, as you haue hearde, hath the name of Metropolitane,Councels of the name and o
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ice of Metropolitane an
                                 〈1 line〉
                               Archbishoppe. &c. 
                                 Con. Ni
                                       〈1 line〉
                                    en. Can. 4. 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . 7.
                            and dothe limitte vnto 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ym certaine Prouinces, to gouerne and take the care of. It hathe bin declared that bothe M. Caluine, Illyricus, M. Foxe, and others doe acknowledge the names and office of Patriarkes and Archbishoppes. &c. in the same Canon to be conteyned. Neyther doe they, nor any other learned wryter denie these names and offices to haue bene in the primitiue Churche, and that fixed to certayne places and persons, not mouable by actions, nor practised by course. Lykewyse you haue hearde, howe that Councell by this clause 
                              Secundùm morem antiquum, according to the auncient custome, doth signifie that these names and offices haue bene in the Churche of long tyme, or else it woulde not haue bin saide to be an olde custome.
                        
                        Moreouer, the nynthe Canon of the Councell of Antioche before alledged isCon. Antiocb. can. 9. most playne and euident, both for the name and the thing, together with the long continuance of them in the Churche.
                        The. 20. Canon of the same Councell of Antioche sayeth directly, that no BishoppesCan. 20. may call a seuerall Councell withoute the consente of theyr Metropolitanes.
                        In the sixth and. 37. Canons Concilij Arelatensis, mention is made of the Metropolitane,Con. Arelat. cano. 6. &. 37. of his authoritie in ordering of bishoppes, and of the authoritie of his Synode.
                        The lyke bothe for the name and the matter also, touchyng ordeynyng ofCon. L
                                 〈1 line〉
                              odic. can. 12. Con Cartb. 2. Can 12. Byshoppes is in the twelsth Canon of the Councell of Laodicea.
                        In the seconde Councell of Carthage in the twelfthe Canon it is euident, that there was a Primate in euerye Prouince, and that withoute his commaundement it was not lawfull for any to bée ordeyned Bishop.
                        In the. 13. and. 17. and diuers other Canons of the general Councell of CarchageCon. Carth. can. 13.▪ 17. &c Con. Chalcedo. as it is in the Gréeke copie the authoritie of the Primate is also expressed.
                        In the Councell of Chalcedon the name of Archebishoppe is sundrye tymes vsed: Flauianus is there called Archebishop of Constantinople, Dioscorus Archebishop of Alexandria and one Atticus bishoppe of Nicopolis, dothe call the saide Dioscorus Archi
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 piscopum nostrum, our Archebishop. Leo is called Archebishop of Rome. &c.
                        
                        Of the Councels that folowed there is no doubte, and it were but superfluous for mee to stande in reciting of them, and therfore thys shall suffise for the Councels, to shew that bothe the name of Metropolitane or Archbishop, and also the authoritie is not vnhearde of in the Churche of Christ, or a flitting or slyding office.Fathers and 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of the name and 
                                 〈◊〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              t Archebishop. E
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 phanius.
                           
                        
                        Nowe to the fathers and stories. Epiphanius Lib. 2. tom. 2. haeri. 68. calleth one Peter Archebishoppe of Alexandria. And that it maye fully appeare, that it was bothe a continuall office and of greate authoritie and iurisdiction, I will sette towne his woordes.
                        
                           
                           
                              Et Meletius quidem in carcere detentus erat vnà cum praedictis Martyribus, ac Petro Alexandriae Arc
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 iepiscopo. &c. And Meletius truely was kepte in pryson togyther with the forenamed Martyrs, and Peter the Archbishop of Alexandria: and Meletius seemed to excell the other bishops of Aegypt, for he had the seconde place after Peter in his Archbishoprike, as being vnder him to helpe him, and looking to Ecclesiasticall matters vnder him: For this is the custome, that the Byshoppe of Alexandria hathe the Ecclesiasticall gouernmente of all Aegypte, Thebais, and Mareota, and Libya, and Ammonica, and Mareotis, and Pentapolis.
                        
                        In the same leafe he calleth this Peter Archbyshop thrée times. This Peter lyued in the yeare of our Lorde thrée hundred and foure, twentie yeres at the least beforePeter, Arch
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              bishop of Alexandria abou
                                 〈1 line〉
                               twentie yeres before the Councell of Nice. Idem.
                            the Councell of Nice.
                        The same Epiphanius in the same Booke and Tome 
                              baere. 69. writeth thus: 
                              Quotquot enim Ecclesiae in Alexandria catholicae Ecclesiae sunt, sub vno Archiepiscopo sunt. All the Churches that are Catholike Churches in Alexandria, are vnder one Archebyshoppe. And a little after he calleth Meletius Archebyshoppe of Aegypte, but yet subiecte to Alexander the Archebyshoppe of Alexandria, and all this was before the Councell ot Nice.
                        What can be spoken more aptely, and more playnely to my purpose? And if T. C. will cauill at the authoritie of the authour (whyche is the poorest shifte that can bée, especially when the authour is so generally allowed) then for breuities sake, I doe referre hym to the Epistle of Ianus Cornarius prefixed before this Booke, and to that whiche after warde I haue alledged in his defense out of the Centuries.
                        
                           Athanasius was called Archebyshoppe of Alexandria: and that it may appeare that it was not a bare title, but an office of Gouernment, you shall finde these wordes in his second Apologie:
                        
                           
                              Iscbaras quidam, vt nequaquam clericus, ita moribus improbissimus conatus est sui pagi insulas decipere, iactans sese clericum esse. Id vbi resciuisset eius loci Presbyter, mibi tum Ecclesias
                              Atbanas. Apol. 2. 
                              perlustranti renunciauit: ego igitur. &c. A certaine man named Ischaras, as hee was no Clearke, so was hee most wicked in manners, who wente aboute to deceyue the yles of his precincte, boasting that hee was a Clarke: when the Prieste of that place vnderstoode thereof, hee tolde it vnto mee, when I was visiting my Churches, so I sente the same man togyther wyth Macharius the Prieste to fetche vnto mee Ischaras, whome when they founde sicke in his chamber, they commaunded hys father to warne hys sonne, that hee attempted no suche thing as was reported of him. And after in the same place followeth Ischaras Letters of submission to Athanasius. In the same Apologie there are Letters of submission written by Arsennius Byshoppe of Hipsell, and the Ministers and Deacons of the same Diecesse to Athanasius: the beginning of the Letters is this: 
                              Et nos quoque diligentes pacem & vnanimitatem cum ecclesia catholica, cui tu per Dei gratiam praefectus es, volensque ecclesiastico Canoni, pro veteri instituto, subijci, scribimus tibi (Papa dilecte) promittimusque in nomine Domini nos deinceps non communicaturos cum schismaticis. &c. And we also louing peace, and concord with the Catholike Churche ouer whiche thou arte by the grace of God appoynted, and willing accordyng to the olde custome to be subiecte to the Ecclesiasticall Canon, write to thee (louing father) and in the name of the Lorde promise, that wee hences orth will not communicate with the Schismatikes.
                        
                        By this it is playne that Athanasius had great iurisdiction ouer many Byshops, and other Ministers, and ecclesiasticall persons. Againe in the same Apologie mention is made of an Archbyshop.
                        
                        In the same Booke the Priestes and Deacons of the Churches of Mareota, in an Epistle that they writte to the Synode, besydes that they call Athanasius, Episcopum nostrum, oure Byshoppe, they shewe that hée vsed to visite the Churche solemnlye accompanyed. Theyr wordes are woorthe the notyng, and bée these folowyng: 
                              Vtpote qui non longis finibus ab Episcopo distemus,
                              
                              & comites in lustranda Marioteei cohasimus, nunquam enim ille solus visitandi causa itinera obire solet: sed comites secum trabere, Presbyteros & Diaconos & non paucos ex plebe. Bicause we dwell not farre from the Byshoppe, and we accompanied him whilest he visited Mariotes, for he is neuer wont alone to take iourneyes in visitations, but to take companions with him, Priestes and Deacons, and many of the people. And his own wordes a little before that Epistle speaking of these Priestes, and Deacons, be these: 
                              Et mecum Prouincias lustrabant, And they visited the Prouinces with me. Whereby also it is euident, that he had a large iurisdiction, and that he did visite his Prouinces. The same Athanasius in that. Apologie, declaring what this place called Mariotes is, sayth: 
                              Mariotes ager est in Alexandria, quo in loco nunquam fuit Episcopus: imo ne Chorepiscopus quidem, sed vniuer sae eius loci Ecclesiae Episcopo Alexandrino subiacent: tamen vt singuli pagi, suos presbyteros habeant. Mariotes is a territorie of Alexandria, where there was neuer Byshop, no not so muche as a Byshops deputie, but all the Churches of that place are vnder the Byshop of Alexandria, yet so that euery village haue their Priestes.
                        
                        In his Epistle Ad solitariam vitam degentes, he calleth Lucius Metropolitane of Sardinia, and Dionysius Metropolitane of Mediolane.
                        
                        Socrates Lib. 5. cap. 8. sayth, that in the Councell of Constantinople, They confirmedSocrates. the faythe of the Nicene Councell, and appointed Patriarkes, assigning their Prouinces, that the Byshoppes of one Dioces shoulde not intermedle in other Churches (for this before was indifferently vsed by reason of persecution) And to Nectarius was allotted Megalopolis, and Thracia. &c.
                        
                        The same is to be séene in the Canons of that Councell of Constantinople.Iustinian. Illyricus. Cent. 4.
                        
                        I omitte Iustinian the Emperoure, who so often mentioneth these names and offices in his Constitutions. I also omitte that Illyricus calleth Cyprian Metropolitane of Carthage: and the fourthe Centurie, where Ambrose is called Metropolitane, hauyng gouernmente of many Churches. Neyther shall I néede to repeate the places of Caluine, M. Foxe, M. Beza Lib. conf. cap. 5. or other late wryters iudgementes, who directely confesse, that these names were vsuall in the Primitiue Churche, and that the office was permanente: for this that is spoken, maye suafice.
                        I will come to those Authours and places, where the office and iurisdiction isThe office of Metropolitan & Archbishop without the name. Cyprian. Greg. Nazi.
                            spoken of, though the name be not expressed.
                        
                           Cyprian Lib. 4. Epist. 8. sayeth, that he hadde a large Prouince, 
                              Habet enim Numidiam & Mauritaniam sibi cobaerentes, for it hathe Numidia and Mauritania annexed vnto it. And Gregorie Nazianzene in the Oration that he made in the commendation of Cyprian sayeth, that he didde rule and gouerne not onely the Churches of Carthage or Affrike, 
                              sed & Hesperiae vniuersae: imò Orienti ferè ipsi ad finem vsque meridiei & Septentrionis: but of all Spayne, and almoste of the whole Easte, vnto the ende of the Southe and the Northe. And what was this else, but to bée an Archebyshop?
                        
                           Eusebius Lib. 6. cap. 1. sayeth, that Demetrius was Byshop of the Parishes of Alexandria,Eusebius. and of Egypt, and this Demetrius liued 
                              Anno Domini. 191. Eusebius testifyeth there likewise that one Iulianus was before him in the same roume.
                        
                           Athanasius in an Epistle that he writte De sentētia Dionysij Episcopi Alexand. contra Arrianos,
                           Atbanasius. affirmeth, 
                              ad Dionysium Alexandria▪ Episcopum curam etiam Ecclesiarum in Pentapoli superioris Libyae pertinuisse, that vnto Dionysius Bishoppe of Alexandria the care of the Churches in Pentapolis of the higher Libya perteyned. And it is manyfeste in the same Epistle, that these Churches had their Byshoppe besydes. For Eusebius Lib. 7. cap. 26.
                           Euseb. writeth, that Basilides was Byshoppe of the parishes of Pentapolis while Dionysius lyued: so that it is euident that Dionyfius was an Archebyshoppe. And this is that Dionysius that is called Alexandrinus, whose workes be extante, and is one of the most ancient writers. The same Eusebius sayth, that Gregorie did gouerne the Churches throughout Pontus.
                        
                        
                           Sozomen. Lib. 7. cap. 19. sayth, that though there be many cities in Sythia; yet they
                           Sozom.
                           
                           haue but one bishoppe.
                        
                        
                           Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 11. testifyeth, that Amphilochius to whome the Metropolitane citie of Licaonia was committed to be gouerned, did also gouerne that whole countreye, and did driue from thence the heresie of the Messalians: And in the same Chapter weTheodoret. reade that Letoius gouernour of the Churches of Militia, burned Monasteries infected with that heresie: whiche declareth that Bishops had then greate authoritie in gouernment.
                        
                           Aurelius Bishop of Carthage in the Councell of Affrike sayd, that he had the ouersyght and care of many Churches.
                        But what néede I labour so muche in a matter that can not be vnknowne toCon. Afric. can. 55. in graeco. any that is of any reading, this therfore shall suffice bothe for the name and office of an Archebishop & Metropolitane. &c. against the vnlearned distinction that you haue vsed in answering S. Ambrose.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 26. Diuision.
                  
                     Auswere to the Admonition. Pag. 66. Sect. 5.
                     
                        Sozomenus lykewyse Lib. 2. of his Ecclesiasticall historie cap. 8. calleth Symeon Archbishop of Seleucia, and Basile the greate Metropolitane of Cappadocia. Lib. 3. cap. 16.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 71. Sect. vlt.
                     Basill you saye, the great Metropolitane of Cappadocia. I haue shewed what the woorde Metropolitane signifyeth, and howe there was not then, suche a Metropolitane as wee haue now, and as the Admonition speaketh agaynst. You playe as he whithe is noted, as none of the wysest among the marchauntes, whyche thought that euery shippe that approched the hauen was his ship. For so you thinke that wheresoeuer you reade Metropolitane or Archebishoppe▪ foorthwith you thinke, there is your Metropolitane, or your Archebishop, where as it shall appeare, that besydes the name, they are no more lyke, than a bishop with vs is lyke a minister.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What this worde Metropolitane signifyeth, what office and iurisdiction he had, is before sufficiently declared, and may more at large appeare in the constitutions of Iustinian. Lykewyse whether our Metropolitans in office any thing at all differ from them. Surely he that shall well consider your vnapte answeres and your vtopicall iestes, may thinke that you weare the liuerie of those marchantes you talke of, and may verie wel sayle in their ships.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 27. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 72. Sect. 1.
                     I can not tel whether you would abuse your reader here with the fallation of the accent, bycause this worde great is so placed betwene Basile and Metropolitane, that it may be as well referred to the Metropolitane, as to Basill, and so you hauing put no comma, it seemeth you had as lieue haue your reader, reade great Metropolitane as great Basil. But that the simpler sort be not deceyued therby, it is not out of the way to let the reader vnderstande what a great Metropolitane this was, whiche appeareth, for that when he was threatned by the magistrate confiscation, of hisSozom. 6. l. e. 16. goods, answered, that he was not afrayde of the threatnings, and that all his goodes were a very fewe bookes, and an olde gowne: suche were then those Metropolitanes, vnder whose shadowes M. Doctor goeth about to shroude all this pompe and princely magnificence of Archbishops.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You search verie narowly when you misse not a comma, but you knowe what nugator signifieth. All men of learning can tell that Basile is in common speach called Basile the great. And yet if he were called great Metropolitan, the title might verie well agrée vnto him: for he had large and ample iurisdiction, being

bishoppe of Cappadocia, as Athanasius dothe also witnesse in his Epistle written to Palladius.
                        
                        The contention is for the name and the office, not for the ryches, al
                              〈1 line〉
                           houghe I thynke that there both are and haue bene Bishops in Englande as poore as Basile if they had 
                              〈1 line〉
                           en taken so soone after they were placed in theyr bishoprikes, as Basile was nowe at this tyme.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 28. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 72. Sect 2. 3. 4.
                     As for Symeon Archbishop of Sele
                           〈1 line〉
                        cia, I will not denie, but at that time was the name of Archbishops. For then An vnaduised answer. Satan had made thorough the titles of Archbishops, Pr
                           〈1 line〉
                        ates, and Patriarches, as it were three staires, wherby Antichrist might clyme vp into his cursed seate, notwithstanding there wanted not good decrees of godlie councelles which did strike at these proude names, and went aboute to keepe them downe. But the swelling waters of the ambition of dyuers, coulde not by any bankes be kept in, which hauing once broken out in certaine places, afterwardes couered almost the face of the whole earth.
                     This 
                           〈1 line〉
                        deuour of godly men may appeare in the Councell of Carthage, which decreed, that theCon. Car
                              〈1 line〉
                           . cap. 39. bishop of the fyrst seat shold not be called 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , that is, eyther the chiefe of the priestes, or the hyghe priest, or any suche thing, by whiche woordes (any such thing) he shutteth out the name of Archbishop, and all such hau
                           〈1 line〉
                        e titles.
                     The same decree also was made in the Africane councell, and if you saye that it was made againstCon. tom. 1 cap. 6. the Pope of Rome, or to forbidde that any man should be called Archbishoppe, shewe me where ther was eyther bishop of Rome, or any other that euer made any such title or chal
                           〈1 line〉
                        nge to be the generall Bishop of all at that tyme, when this councell of Carthage was holden, when as the first of those which did make any su
                           〈1 line〉
                        h chalenge, was the bishop of Constantinople, which notwithstanding An vntruth. chalenged not the preheminence first ouer all, but that he might ordeyne bishops of Asia, Pontus, Thracia, whiche were before appointed by theyr Synodes, and this was in the councell of Chalcedon, which was long after that councell of Carthage before remembred.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is before sufficiently declared, that these names and offices were allowed and confirmed by the Councell of Nice, and therefore not brought in by Satan. Moreouer this Symeon Archbishop of Seleucia, liued as it may appeare by most Chronicles aboute the tyme of the Councell of Nice, and was martyred by Sapores the king of Persia.
                        
                        Which peraduenture if you had vnderstoode, you woulde not haue burste oute into this heate of woordes, for then might you haue made the same answere to Ambrose his authoritie which was long after him, & so kept secret your owne fond deuise.
                        The Councell of Carthage and also of Affrike was at that tyme, wherein the Bishop of Rome by his Legates didde clayme the right of hearyng of appeales, from whome soeuer they were made, and for his purpose alleaged a counterfait Canon of the Councell of Nice. Wherefore it is moste certayne, that then th
                              〈1 line〉
                            Bishop of Rome beganne at the leaste to clayme the super
                              〈1 line〉
                           oritie ouer all Churches, and to take vpon hym as it were the name of vniuersall Byshoppe: and therfore this canon is made against him.
                        And that thys is true, the Epistle of the Councell of Affrike written to Celestinus, then Bishoppe of Rome declareth. For after that they haue 
                              〈1 line〉
                           esyred hym that he woulde admit no suche appeales, nor absolue such as they should excominunicate, bycause that was to doe agaynst the decrées of the Councell of Nice, and to abridge them of their iurisdiction and libertie: they adde and saye:
                        
                           Both bicause this priuiledge hath bin taken from the Church of Aphrike by no constitution of the fathers, and also the decrees of the councell of Nice hath committed bothe the inferiour Clearkes and the Bishops themselues vnto their Metropolitanes: for it was discretely and rightly consydered, that all matters are to bee determined in the places, where they began. and that no prouince can lacke the grace of the holie ghost, wherby the prieste of Christe may be hable, both wisely to see, and also constantly to mainteyn the right: especially
                           
                           for that it is lawfull, for euery man that shall mislike the discretion of the iudges, to appeale either to particular councels within the same prouince, or else to an vniuersal councell: vnlesse perchaunce some man will thinke, that God is able to inspire the triall of iustice into one man alone, and will not inspire the same into a greate number of priests meeting togyther in Councell. And how may such beyond sea iudgemente be thoughte good, wherevnto the persons of the witnesses which in triall of truth are thought necessary either for that they be women, or for the infirmitie of their age, or for many other incident letts, cannot be brought. Now that any should be sent abroade as it were from your holinesse side, we find it not decreed in any Councell. And a little after, And send you not any your Clerks hither to execute iustice at any mans request, least we seeme to bring the smokie puffe of the world into the Church of Christ. &c.
                        
                        Whereby it is plaine, that they only prohibite that title of vniuersalitie and of generall iurisdiction, that the Byshop of Rome now claymed and at that time began to claime ouer all Churches, and not the names of superioritie due vnto any in their owne prouince. For that perogatiue of iurisdiction ouer. Byshops and other ministers they acknowledge to be due to the Metropolitane, as it is euident in the words of that same epistle, which I haue recited.
                        Moreouer it is manifest that this name Archbishop was then vsed, and after thatThe name of Primate allowed in the Councell of Carthage. M. Foxe.
                            time continued and not disalowed by any, as it may appeare by that which hath bin hitherto written. And this name Primate (whiche is as hautie as the name of Archbyshop) is allowed euen in that councell of Carthage, as may appeare in the. 13. 17. and. 23. canons, as it is in the Gréeke copye. Wherfore in my opinion M. Foxe doth aptly decide this controuersie, in that learned treatise of his firste tome, where he speaking of this same Councell and of this Canon which you haue recited, (for I suppose you did borrow it there) signifyeth in effect that neyther the name of Primate, Archbyshop or Metropolitane, is by that Canon prohibited, but rather these ambitious titles of uniuersall Byshop, prince of all priests, head of all priests, and suche like. Whiche names séeme to derogate authoritie both of iurisdiction and office from all other priestes, and therfore alittle after he saith. Thus then these titles aboue recited, as Byshop, Metropolitane, Byshop of the first seate, Primate, Patriarke, Archbyshop, that is to meane, chiefe byshop or headbishop 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              o other byshops of his prouince, we denie not but were then in old time applyed and might be applyed to the Byshop of Rome, like as the same also were applyed to other Patriarks in other chiefe cities and prouinces. And in the same place, after he 
                              〈1 line〉
                           athe declared this title (summus orbis Pontifex) as it is now vsed in Rome to be vnhard of in the primitiue time of the Churche, that is fiue hundred yeares after Christ. He saith the like is to be affirmed also of other presumptuous titles of like ambition, as the head of the vniuersall Church, the vicar of Christ in earth, Prince of priests, with such like, which be all new found termes. &c. so that it is plaine, that these general titles of vniuersall iurisdiction ouer all, and not the particular names of superioritie ouer seuerall Churches, is by this Councell forbidden.
                        Thys farther appeareth in the fyfth Councell of Constantinople where Iohn notCon. Const
                                 〈1 line〉
                              n. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                               alias the. 2. being content with the name of Patriarke of Constantinople would néedes haue it ratifyed by the councell that he should be called Oecumenicus Patriarcha, that is vniuersall Patriarch. Against which title not of Patriach but of vniuersall Patriarch, both Pelagius and Gregory at that time byshops of Rome, the one succéeding the other, did earnestly write, and this is the true meaning of that Canon.
                        
                           Ignatius immediatly after the Apostles time calleth a Byshop principem sacerdotum,
                           Ignatius epist. ad Smirn. Ambros. in. 4. Eph. the Prince of priests, or chiefe Priest: and so doth Ambrose in the fourth ad Ephesios. But this they do not attribute to any one as hauing vniuersall authoritie ouer all, but to euery byshop in respect of such as be vnder him.
                        Touching the byshop of Constantinople, your are deceyued very muche, and declare in hym the same vnskilfulnesse that you haue done in the other. For it is euident that he required thys name and title of vniuersall Patriarch ambitiously as béeing desirous to be superiour to all the Patriarchs in the worlde. This to be trueDistinct. 99. is manifest by the decrée of Pellagius Distinct. 99. Canon Nullus.
                            And by the Epistles of

Gregory written purposely of that m̄atter. Neyther do I reade in any approued author to the contrary.
                        Agayne you are deceiued greatly in the Councell. For though the Byshoppe of Constantinople did chalenge in the Councell of Chalcedon the righte of ordering Metropolitanes in those places, yet doth he not in that Councell chalenge the title of vniuersall Patriarch, whiche notwithstanding was offered to the Byshoppe of Rome in that Councell of Chalcedon, but first giuen to the Patriarch of Constantinople, in the seconde Councell of Constantinople: or as it is termed in the booke ofCon. tom. 2. Councels, the fifte, bycause it was the fiftegenerall Councell, as it may appeare in the same councell. Moreouer whereas you say, that the Byshop of Constantinople required that he might ordeyne Byshops in Asia. &c. if you marke the words diligently, you shall perceiue that he re quired therin nothing but according to the sixth Canon of the Councell of Nice, whiche is also there alledged for that purpose: but I haue shewed before how the Byshop of Rome made this chalenge of vniuersalitie in effect, and indéede, euen in that Councell of Carthage, where this Canon by you alleadged is, and therefore I néede not stand any longer vpon this poynt.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 29. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition Page. 66. Sect. 6. 7. 8. &. Page. 67. Sect. 1. 2.
                     
                        Damasus calleth Stephen an Archdeacon.Archdeacons
                     
                     
                        Hierome in his epistle ad Euagrium hath this name Archdeacon.
                     
                        Sextus in his decrees saithe that Laurence the Martyr was an Archdeacon.
                     
                        Sozomenus lib. 7. cap. 19. maketh mention of an Archdeacon reading the scriptures.
                     
                        Socrates in the seuenth booke of his ecclesiasticall historie speaketh of one Timothie an Archdeacon.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 72. Sect. 5. 6. 7.
                     For to proue ye lawfulnesse of the name of an Archdeacon, the antiquitie, the necessitie of it, the testimonies of (a) foure are brought, which neyther speake of their lawfulnes nor of their necessitie,(*) T. C. f
                              〈1 line〉
                           eth in his accompt, and telleth but fower, for fiue. and they say not indeede so much as god saue them, and two of these witnesses are Popes, whereof the first and best, ordayned that if the Metropolitane did not fetch his pall at the Apostolike see of Rome within three moneths after he be consecrated, that then he should lose his dignitie, as In what part of Gratian. Gratian witnesseth in the decrees that he ascribeth vnto Damasus.
                     I doubt not therefore that this is but a forger vpon whome you would father the Archdeacon: For that Damasus in whose place you put this forger liued Anno. 387. at what time the see of Rome had no such tyrannie as this and other things which are fathered of him do pretend. And if this be inough to proue Archdeacons I can with better witnesse proue subdeacons, Acoluthes, exorcists, lectors, ostiarios, these doth Ensebius make mention of, an This is vntrue, for Sixtuis more ancient. auncienter writer than any you bring: and out of Ruffine, Theodorete, Sozomene, Socrates. &c. monkes almost in euery page, and herevpon it is more lawfull for me to conclude, that monkes, subdeacons, exorcists, acoluthes, ostiarij, lectores, are necessary ecclesiasticall orders in the Churche, as you conclude the necessitie of the Archdeacon.
                     I perceiue you care not whether the Archdeacon fal or no, that you bestow so little cost of him, and leaue him so nakedly. And if I would be but halfe so bold in What haue you else but cō
                           iectures? comectures and diuinations as you are, I could say that this sleight handling of the Archdeacon, and sweating so much aboute the Archbyshop, is there vpon, that you would be loth to come from being Deane to be an Archdeacon, and you liue in some hope of being Archbyshop: but I will not enter so farre: and surely for any thing that I see, you mighte haue trussed vp the Archbyshop as shorte as you do the Archdeacon, for they stād vpon one pinne, and those reasons which establish the one establish the other. Whervpon also commeth to passe that all those reasons which were before alledged against the Archbyshop, may be drawen against the Archdeacon.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.The vntoward dealing of the replier, & his vnsufficiēt answer.
                        
                        My purpose in that place is (as you mighte haue séene if you woulde) to proue that the names of Archbyshops Archdeacon. &c. be not Antichristian

names, that is, names inuented by Antichriste, but most auncient, for those be my very words, & as I haue proued that to be most true in Metrapolitanes and Archbyshops, by shewing that they were in the Churche, before the Pope was Antichrist, so I do the like of Archdeacons. And where I haue brought in fiue witnesses, you say I haue brought in fower. Damasus, Hierome, Sixtus, Sozomene and Socrates be in number fiue, and of these fiue you haue answered only two, and that after your vsuall manner, by reiecting the Authors. What is falsely attributed to Damasus in other matters is no answer to this, that he reporteth of Archdeacons, whiche also the third Centurie alledgeth as true. And though he were Byshop of Rome, yet was he a vertuous, learned, and godly Byshop. So was Sixtus in like manner, who liued Byshop of Rome 
                              Anno. 265. So that Damasus was neyther the first nor the best. For Sixtus was martyred for the Gospell, so was not Damasus. They speake as much for Archdeacons as I require, that is that their names were not inuented by Antichrist: and if there were then no such tyrannie in the Churche of Rome, as you here mislike, and yet this name in that Church, it is not like to be a tyrannicall name.
                        But I maruaile you will deale so barely in this matter, knewing that Hierome, who liued in Damasus his time, hathe this name Archdeacon oftner than twise or thrise. Without doubt you do not well consider what you write.
                        This Answer of yours was neuer as yet approued of any learned mā. For what if Eusebius make mention of Subdeacons, Acoluthes. &c. which were peraduenture profitable offices in the Church at that time, doth it therefore follow that it is vnlawfull to haue Archdeacons? I conclude no necessitie of the Archdeacon, but I conclude hys antiquitie, and bycause you cannot answer that, you fall to scoffing and vnséemely iesting as your manner is, and so do you shift off thrée of my witnesses.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 30. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 72. lin. 2. &. Sect. 1.
                     Hauing therefore before proued the vnlawfulnesse of them, I will here set downe the differēce betweene those Archdeacons that were in times past, and those whiche are nowe, whereby it may appeare they are nothing like but in name.
                     They were no ministers as appeareth in Vntruth, no such thing appeareth. Sozomene, ours are.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What one reason haue you vsed to proue the vnlawfulnesse of them. If you meane such reasons as you haue against Archbyshops, they be fully answered.
                        Not one word is there in the seuenth booke and nineteenth Chapter of Sozomene to proue that Archdeacons eyther then were not, or now may not be ministers. For all that he speaketh in that chapter is this. And this also is a strange thing in the Church of Alexandria, whiles the Gospells are a reading, the Byshop doth not rise vp, which I haue hard of others. This holy booke a Monke that is an Archdeacon readeth there, in other places Deacons: in many Churches the priests only: but in principall feasts Byshops. Howe you can conclude that Archdeacons were not then ministers by any thing here spoken, surely I know not, for if you meane, bycause he saith that in some churches only Priests did reade, you can no more thereof conclude that Archdeacons were then no Priests, than you may that they were no Deacons, or that Byshops be no Priestes, neyther is it necessary that they shoulde be nowe ministers, it is sufficiente if they be Deacons: yet may they be ministers and méete it is that they should so be, and you cannot proue the contrary.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 31. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 73. Sect. 2.
                     They were tyed to a certaine Church, and were called Archdeacon of such a congregation orCon. Vrbinum. Sozo. 7. lib. cap. 19. Church, ours are tyed to none, but are called Archdeacons of such a shire.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is no other words in that booke and chap. of Sozomene touching Archdeacons, than these whiche I haue before recited: what they make for your purpose let the reader iudge. Your Vrbanum Concilium is very obscure, for there is none such to be found in all the volumes of Councels. But to put you out of doubt, we haue no Archdeacons, but such as be tyed to one Church, though they haue the names sometimes of the Shire, wherein their iurisdiction lyeth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 32. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 73. Sect. 3.Ierom. to Euagri.
                     
                     They were chosen by all the deacons of the Church where they be Archdeacons, ours are appointed by one man, and which is no Deacon.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There can be no such custome gathered of Hieroms words in that place, only he vsing an example to declare what the manner of choosing their Byshop was in the Church of Alexandria saith, that they elected one from among themselues whome they placing in an higher roome called him a Byshop, as if the souldiers should choose their captayne, or Deacons should choose one of them whome they know to be painfull, and name him archdeacon. You can no more hereof conclude, that it was then vsuall for deacons to choose their Archdeacon, than you may that it was also vsual for souldiers to choose their captaine: neyther can you here by proue that our Archdeacons are not like vnto theirs (if this were true) no more than you can, that our Captaines are not like vnto theirs, bycause the Souldiers do not choose them. But what create matter is it, if they were then chosen by Deacons and be not so now? and doth not the Byshop appoynt them and is not the Byshop more than a Deacon?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 33. Diuision.Con. Nicen can. 14. and after Ruf. 20
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 73. Sect. 4.
                     They were subiect to the minister of the word, ours are aboue them, and rule ouer them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is not one word of Archdeacons in the fourtaenth Canon of the Councell of Nice, nor in the 20. after Ruffine, and therefore you do but abuse the reader. That which is in that place is spoken of Deacons onely, and is at this day obserued in this Church.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 34. Diuision.Vntruthes, for neyther of them speaketh of Atchdeacons in those places alledged to this purpose.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 73. Sect. 5.Ierom. ad Euag. Aug. quaest. noui & vet. teit. q. 101.
                     
                     It was counted to them great arrogancie if they preferred themselues to any minister or elder

of the Churche: ours will not take the best ministers of the Church as their equals. If therefore Archdeacons will haue any benefite by the Archdeacons of old time, it is meete they shoulde content themselues with that place which they were in.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        No such thing is in that epistle of Hierome: only he speaketh of deacons, touching that matter, whome he also she weth in the Church of Rome to haue bin in certaine points preferred before ministers, neyther is there one word of Archdeacons in that booke of Augustines, but only of Deacons. You must learne to make a distinction betwixt an Archdeacon and a Deacon, and not to make the reader beléeue that the authors you quote in the margente, speake of Archdeacons, when they onely speake of Deacons. My witnesses how few so euer they be, are sufficiente to withstand thys cowardly assault of yours, wherein there is neyther strength nor truth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 35. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 67. Sect. 3.
                     
                        Augustine in his first booke de moribus ecclesiae Catholicae, maketh mention ofDeanes. Deanes, and their offices.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 73. Sect. 6.
                     As for the office of a deane, as it is vsed with vs it is therefore Vntruthes. vnlawfull, for that he being minister, hath Vntruthes. noseuerall charge or Congregation appointed wherein he may exercise his ministerie, and Vntruthes. for that he is ruler and as it were master of diuers other ministers in his Colledge, which likewise haue no seuerall charges of congregatiōs, and for that (which is most intollerable) both he himselfe oftentimes hauing a seuerall Church or benefice (as they call it,) is vnder the coloure of his deaneship absent from his Church, and suffereth also those that are vnderneath him, to be likewise absent from their Churches. And whereas M. Doctor alledgeth S. Augustine to proue this office to be auncient: indeede the name is there found, but besides the name, not one propertie of that deane which we haue. For Augustine speaking of the monks of those dayes, saythe that the money which they gate with the labor of their hands, they gaue to their deane, which did prouide them meate and drinke and cloth and all things necessary for them: So that their monkes shoulde not be drawen away from their studies and meditations, through the care of worldly things: So that this Deane which he speaketh of, was seruaunte and stewarde and cater to the Monks, and therefore only called Deane, bycause he was steward and cater to ten Monks. Now let it be seene what Augustines deane maketh for the deane which is theirs, and what faith and trust M. Doctor vseth, in reciting of the old fathers.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        All thys is but your owne sansies taken for principles and groundes. For fyrste it is vntrue that euery Minister muste of necessitie haue some seuerallTractat. 4. charge, as I haue declared before. Secondly it is as vntrue, that a Deane hathe no seuerall charge or congregation, wherein to exercise his ministerie. For there is no Cathedrall Churche withoute a congregation and charge. The third that followeth, is builded of the same groundes that these two fyrste be, and may as well be spoken agaynste the masterships of suche Colledges in the vniuersities, wherein any preachers or ministers bée maynteyned. Whyche argueth that you meane the same to Colledges that you doe to Cathedrall Churches, and that you woulde haue ministers frée from subiection. Last of all, that whyche you say is most intellerable, you speake withoute any tolerable reason: For Master Deane and hys Prebendaries do more good both in the Churche of Englande generally, and in

their seuerall Churches particularly, and take more paines in one moneth, than you and your companions (whereof some notwithstanding are contente without doing any dutie at all, to enioy prebendes more than one) in one whole yeare. And if eyther Master Deane or the Prebendaries neglect their dueties, there be superiours and lawes to reforme them.
                        The place of Augustine proueth the name of a Deane: it proueth a College and societie, whereof he is Deane: it argueth a superioritie and gouernmente, for he saith they be called 
                              Decani, ideò quòd sint denis praepositi, Deanes, bycause they are set ouer tenne: it sheweth an office to care and prouide for them, and sée that they haue all thynges necessary: it declareth dayly exercise of praying and teaching: for he addeth thus. 
                              Conueniunt autem diei tempore extremo de suis quisque habitaculis, dum adhuc ieiuni sunt, ad audiendum illum patrem, & conueniunt ad singulos patres terna ad minimum hominum milia: Nam etiam multò numerosiores sub vno agunt. They come togyther at night euery man from his lodging whilest yet they are fasting, to heare that father: and theyAug. de moribus ecclesiae. come togyther to euery father, three thousand men at the least, for a greate meanie moe liue vnder one. &c.
                        
                        Now sir if God of his singular goodnesse hathe to the greate and vnspeakeable benefyte of his Churche, moued the harts of princes and men of wealth, so to indue suche places with possessions and reuenewes, that they hauing thynges necessary prouided for them, may bestow that tyme in studying, praying, preaching, and other godly exercises, whiche these that Sainct Augustine speaketh of, did in labouring with their handes, is Master Deanes name or office euer the woorse? howsoeuer it pleaseth you to terme these companies, that Sainct Augustine héere speaketh of: Yet were they Godly societies, and do very aptly set foorth the vtilitie, and the antiquitie of Churches and Colledges: the Deanes and Masters whereof, haue indéede the chiefe and speciall care of all externall things perteyning to them, whether it be landes, prouisions, or any thing else that is necessary: And therefore the liker to Sainct Augustines Deane, and the place more aptly alledged to proue the antiquitie of this name and office. If Master Doctor should vse no more faith in reciting the Doctors than you do, I woulde he were whipped at the crosse in Cheape.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 36. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag 67. Sect. 4.
                     Nytherto Antichrist had not inuaded the Church of Rome. But what shoulde I trouble you with any more authorities? those that be learned may easily vnderstand that these names Metropolitane, Archbyshop, Archdeacon, Primate, Patriarke, and suche lyke, be most auncient and approued of the eldest, best, and worthyest Councells, fathers, and writers.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 73. Sect. 7.
                     And vnto the end that these testimonies might be more autenticall, and haue some waighte in them, Master Doctor addeth, that hitherto Antichrist had not inuaded the seate of Rome. You shall haue much a do to proue that Antichrist had not inuaded the sce of Rome, when your Clement Anaclete, Anicete, and Damasus wrote: nay it is most certayne, that then he had possessed it: but what is that to the purpose, although there was no one singular head appeared or lifted vp, yet corruptiō of doctrine & of the sacraments, hurtful ceremonies, dominion & pompe of ye Cleargie, new orders, & functions of ye ministerie, which were the hāds that pulled him, ye feete which brought

him, the shoulders that lifted and heaued hym vp into that seat, were in the Church. Neither while you do thus speake, do you seeme to remember, that this monster needed not nine monethes, but almost nine hundred yeares, to be framed and fashioned, or euer he could with all his parts be brought to light. And althoughe the louer of this Antichristian building were not set vp: yet the foundations thereof being secretly and vnder the grounde laid in the Apostles time: you might easily know that in those times that you spake of, ye building was wonderfully aduaunced & growen very high, and being a very daungerous thing to ground any order or pollicie of the Churche vpon men at all, which in deede ought to haue their standing vpon the doctrine and orders of the Apostles, I wyll shew, what great iniurie M. Doctor doth, to send vs for our examples and patterns of gouernment to these times which he doth dicette vs vnto.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be but wordes, the same mighte be also spoken of the Apostles times. ForAntichrist began in the Apostles tunes 2. Thess. 2. 1. Io. 2.
                            enen then Paul speaking of Antichrist sayd, 
                              Nam mysterium nuncagit iniquitatis, for the mysterie of iniquitie doth already worke: And S. Iohn sayd that there then began to be many Antichristes: but doth this detract any thing from the truth taught in that time? or shall we therfore refuse to take such examples of it, as is conuenient for our time? There is no man of learning and modestie which will without manifest proofe condemne any order, especially touching the gouernment of the Churche, that was vsed and allowed during the time of the primitiue Church, which was the next. 500. yéeres after Christ, within the which time, most of my authorities are conteined. Neyther was there any functiō or office brought into the Church during al that time, allowed by any generall Councel or credible writer, which was not most meete for that time, and allowable by the word of God.
                        I graunt that Antichrist was working all this time, and grewe more and more, for else could there neuer haue bene so many sectes and heresies from time to tyme spred in the Church, which was the cause of so many singular and notable Councels, so many profitable and necessary bookes, written by such learned and godly Doctors, as did with might and maine striue against them. Out of the which Councels and fathers, and best witnesses what was done in those times, I haue fetched my proofes: euen out of them (I say) that did with might and maine labour to kepe out Antichrist from the possession of the Church, and therefore not to be suspected to consent to Antichrist.
                        I knowe that those sectes and heresies gaue strength vnto Antichriste, and at the length were one speciall meanes of placing him in his throne, euen as I am also perswadedAntichrist worketh in England by contentious persons. that he worketh as effectually at this daye by your styrres and contentions, wherby he hath and will more preuaile against this Church of England, than by any other meanes whatsoeuer. Therefore it behoueth you to take héede, how you deuide the armie of Christ, which should vnanimiter fight against that Antichrist. As for vs we must follow the examples of those good fathers, and labour, accordingly to restore vnitie, and to preserue it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 37. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 73. Sect. vlt.
                     Eusebius out of Egesippus writeth, ye as long as the Apostles lyued, ye Church remained a pure virgin, for that if there were any that went about to corrupt the holy rule that was preached, theyEuseb. lib. 3. cap. 32. did it in the darke, and as it were digging vnderneath the earth. But after the death of the Apostles, and that generation was paste, whiche God vouchsaued to heare the diuine wisedome with their owne eares, then the placing of wicked error began to come into the Church.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is euident in diuerse places of the Scripture, namely in the first Epistle to theCorruptions in the churche in the Apostles time▪
                            Corinthians, and the Epistle to the Galath, that there were many grosse and greate corruptions openly professed in the Churche, by diuerse, not onely in maners, but also

in doctrine, euen in the Apostles tyme, and Eusebius hymselfe declareth that thereEuseb. lib. 2. Cap. 13. Idē. Lib. 3. was one Simon mencioned Acts. 8. whom he calleth the author of all heresie, 
                              Lib. 2. Cap. 13. Likewyse he sheweth 
                              Lib. 3. that Ebion, Cerinthus, and the Nicholaites, all horrible heretikes were in the Apostles time. Wherefore if this be a good reason, then is it not safe for vs to follow, no not the Apostles time.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 38. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 74. Sect. 1.
                     Element also in a certayne place, to confirme that there was corruption of doctrine immediatelyLi. stromat. somvvhat after the be ginning. after the Apostles time, alleageth the prouerb that there are fewe sonnes like their fathers.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I can finde no such thing in Clement, but the matter is not great whether he saye so or no. The argument is starke noughte: for if this followe, that we may take no example, paterne, or testimonie of gouernment, out of that time, bycause it was corrupte, then by the same reason muste we not take examples of any tyme, no not out of the Apostles time, bicause that was also corrupte as I haue saide. Your argumentes be passing strong, surely I maruaile with what boldnesse you write them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 39. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 74. Sect. 2.
                     And Socrates sayth of the Church of Rome and Alexandria, which were the most famousLi. 7. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 11. Churches in the Apostles tymes, that aboute the yeare. 430. the Romane and Alexandrian Byshops Socrates fal
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           fied. leauyng the sacred function were degenerate to a secular rule or dominion, wherevpon we see, that it is safe for vs to goe to the Scriptures, and to the Apostles tymes, for to fetche our gouernment and order: and that it is very daungerous to drawe from those ryuers the fountaynes wherof, are troubled and corrupted, especially when as the wayes whereby they runne are muddier and more fennie, than is the head itselfe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You falsifie the wordes of Socrates, for thus be sayth, For euen till that tyme the Nouatians florished maruellously at Rome, and had manye Churches and had gatheredSocra. lib. 7. Cap. 11. muche people. But enuie tooke holde of them, when as the Byshopprike of Rome and of Alexandria nowe a good whyle was passed beyonde the Limites of Priesthoode to an outwarde Dominion. He sayth not leauing the sacred function, were degenerate to a secular rule and dominion, as you translate it.
                        But why doth Socrates burste out into thys reprehension of them, euen bycauseSocrates a fauourer of ye Nouatians. 
                                 Niceph. lib. 6. Cap. 37. &. lib. 9. 13.
                            they expelled the Nouatian heretikes, of whome Socrates was a fautor, as it may appeare in Nicephorus, wherefore he dothein that place affectionately, and vniustly reproue both the Byshop of Rome, and Alexandria, for stoutly resisting those heretikes and expelling them from their Churches, especially they nowe increasing to so great a multitude, as it may séeme by Socrates wordes they dyd. And althoughe the words of Socrates whiche I haue alreadie recyted iustifie this to be true, yet doth his words followyng declare the same more euidently. For he commendeth the Byshop of Constantinople bycause he friendly interteyned the Nouatians, & suffered them quietly to remayne wythin the Citie, and yet it is certayne, that the Byshop of Constantinople, had as large authoritie as the Byshop of Alexandria, wherefore Socrates in thys poynt is no more to be beléeued against those Byshops, than you are against theSocrates doings agreable to our time. Byshoppes in thys Churche, whose authoritie you maligne vpon the lyke occasion.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 40. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 74. Sect. 3. 4.
                     And Where i
                              〈1 line〉
                            truth become. although M. Doctor hath brought neither Scripture nor reason, nor Councell wherein there is either name of Archbyshop, or Archdeacon, or proued that there may be: And althoughe he shew not so much as the name of them foure hundred yeares after our saniour Christ. And although where he sheweth them, they be either by counterfeit authors, or without any worde Would you haue better 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            tha
                              〈1 line〉
                            decrees for th
                              〈1 line〉
                            authoritie, and continuall 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ise. of approbation of good authors: yet as though he had shewed all and proued all, hauing shewed nothing nor proued nothing, he clappeth the hands to himself, and putteth the crowne vpon his owne head, saying, that those that be learned maye easily vnderstande, that the names Archbyshop, Archdeacon, Primate, Patriarke, be most auncient, and approued of the eldest, best, worthiest Councels, fathers, writers: and a little afterward, that they are vnlearned and ignorant which saye otherwyse.
                     Here is Vanitie. a victorye blowen with a great and sounding trumpet, that myghtè haue bene piped with an o
                           〈1 line〉
                        en straw, and if it shoulde be replyed againe, that M. Doctor hath declared in this little learning little reading, and lesse iudgement, there mighte growe controuersies without all fruite.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If I were not acquainted with this spirit, it would make me muse at such euident and manifest vntruthes, ioyned with so prophane iestes and tauntes. If I had alleaged no moe authorities but onely the Councell of Nice, it had bene sufficient to haue disproued this so bolde assertion of yours. But séeyng I haue alleaged other testimonies also, which euidently proue my purpose, I muste néedes thinke you not to be a man that greatly careth for your owne credit, but if you thinke they are few, & therefore accompt them for none, I haue now I trust in this Chapter. 25. Diuision supplyed their want, and made vp the number.
                        What Scriptures I haue appeareth afterwards. It is sufficient if I finde there the office of an Archbishop, as I doubte not but I shall, and therefore I say againe, that to doubt of the antiquitie of these names and offices, argueth great penurie of reading the auncient writers.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 41. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 67. Sect. 4.
                     And for as much as the originall and beginning of these names Metropolitane, Archbyshop, Archdeacon, Primate, Patriarke, and such like (such is their antiquitie) cannot be found so farre as I haue reade, it is to be supposed they haue their originall from the Apostles themselues. For as I remember S. Augustine hath thys rule in hysAugust▪
                         
                        118. Epist. ad Ianuar. Those things that be not expressed in the Scriptures and yet by tradition obserued of the vvhole Churche, come eyther from the Apostles or from generall Councels, as the obseruing of Easter, the celebrating of the day of the ascention, and of the comming of the holy Ghost, & suche like. Uery vnlearned therefore and ignorant be those which so boldly affirme that these names vsed in the purest time of the church, be Antichristian.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 74. Sect. 4. 5.
                     And by and by in saying that the Archbyshops beginning is vnknowne, in steade of a Modestie. bastard which some brought into the Church, that hid themselues bycause they were ashamed of y• child, he will make vs beleue that we haue a newe Melchisedech, without father, without mother, & whose generation is not knowen, and so concludeth with the place of S. Augustine, as farre as he remembreth, in the. 118. Epistle to Ianuarie, that the original of them is from the Apostles themselues.
                     Here This is fro
                              〈1 line〉
                            the matter. M. Doctor seemeth to seeke after some glory of a good memory, as thoughe he had net Augustine by him when he wrote thys sentence, and yet he maruellously forgetteth himselfe, for he vsed this place before in his. 23. Page, and cyteth it there precisely and absolutely, where also I

haue shewed, howe vnaduisedly that sentence of Augustine is approued: and howe that thereby a window is open to bryng in all Popery, & whatsoeuer other corrupt opinions. That the names of Lordes and honour as they are vsed in this Realme, are not meete to be giuen to the Ministers of the Gospell, there hath bene spoken before.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This place of Augustine is of greater force and credite with those that be learned, than that it can be shifted off. I haue answered whatsoeuer you saye against it in that place, and shewed of what credite it is with some famous writers of our time, namely with Master Zuinglius, Master Caluine, and Master Gualter. And surely I thinke no learned man doth dissent from them.
                        Your iestes are to vsuall and vnséemely for a Diuine, especially when you abuse the scripture to make sport withal. I might haue sayd also of you, yt you sought after some glory of a good memorie, when as you vsed the like kinde of speach, in alleaging of Gildas and Lumbard, Pag. 68. but that I am not delighted with such kinde of eloquence.Pag. 68. Sect. 4.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 42. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 65. Sect. 5.
                     Whether that the name of Prelate of the Garter, Earle, Coūtie Palatine, Honor, high commissioner, Iustice of peace and Quorum,Ciuill offices giuē to ecclesiasticall persons. being necessary offices in this common weale, partly for the honour of the Prince and Realme but especially for good gouernment of all estates and degrees of persons, be Antichristian, let those consider to whom God hath committed the sworde of gouernment: such insolent audacitie against states and lawfull regiment, is rather to be corrected with due punishment, than confuted by argument.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 74. Sect. 6. 7. 8.
                     As for Prelate of the Garter, if it be a needefull office, there are inowe to execute it besydes the Ministers, which for as much as they be appointed to watche ouer the soules of men, purchased with the bloude of Christ, all men vnderstand that it is not meete that they shoulde attend vpon the bodie, muche lesse vpon the legge, and least of al vpon the Garter. It is not vnlawfull for Princes to haue Ministers of their honor, but also it is not lawfull to take those that God hath appoynted for another ende, to vse to such purposes.
                     Thou seest here good reader that M. Doctor kepeth his olde wont, of Vntruthe. manifest peruerting of the wordes and meanyng of the authors of the Admonition. For whereas they saye that the name of Erle, Countie Palatine, Iustice of peace and Quorum, Commissioner, are Antichristian, when they are giuen to the ministers of the Churche, whose calling wil not agree with such titles, he concludeth simply, that they saye they be altogether vnlawfull, and simply antichristian, as if I should reason, that it is not meete that the Queenes Maiestie should preache or minister the Sacramentes, therefore it is not meete that there shoulde be any preachyng or Ministring of the Sacramentes.
                     Nowe letting passe all your hard wordes and vnbrotherly speaches, with your vncharitable prognostications, and colde prophesies, I will come to examine, whether you haue any better hap in prouing the office, than you haue had in prouing the name.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I sée no cause why he that is prelate of the garter, maye not also sufficiently discharge his duetie in watching ouer the soule, for I thinke the garter dothe not require such continuall or great attendance. Those that are appointed to watche ouer ye soule are not exempted from bodily seruice to their Prince, excepte you will take from the Prince, not onely authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matters, as you haue done, but ouer Ecclesiasticall persons also, as by this and such other lyke assertions you séeme to doe▪
                           
But here of more in place. I peruert not the wordes of the Admonition, as appeareth by their manifest wordes: what their meaning is God knoweth. But how little authoritie these offices should haue, if your plat forme were framed, shall be declared when I come to your seigniorie: neyther the names nor offices that come from a Christian Prince, that detesteth Antichrist, can be called Antichristian, vpon whom soeuer they be bestowed. Wherevnto this your example tendeth of the Quéenes Maiestie, wise men may easily coniecture. It smelleth of that Papisticall cauillation, Scilicet that we giue to hir Maiestie authoritie to preach and to administer the sacramentes, bycause we acknowledge hir lawfull authoritie in Ecclesiasticall causes.
                        I pray God my prognostications be not to true: the more I consider of your booke, the more I am driuen to suspect it. My hard speaches be within the bondes of modestie, but yours may better beséeme the order you talke of, then a man of your profession.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 43. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 68. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Lordes Grace, Lordbishop, honor. &c. be names of reuerence, teachyng vs to acknowledge our duetie towardes our superiours, and their authoritie ouer vs. And it is much more to be reprehended, not to giue honor to whom honor is due, then to receyue honor when it is due. You maye and you please in verye auncient Histories and inTitles of dig nitie in ministers not Antichristian. great learned fathers, see as honorable and reuerent titles giuen vnto Byshops as these be. And surely it is not Antichristian to be called by names and titles, not ambitiously soughte for, but orderly and lawfully giuen according to the condition and state of the place wherin a man is. But it is Antichristian, that is proude, presumptuous, disdainfull, arrogant, and contemptuous, to refuse to giue to euery one that name and title that by law, ciuilitie, and duetie of vs is required, and expresseth our reuerence, duetie, and obedience.
                     You would speake as much of names of honor and reuerence in other persons if you durste be so bolde wyth them, as you thinke you may be with some.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothing is sayde to this.
                  
               
            
            
               The offices of Archbishops, &c, are not strange or vnheard of in Christes Church: and of superioritie among the Cleargie.
               
                  Chap. 3. the first Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Page. 68. Sect. 3. 4. & Pag. 69. Sect. 1.
                     Nowe it followeth to proue that the offices signifyed by these names are not straunge and vnheard of in Christes Churche, neyther yet plainly in Gods worde forbidden, that they are not to be remoued, but as most necessarie to be reteined.
                     
                        It is without all doubte that both these names and offices haueAntiquitie of the offices. bene in Christes Church, long before Nicene Councell, and that they haue had in the same continuance euen to this daye: as partlye if may be gathered by that which I haue spokē before, and most manifestly by all histories and learned writers from before that Councell of Nyce to this instant houre: and therefore they little consydered what they writte, when they set it downe that these names and offices were straunge and vnheard of in the Church of Christ.
                     These men contemning auncient writers neuer read them, & that is the cause of such vnlearned assertions.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 75. Sect. 1.
                     And wheras in the former treatise of the name of the Archbyshop, he blew the trumpet before the victorie: heere in this of the office he bloweth it before he commeth into the fielde, or striketh one stroke, saying that they little consider what they write, that they are contemners of auncient writers and that they neuer read them, and that they are vnlearned which denie these things which he affirmeth. Well what we reade & howe vnlearned we are, is not the matter whiche we striue for, the iudgemente thereof is first with God▪ then with the Churches, and in their iudgementes we are content to reste. But if you be so greatly learned, and we so vnlearned and smally read, then the truth of oure cause shall more appeare that is maynteined with so small learnyng and reading, agaynst men of such profound knowledge & great reading. And yet I knowe not why if we be not tooidle, we should not be hable to reade as much as you, which may haue leysure to reade a good long writer, or euer you can ryde onely to see and salute your houses and liuings, being so many and so farre distant one from an other. And if we be so vnlearned and holde suche daungerous opinions of Papistrie and anabaptisme, as you beare men in hand we doe, why do you not by the example of the Ministers in Germanie, procure a publike disputation, where you may both winne your spurres and suche detestable opinions with the ignoraunce of the authors, may be displayed vnto the whole world? But let vs heare what is sayde.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue sayd nothing of the authors of the Admonition, which their owne doings proueth not to be true, and if you will also take it vnto your selfe, who can let you. If notwithstanding al my iourneys to see and salute my houses and lyuings, I be founde to discharge my duetie there, and also to haue read as much as you, that haue suche leysure, it is at the least an argument that I am not idle. I loue not to boast of my self. Your too too arrogante and contemptuous speaches prouoke me further than modestie requireth. I am not ashamed of my readyng, and yet I will make no comparisons.
                        I haue sundrie times both priuately and publikely, as I am able to proue by sufficientConference offered hath bene refused. testimonies, and you cannot denie, offered you conference by writing of these matters, I haue earnestly moued you vnto it, and you haue alwayes refused it. This had bene a quiet and the best and most assured way: for 
                              litera scripta manet, That whiche is set downe in writing remaineth. Howbeit I refuse no way that shall be thought conuenient to the Magistate, neyther am I afrayde of your stoute bragges, for I knowe what substance is in you: but yet by the way this may be noted, what you bunt after and séeke for, when you refuse priuate conference by writing offered vnto you, and cry out for publike disputation: 
                              scilicet popularem laudem, popular praise: But therein do you follow the vaine bragges of other sectaries. &c.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 69. Sect. 2. 3. &. Pag. 70. Sect. 1.
                     
                        
                           Cyprianus Lib. 1. Epist. 3. ad Cornelium
                         speaking of the office of an Archbyshop,Of the office of an Archbishop. sayth on this sort, 
                           Neque enim aliunde haereses obortae sunt, aut na ta schismata, quàm inde
                           
                           quòd sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, nec vnus in ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, & ad tempus iudex vice Christi cogitatur, cui si secundum magisteria diuina obtemperaret fraternitas vniuersa, nemo aduersus sacerdotum collegium quicquam moueret: Neyther haue heresies or schismes rysen of any other occasion, than of that, that the Priest of God is not obeyed, neyther one Priest for the tyme in the Churche, and one Iudge for the time in the steade of Christ thought vpon, to vvhom if the vvhole brotherhoode vvoulde be obedient, according to Gods teaching, no man vvould moue any thing agaynst the Colledge of Priests.
                     
                     Cornelius beeing Bishop of Rome, and hauing excommunicatedCyprian expounded. certayne notorious wicked men, and afterwarde beeing threatned and ill vsed at their handes, beganne to faynte and to be weerie of his office: Cyprian hearing thereof, wrote comfortably vnto him, and willed him in any wise to proceede, she wing further what sects and schismes ensueth in any Prouince or Diocesse, whereas the Bishops authoritie is despised. For in these wordes he speaketh not of the vsurped authoritie of the Bishop of Rome ouer all Churches, but agaynst the insolencie of some, whiche despising their Metropolitane, or Archebishop, did with their factiousnesse trouble the Churche. For he woulde haue an Archebishop in euery Prouince, whiche shoulde beare the chiefe rule ouer the rest of the Cleargie, and so doe the godlyest and best learned expounde Cyprian.
                     The same Cyprian writing to one Florentius Pupianus, speakingAuhoritie of Archbishops. in his owne behalfe beeing Bishop of Carthage, sayth on this sorte: 
                           Vnde schismata & haereses obortae sunt & oriuntur, nisi dum Episcopus qui vnus est, & ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam praesumptione contemnitur, & homo dignatione Dei honoratus, ab hominibus indignis iudicatur? From vvhence haue heresies and schismes sprong heeretofore, and vvhereof spring they novve, but that the Bishop vvhiche is one, and gouerneth the Churche, by the presumpiuous disdayne of certayne is despised, and a man preferred by Gods allovvance, is examined and iudged by vnvvorthy men. For it is the chiefe and principall office of an Archbishop to keepe vnitie in the Churche to compounde contentions, to redresse heresies, schismes, factions, to see that Bishops, and all other of the Cleargie whiche be vnder him doe their duetie. &c.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 75. Sect. 2. 3.
                     Cyprian (sayth he) speaking of the office of an Archebishop. &c. This is rather to make sporte, than to confute Unlesse (good Reader) thou wilte first beleeue that Cyprian speaketh of an Archebishop, and haste before concerned a strong imagination of it, M. Doctor can proue nothing. Aristotle sayth▪ that vncumming paynters write the names of the beastes whiche they paynt in their tables, for bicause otherwise it could not be knowne what they paynt: So M. Doctor mistrusting that the Archebishop will not be knowne by his description, writeth first the name of that he will paynt out.
                     This is it which we striue about, whereof the controuersie is, and this M. Doctor taketh for graunted. He accuseth the authors of the Admonition for faulting in the petition of the principle, or desiring to haue that graunted which is denied, and yet I am sure that in the whole Admonition there is not suche a grosse petition as this is. Where or in what words dothe S. Cyprian speake of the office of an Archbishop?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is the chiefe and principall office of the Archebishop, to prouide that peace andThe principall office of an archbishop. vnitie be kepte in the Churche, to suppresse schismes and heresies. &c. This dothe Cyprian in this place signifie in playne words.
                        
                           That he meaneth of an Archbishop and Metropolitane, though he expresse not the name, it is euident by his words: for in the first place he speaketh of Cornelius, then Bishop of Rome, who had gouernment ouer that whole Prouince. And in the secōd place he speaketh of him selfe, who had a very ample and large iurisdiction. For béeingCyprian a Metropolitane. Bishop of Carthage, he had the charge & ouersight of the Churches in Affrike, in Numidia, and in both the Mauritanies, as he him selfe doth testifie. lib. 4. Epist. 8▪
                            And as I haue before shewed out of Gregorie Nazianzene, he did not onely rule the Churche of Carthage, but also of Affrike, of Spayne, and almoste of the whole EastCap. 2. diui. 25 partes: for the whiche cause Illyricus as I also sayde before, dothe call him Metropolitane. And therfore I haue truely affirmed, that in those places he speaketh of the office of a Metropolitane or Archbishop: neyther is this a petition of the principle: but a true principle: but it is straunge to sée howe you forget your selfe, for afterwards in the. 95. page of your booke, you acknowledge that Cyprian was a MetropolitanePag. 95. sec. 2. Bishop, which sufficiently iustifieth my second place out of Cyprian.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 75 Sect▪ 3.
                     And heere by the way it is to be obserued of the Reader, howe neere a kinne the pope and the Archbishop be. For this office is confirmed by the same Truly. places that the Falsly. popes is. The places and arguments which are brought agaynst him are soluted with the same solutions that they vse which maynteyne the Papacie. For these places of Cyprian be alleadged for the popes supremacie, and In deede you knowe this is vntrue. in deede they make as muche for the pope as the Archbishop. For althoughe they be two heads, yet they stande vpon one necke, and therefore the reformed Churches whiche cut righte dyd strike them both of at one blowe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This argueth eyther wilfull ignorance, or professed malice: for you can not but knowe that Cyprian meaneth of the subiection that ought to be giuen to Cornelius in his owne Prouince, and that the Papistes wrest the same to proue his vniuersall iurisdiction ouer all Christendome. Nowe if a man maye not alleadge that truely, according to the true sense and meaning of the author, whiche the Papistes abuse to serue their turne, then muste we abstayne from alleadging diuers places of the Scripture.
                        It is true that the Papistes vse this place for the Popes supremacie, but falsly: for Cyprian onely meaneth of the superioritie of a Metropolitane or Bishop in his Prouince or Diocesse. And the Papistes them selues haue giuen ouer their holde, that they tooke of those places of Cyprian, confessing that he ment of euery seuerall Byshop in his owne Diocesse or Prouince, as appeareth in Dormans & Hardings latter bookes, and others. And is this kinde of reason so neare a kinne to the Papists, which vtterlye ouerthroweth one of their strongest argumentes? Surely I maruell that your desire is so muche to write agaynst the person, that in the meane time you neglect the common cause, and giue strength as muche as lyeth in you to the reason of the aduersarie, whylest you say, that this place maketh as muche for the Pope, as it dothe for the Archbishop. But the truthe of this your Replie shall appeare, when I haue answered your other cauilles.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 75. Sect. 3.
                     In neyther of the sentences heere alleaged out of Cyprian, nor in all his works as hathe bin before noted, is there one worde of an Archbishop, and yet M. Doctor sayth, that he speaketh of an Archbishop: before he shewed the name without the office, and now he goeth about to shew the office without the name: so that he can neuer make both the name and the office meete togither. To shape out an Archbishop here, you must needes interprete the words Bishop and priest, Archbishop and high priest: for Cyprian maketh mention of no other name of ministerie in those places, and if you may haue this scope of interpreting, it will not be harde for you to proue that stones be bread, and that chalke is cheese.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Epiphanius lib. 2 tom. 2. haer. 69.
                            dothe call the Bishop of Alexandria sometyme Bishop,Epiphanius. Concil. Calc. and sometime Archbishop. The Councell of Calceden in like maner calleth the same men, as Flauianus, Dioscorus, Leo, & other, sometimes Bishops, and sometimes Archebishops: the lyke is to be séene in other authors and wryters. So that the omitting of the title is no reason at all to disproue the thing. It is certayne that in Cyprians time, this name Papa was a common name to many Bishops, those especially that were of fame, as M. Foxe at large declareth, tom. 1. fol. 11. And yet doth not Cyprian vse that title commonly when he wryteth to Cornelius, or to any other Bishop. This therfore is but a féeble argument.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 75. Sect. 3.
                     Let vs see what is a Bishop or Priest, I vse the name of priest agaynst my will, but bicause it is sacerdos, and you so translate it, that it may better be vnderstanded what I answere to you, I am content to followe you so farre. I saye, let vs consider what is a Bishop or priest by S. Ciprian, and thereby wee shall knowe what an Archbishop he setteth foorth vnto vs, whiche thing may appeare manyfestly, by that which he sayth in the same Epistle, that the Bishop that is appoynted into the place of him that is dead, is chosen peaceably, by the voyee of all the people. A cauill. I thinke you will not say, that all the people throughout the whole Prouince, or throughout a whole Diocesse (as we count a Diocesse) met togither, for that had bin both a great disorder and confusion, a great charge to the Churche, and in the time of persecution as that was, to haue offered the whole Church in all the prouince into the mouth of the wolfe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you had read Ecclesiasticall histories, then shoulde you vnderstande that the Metropolitanes and Bishops of euery Prouince and Diocesse, were chosen in the presence of the people of that place and citie, whereof they had their names, and that the consent of no other of the people in that Prouince or Diocesse was required. So Cyprian himselfe, thoughe he had so ample a charge as I haue shewed before: yet was he chosen onely by the people of Carthage. The same is to be séene also in other suche elections: and especially of the Bishop of Rome, after that he was in his greatest glorie, and therefore this is a poore argument. The Bishop of Rome or of Carthage were chosen by the consent of the Citizens onely, and not of the people in other places of the Prouince, Ergo their authoritie & iurisdiction extended no farther than these Cities: and yet the whole Diocesse, that is, the Christians in the Diocesse (suche I meane as were appoynted for that purpose) mighte haue met in that time without perill, or any other such inconuenience as you speake of, for such a purpose, as well as they did in the same time to Synodes, whiche were frequent both in Cyprians time, and before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 75. Sect. vlt.
                     And least peraduenture you should haue this hole to hide your selfe in, saying that it might be procured, that in euery Church or parish throughout eyther the Prouince or Diocesie, the consent of the people mighte be asked, and they tarie in their places where they dwel, Cyprian in the next Epistle doth put the matter out of all question, saying that the priest (whome he after calleth Bishop) is chosen in the presence of the people, & in the eyes of all. So that Cyprians Bishop whom you wil needes haue an Archbishop, had neyther prouince nor dioces, as we cal a dioces, out only a Church orcongregatiō, such as the ministers & pastors with vs, which are appoynted vnto seueral townes: whiche may further appeare in that Cyprian sayth, that oute of Vntruthe, for Cyprian nameth not a Prouince. one prouince there were. 90. Bishops which condemned Priuatus. Nowe if there were. 90. Bishops in one prouince met, and yet not all that were in that prouince (as may appeare out of the same Epistle) all men doe vnderstande, that the scope that Cyprians Bishop or Archbishop, as you will haue him, had, was no suche thing as a Dioces or a prouince. I could bring infinite testimonies out of Cyprian

to proue that the Bishop in his time was nothing else but S. Paules Bishop, that is, one that had cure and charge of one flocke, whiche was so placed as it might be taught of him, and ouerseene by him, and gouerned by him, and of whome in matters perteyning to God it mighte depende.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your proofes goe very lowe when you vse suche slender ones: the words of Cyprian in that Epistle be these: 
                              Quod & ipsum videmus de diuina authoritate descendere vt
                              1. Lib. Epi. 4. 
                              sacerdos, plebe praesente, sub omnium oculis delegatur. &c. The whiche thing we see to discende from the authoritie of God, that the Priest be chosen the people beeing present before them all. &c. What can you else gather of this, but that a Priest must be chosen in presence of the people, and that then he is sayde to be chosen 
                              sub omnium oculis, before al their eyes, when he is chosen publikely, and openly in the sighte of many. But what is this to the strayghtning of his charge? A man mighte as well reason thus: Al the Citizens of Rome were not at Cornelius election, therefore he is not Bishop of all the Citie of Rome. But to the ende that you maye vnderstande, the vanitie of this your assertion, and that it may appeare that Cyprian maketh the Bishop in degree to be aboue a Priest, & also that at the election of the Bishop of Rome, moe were present than those of the Citie: I will set downe his wordes as they be. 
                              Lib. 4. Epist. 2.Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 2. I come nowe vnto the person of our fellowe Cornelius, that you may more truely knowe him, as well as we, not by the lyes of malicious men and backbyters, but by the iudgement of God, whiche made him Bishop, and by the testimonie of his fellow Bishops, the wholeAll the Bishops agreed to Cornelius his election. number whereof through all the worlde dyd ioyntly agree. For (whiche thing did greatly commende our welbeloued Cornelius vnto God, and to Christ, and his Churche, and also to all his fellowe ministers) he did not sodenly come to the Bishopricke, but beeing promoted by all the ecclesiasticall offyces, he ascended to the high dignitie of Priesthoode,A Bishop aboue a priest in Cyprians time. by all degrees of religion. Then afterwarde he neyther desired nor would haue the Bishopricke it selfe, neyther as others vse whiche are puffed vp with pride and arrogancie, dyd he inuade the See by force: but beeing quiet and modest, and suche a one as they vse to be whiche are chosen vnto this place by God, for the moderation of his chaste conscience, and the humblenesse of his naturall and preserued shame fastnesse. He dyd not (as some men doe) vse violence, that he might be made Bishop, but suffered violence, that he mighte byCornelius chosen by others, than ye Romanes. compulsion be driuen to receyue the Bishopricke. And he was made Bishop of many of our fellowe Bishops, whiche were then at Rome, and whiche sente very honorable and commendable letters vnto vs of his ordination. But Cornelius was made Bishop by the iudgement of God, and his Christ, by the testimonie almoste of all Clearks, by the suffrages of the people whiche was then present, and by the Colledge of the auncient Priestes, and of good men.
                        
                        In these wordes first it is to be noted that he sayth Cornelius was made BishopCollections out of Cyprian. by the testimonie of his fellowe Bishops: 
                              Quorum numerus vniuersus per totum mundum concordi vnanimitate consensit, The whole number whereof through all the worlde did ioyntly agree▪
                            Secondly that he was promoted to the highe dignitie of Priesthoode, 
                              per omnia ecclesiastica officia & cunctis religionis gradibus: Through all ecclesiasticall offyces▪ and by all degrees of religion, and then afterwarde was made Bishop. Thirdly, that Cornelius was made Bishop by the iudgement of God and Christ, by the testimonie almoste of all Clearkes, and by the suffrages of the people, whiche was then present, and by the Colledge of auncient Priests, and good men. Howe farre these thinges differ from your collections, and howe farre from Cyprians meaning you gather your coniectures, let the Reader iudge. I haue before sufficiently proued by auncient testimonies, that the Bishop of Rome, Carthage, and other, had not one Citie onely to gouerne, or one parishe, but diuers places, whole Prouinces and Countreys, as Cyprians owne wordes before rehearsed maketh manifest. Wherefore all this you doe but speake of pleasure.
                        If you had tolde me in what place Cyprian sayth, that out of one Prouince there was 90. Bishops that condemned Priuatus, I woulde haue sayde something to it: but séeing

you haue kepte the place secrete to your selfe, you giue your Reader occasion to suspecte, eyther that it is forged, or else not faythfully alleadged. If it be that whiche is 
                              lib. 1. epist. 3. then truely antiquum obtines. For these be Cyprians words: 
                              Per Foelicianū
                              
                              Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 3. 
                              autem significaui tibi frater, venisse Carthaginem Priuatum veterem baereticum, in Pambesitana colonia, ante multos ferè annos, ob multa & grauia delicta. 90. episcopora sententiā condemnatū, antecessorū etiā nostrorū (quod & vestrā conscientiam nōlatet) Fabiani & Donati literis seuerissimè notatum. &c I haue signified vnto you by Felicianus, that Priuatus an olde heretike, is come to Carthage, beeing condemned in the Citie Pambesia many yeres since, for many and greeuous trespasses, by the sentence of 90. Bishops, and beeing also moste sharply reprehended by the letters of my predecessours Fabianus and Donatus (as your conscience knoweth.)
                        
                        Héere is not one worde of so many Bishops béeing in one Prouince, neyther yet any Prouince or Diocesse mentioned wherin they should be. Surely this is too much, so often to offend in falsifying: but be it there were so many Bishops in one prouince, what conclude you therof, that Bishops then had but one towne or parishe limited vnto them? As though there be not Prouinces of that largenesse that they may conteyne so many Bishops, & yet the seuerall parishes furnished with peculiar pastors. Massaeus lib. 16. sayth, that there are. 160. Bishoprickes subiecte to the Patriarche of Antioche.
                        But there can no such thing as you affirme be gathered of Cyprians words, neyther shal you euer be able to proue out of Cyprian, or any other auncient writer, that such Bishops as Cyprian & Cornelius were, had onely gouernment of one towne, or as we call it, parishe: but the contrarie is most euident, as I haue before declared.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 76. Sect. 1.
                     Furthermore, to shape the Archbishop by these places of Cyprian, you muste be driuen to expounde this worde (Churche) Prouince. The Papistes whiche cite this place for the Pope as you doe for the Archbishop, they expounde the worde Churche heere to be the whole Church vniuersall and Catholike. And in deede although it be falsly expounded so in this place, yet maye they doe it with more probabilitie and likelyhoode, than to expounde it a Prouince, for so much as these wordes (the Churche) is oftener read bothe in the Scripture, and olde writers, to signifie the whole Churche, than any prouince of one Realme: but let Cyprian expounde him selfe what he meaneth by a Churche heere, although that may easily appeare by that whiche is spoken of S. Cyprian his Bishop, wheras Cyprian declareth that Cornelius the Bishop of the Church which was in Rome, would not let Felicissimum a Nouatian heretike, beeing caste out by the Bishops of Affrike, to enter into the Churche, he declareth sufficiently that he meaneth that company of the faythfull whiche were gathered togither at Rome, to heare the worde, and to communicate at the sacraments.A cauill▪
                         For it was not Cornelius parte to shut him out of the Prouince, neyther in deede coulde he himselfe, beeing not able without hazarde by reason of the persecution that then was, to tarie in any part of the prouince. Agayn speaking agaynst ye Nouatian heretike, he sheweth that throughe his wicked opinion of denying of repentance to those that were fallen, the confession of faultes in the Churche was hindred. Nowe it is manyfest that confession was not made throughout the prouince, but in that particular Churche, where the party dwelte that committed the faulte. Therefore Cyprian vnderstandeth by the name of the Churche, neyther Dioces, as we call Dioces, and muche lesse a whole prouince. And in the same Epistle, speaking of those whiche had fallen, he sayth, that they durst not come so muche as to the thresholde or entry of the Church, where he also opposeth the Churche to the Prouince, saying that they roue about the Prouince, and runne about to deceyue the brethren.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I expounde this worde (Churche) in this place no otherwise than al learned writers expounde it, that is, for that prouince & diocesse whereof Cornelius was Bishop, and it is no vnaccustomed thing, to cal the Church which is extended through a prouince, by the name of the chiefe Citie or Metropolitane seate of the Prouince, as the Churche of Rome all that that is subiecte to the Bishop of Rome: the Churche of Carthage, all that that is belonging to the Bishop of Carthage. And this is truely to expound the places of Cyprian, and may be iustified both by examples & authorities, as I haue proued before, wheras your interpretatiō hath no shadow or shew of truth.

But you had rather iustifie the Papists interpretation, than séeme to relent to theThe zeale of the Replier. authoritie of an Archbishop. Suche is your zeale.
                        Cyprians wordes touching Cornelius dealing with Felicissimus the Nouatian, be these: Likewise that thou mightest knowe of Felicissimus the author of the sedition:Lib. 1. Epist. 3. who also is conteyned in the letters of our fellowe Bishops, written of late vnto them, whiche Felicissimus is not onely driuen from hence by them, Sed abs te illic nuper de ecclesia nullus est: but is there of late expelled by thee out of the Churche. Of these wordes you gather this argument: Cyprian signifieth that Cornelius had banished Felicissimus from the Churche of Rome: Ergo, Cornelius was Bishop but of one Parishe or Citie, or therefore a Churche in that place signifieth one onely particular congregation gathered togither in one Towne. What kinde of coniectures call you these? And what thoughe Cornelius coulde not shut him out of the Prouince? mighte he not therefore by excommunication seclude him from the congregation of the faythfull throughout the Prouince: Doe you thinke that he forceably shutte him out of the locall Churche of Rome, or rather dealte with him according to the ecclesiasticall Censures? You maye delude simple readers that beléeue whatsoeuer you saye, but suche as be able to examine your doings, can not (if they wyll searche) but finde passing forgerie.
                        Agayne you saye, speaking agaynst the Nouatian heretikes. &c. Cyprians wordes touching that matter be these: 
                              Quibus etiam non satis fuit ab Euangelio recessisse, spem lapsis
                              Ibidem. 
                              satisfactionis & poenitentiae sustulisse, fraudibus inuolutos vel adulterijs commaculatos, & sacrificiorum funesta contagione pollutos, ne Deum rogarent, ne in ecclesia exomologesiu criminum facerent,
                              The Nouatian heresie. 
                              ab omni sensu & fructu remouisse: To whome it was not inoughe to haue departed from the Gospell, to haue taken awaye hope and satisfaction, and repentance from those that haue fallen, to haue remoued from all feeling and fruite of repentance those that are taken in snares, or defiled with adulteries, or polluted with the deadly contagion of sacrifices, that they should not pray to God, nor make confession of their sinnes in the congregation. What dothe Cyprian else meane by these wordes, but that Nouatus denyed repentance to suche as were fallen, and woulde not receyue them agayns into the Churche, that is, not this or that parishe, but the Churche of Christ, the congregation of the faythfull, for that was Nouatus herefie, 
                              negare veniam lapsis, to denie forgiuenesse to those that fell. And therefore also he denied vnto them the fruites of repentance, as confession of their offences in the congregation of the faythfull. &c. For Nouatus opinion was not that suche shoulde onely be secluded from this or that congregation, but generally from the Churche of Christe, and hope of saluation: And therfore in that place of Cyprian is ment that Churche, 
                              extra quam non est salus, without the which there is no saluation.
                        
                        And to what purpose doe you procéede and go on forward, saying: That in the same Epistle, speaking of those that had fallen. &c. What proueth it? but that those heretikes had caste them into suche a dispayre of forgiuenesse, that they durste not offer them selues to be receyued into the Churche, that is, to repentance? And that the same Heretikes béeing them selues excommunicated, wandred vp and downe, sowing the pestilent séede of their doctrine. This is to oppose Heretikes and Schismatikes, (whiche runne vp and downe in corners) to the true members of the Churche. But it is not to oppose the Churche to the Prouince. For the Prouince (if it be Chrystened) is the Churche, althoughe it conteyne in it seuerall congregations, whiche be also Churches, and yet béeing members of it, are subiecte to one Bishop, and so dothe the whole Epistle of Cyprian declare, neyther can there anything be gathered out of it to the contrarie: for a testimonie wherof I call to witnesse these your weake collections, which you would not haue vsed, if you could haue founde any better.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 76. Sect. 2.
                     Seeing therefore A weake con clusion of false principles. the Bishop which Cyprian speaketh of, is nothing else but suche as we call pastor, or as the common name with vs is parson: and his Churche whereof he is a Bishop,

is neyther dioces nor prouince▪ but a congregation whiche meete togither in one place, and to be taught of one man, what should M. Doctor meane to put on this great name of Archbishop vpon so small a Bishopricke? as it were Saules great harnesse vpon Dauid his little body, or as if a man shoulde set a wyde huge porche before a little house.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Where the premisses be nought, howe shoulde the conclusion be good? I would to God your argument were in his right forme, that we mighte sée vpon what substantiall postes your conclusion dothe stande. But let the Reader consider your grounds which I haue opened before.
                        I might heere tell you agayne that Cyprian in playne and manifest words, 
                              Lib. 4. Epist. 1. dothe make a Bishop superior in degrée to him that you call pastor: his words I haue repeated before. I might also put you in minde of Cyprians iurisdiction ouer the churches of Carthage, Numidia, and Mauritanie, according to his owne testimonie. 
                              lib. 4. Epi. 8. in which respecte Illyricus dothe call him Metropolitane: Likewise I might tell you that the most writers of that age, as Tertullian de Coro. militis, & de Fuga in pers. Origen hom. 2. in Numer. &. 11. in Hierem.
                            doe make thrée degrées of Ministers: Deacons, Priests, & Bishops. To be short, I could bid you looke Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 1. and you should sinde that Demetrius, who liued 
                              Anno. 191. was Bishop 
                              Paroeciarū Alexandriae & Aegypti, of the parishes of Alexandria and Egypt, and referre you to many suche examples vsed before, which vtterly ouerthrowe this conclusion, and euen hisse it out of the doores.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 9 Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 76. Sect. 3.
                     And least that M. Doctor shoulde saye, that notwithstanding the Bishops had but seuerall churches: yet one of them might haue eyther a title more excellent than the rest, or authoritie and gouernmēt ouer the rest: that shal likewise be considered out of Cyprian. And first for the title and honor of archebishop, it appeareth howe Cyprian helde that as a proude name, for he obiecteth to Florentius as a presumptuous thing: for that in beleeuing certayne euill reportes of him, and misiudging
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 4. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           p. 9 of him, he did appoynt himselfe Bishop of a Bishop, and iudge ouer him whiche was for the time appoynted of God to be iudge.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Pupianus to whome Cyprian wrote that Epistle, had greatly misused Cyprian, in beléeuing certayne false rumors & reports of him, & vpon the same giuing sentence against him: for this cause Cyprian reproueth Pupianus, saying: 
                              Quis autem nostrum Iongè est ab bumilitate, vt
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 úmne ego, qui quotidie fratribus seruio, & venientes ad ecclesiam singulos benignè, & cū voto & gaudio suscipio: an tu qui te Episcopū Episcopi, & iudicē iudicis ad tēpus à Deo dati constituis, &c. VVhether of vs is further from humilitie, I which serue my brethren dayly, & receyue euery one that cōmeth vnto the Church gētly, & with desire & ioy, or thou which makest thy selfe the Bishop of the Bishop, and the iudge of the iudge, giuen of God for the time. It appeareth rather in these words, that Florentius is reproued for taking vpon him to iudge Cyprian, to whō he ought obedience: so that this place doth not deregate any thing frō any lawful authoritie, that one Bishop hath ouer another, but it condemneth the rash & presumptuous iudgement of those, that will take vpon them rashly to giue sentēce of their superiours & betters, as Pupianus did. For in that he findeth fault with him, for making himselfe (as it were) Bishop of the Bishop, and iudge of the iudge, he playnly declareth, that he himself was both Bshop and iudge of Pupianus: neyther dothe he obiect this to Pupianus as a proude name, but as a proude deede.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag 76. Sect. 4.
                     And heerein also I may vse the same reasons, which the godly writers of our time vse agaynst the Pope, to proue that he had no superioritie in those dayes ouer other Bishops, for that the other

Bishops called him brother, and he them, called him fellow Bishop, & he them. For so doth Cyprian call the Bishops of that prouince in hys Epistle, his fellow Bishops, and in diuers places his brethren. And in the sentence which he spake in the Councel of Carthage, he sayth, none of vs doth take him selfe to be Bishop of Bishops.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Euery Bishop was chiefe in his owne Prouince, and not subiect to any. The Bishop of Rome had no iurisdictiō ouer the Bishop of Carthage, but they were of equall power and authoritie, as others were also of the like seates. In that Cyprian called the Bishops of his prouince, fellowe Bishops and brethren, he declared that the functiō and ministerie was all one: he like wise vttered his humble minde & spirite. But this proueth not that he had no superioritie ouer them. S. Peter in his first Epist. chap. 5.1. Pet. cap. 5. calleth himselfe fellowe minister with those whom he then exhorted, which were all pastors, and such as were ministers of the worde, and yet you acknowledge an Apostle to be the highest in the Church, & aboue al the other degrées mentioned 
                              ad Ephe. 4.
                        
                        Cyprians words in the Councell of Carthage, I haue spoken of in another place: he meaneth the title of vniuersall Bishop, and suche as séeke tyrannically & vnlawfully to rule, and especially suche as will of necessitie binde all other men to their opinions in all thinges, for his words be: 
                              Tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adigat: None of vs enforceth his fellowes by tyrannicall feare to the necessitie of obeying.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 77. Sect. 1.
                     Nowe, that there was no authoritie of one Bishop ouer an other, and that there was none such as when controuersies rose, tooke vpon him the compounding of them, or any one, to whom it apperteyned, to see the vnitie of the Church kept, and to see that all other Bishops and the Cleargy dyd their duetie, as M. Doctor beareth vs in hande, it may clearely be seene in dyuers places of Cyprian, and first of all in that sentence which he spake in the Councel of Carthage, where he proceedeth further after this sorte, that none of them dyd by any tyrannicall feare binde his fellowes in office, or any fellowe Bishops, to any necessitie of obedience, seeing that euery Bishop hath for his free libertie and power his owne iudgement, and discretion, as one which can not be iudged of an other, as he also him selfe can not iudge an other, but sayth he, we ought to tarry and wayte for the iudgement of our Lord Iesus Christ, which only and alone hath power to fet vs ouer his Church, and to iudge of our doing. And in the same Epistle, wherout the first place is taken by M. Doctor he sayth, that vnto euery one a portion of the flocke is appoynted, which euery one must rule & gouerne, as he that shal render an accompt of his deede vnto the Lord. And in an other place he sayth:Li. 2
                              〈1 line〉
                            ep. 1. we doe not vse any compulsion or violence ouer any, nor appoynt no lawe to any, seeing that euery one that is set ouer the Church, hath in the gouernment the free disposition of his owne will, wherof he shall giue an accompt vnto the Lorde. And yet Cyprian was the Bishop of the Metropolitane or chiefe seate, and one whome for his learning 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nd godlynesse, the rest no doubte had in great reuerence, and gaue great honor vnto.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Bicause so much adoe is made of the words of Cyprian in that erroneous CouncelThe wordes of Cyprian discussed. Tom. 1. Con. Carth.
                            of Carthage, wherein Cyprian himselfe also was the chiefe author of the errour, I will recite the words as I doe there finde them: 
                              Nequè enim quisquam nostrum episcopū se esse episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico terrore, ad obsequendi necessitatem Collegas suos adigit, cum habeat omnis episcopus licentiam libertatis, & potestatis suae arbitrium proprium, tanquā iudicari ab alio non possit, cum nec ipse possit alterum iudicare, sed expectemus vniuersi iudicium Domini nostri Iesu Christi, qui vnus & solus habet potestatem, & praeponendi nos in ecclesiae suae gubernatione, & de actu nostro iudicandi: Neyther dothe any of vs make him selfe Bishop of Bishops, or enforceth his fellowes to the necessitie of obeying by tyrannicall feare, bicause euery Bishop hathe freedome of libertie and free iudgement of his owne power, as he who can be iudged of no other, neyther can him selfe iudge another Bishop: but let vs all wayte for the iudgement of our Lorde Iesus Christ, who alone hathe power bothe to place vs in the gouernment of the Churche, and to iudge of our dooing. It were very absurde, to thinke that Cyprians words are generaily to be vnderstanded of all kinde of iudgement, or that a Bishop in all things shoulde be left to his owne free libertie:

and discretion, or that be is frée from all controlement. For what if he be an heretike? what if he be otherwise criminous? shall he not be iudged by man, but lefte onely to the iudgement of Christe The words of Cyprian if they be as you vnderstand them,The meaning of Cyprian. take authoritie of iudgement aswell from Synodes, as from Archbishops. Cyprian therfore meaneth as the words themselues do teache, that one Bishop should not tyrannically rule ouer an other, & at his pleasure abridge the libertie of an other in vttering his iudgement, especially in a Synode, or rashly condenme an other. For Cyprian in that Councell propounding the controuersie of rebaptization, requireth euery mans iudgement therof, protesting (as it were) not to condemne, or to excommunicate any that should dissent from him in that matter, and therevpon sayth, Nequè enim quisquam nostrum. &c. so that he meaneth that to be tyrannicum, to compeil other Bishops necessarily to agrée to his opinion in▪all things, & these words, licētia libertalis & potestatis suae arbitriū propriū, are not m
                              〈1 line〉
                           nt of iurisdiction, but of iudgement and opinion. For one man is not of necessitie bounde to frame him selfe to the iudgement and opinion of an other, but therein hath fréedome and libertie, neyther will any man allowe this authoritie in any Archbishop.
                        Touching iurisdiction, euery Bishop in this church hath frée gouernment ouer his stocke, in al things that belongeth vnto him: if any thing happen that he can not end, then the Archbishop intermedleth, if that will not serue, it is referred to a Synode. The words of Cyprian can in no respect derogate any thing from the iurisdiction of Archebishops. For concerning iurisdiction they be bounde to lawes themselues, and do but execute lawes made, not of their owne priuate authoritie, but by Parliament, and by the Prince. Neyther can they controle the worst minister in their Dioces, if he obserue the lawes and rules prescribed. Therefore excepte your meaning be, to haue Bishops and ministers frée from all lawes and from all subiection to any superiour, Prince or other (whiche is moste like) I doe not knowe why you should take this saying of Cyprian in that sense you doe. Sure I am that the words doc not fauour your Anarchie, and that may the Reader easily perceyue.
                        In that Cyprian sayth, vnto euery one a portion of the flocke is appoynted, he sayth truely, but yet dothe he not thereby exempte Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers from obedience and subiection to their lawfull gouernours. For due obedience dothe not hinder any dutie that is owing towards their flocke.
                        In the place that you alleage out of Cyprians seconde booke and first Epistle, you haue omitted that whiche goeth before, and declareth what Cyprian meaneth by the words that you haue recited. His wordes be these: 
                              Caeterùm scimus quosdam quod
                              Lib. 2. Epist. 1. 
                              semel imbiberunt nolle deponere, nec propositum suum facilè mutare: &c. But we know that certayne will neuer laye away that which once they haue taken: neyther easily chaunge their purpose, but doe reteyne certayne thinges peculiar to them selues, whiche once they haue vsed: yet not breaking the bonde of peace and concorde among their fellowes, wherein we neyther compell any man, nor appoynte any lawe, since euery gouernour hathe free iudgement of his wyll in the gouernment of the Churche, and shall render an accompt of his deede to the Lorde. Cyprian in the wordes before, sheweth his opinion concernyng suche, as béeing Ministers of the worde had sacrificed to Idols, and when he hathe so done, thus he speaketh to Stephane to whome he writte the Epistle: Haec ad conscientiam tuam (frater charissime). &c. Then followeth, Caeterùm scimus. &c. as I haue before recyted, wherein Cyprian signifieth, that he wyll not take vpon him to iudge or to condemne other Churches, whiche haue a contrarie custome, so that they kéepe the bonde of peace. But he meaneth vndoubtedly suche Churches and Bishops, as he had nothing to doe with, else it is manyfest, that within his owne charge he woulde not haue suffered any suche thing to be done, and thys place answereth all that Cyprian hathe spoken any where touchyngTract. 3. cap. 2. Sect. 5. not receyuyng into the ministerie suche as had sacrificed to Idols, whereof I haue spoken before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 77. Sect. 2. 3. 4.
                     And whereas it is sayd for the preseruation of vnitie, one must be ouer al, S. Cyprian shewethLi. 4. epi. 9 that the vnitie of the Church is conserued not by hauing one Bishop ouer all, but by the agreement of the Bishops one with another. For so he writeth, that the church is knit and coupled togither (as it were with the giue) of the Bishops consenting one with an other. And as for the compounding of controuersies, it is manyfest, that it was not done by one Byshop in a prouince, but those byshops whych were neere the place where the schisme or heresie sprang.
                     For speaking of the appeasing of controuersies & schismes, and shewing how dyuers BishopsLi. 1. epi. 4 were drawen into the heresy of Nouatus, he sayth that the vertue and strength of the Christians, was not so decayed or 
                           〈1 line〉
                        anguished, but that there was a portion of Priests which did not giue place vnto those rumes and shipwrackes of fayth.
                     And in another place he sayth: therfore (most deare brother) the plentyfull body or companyLi. 3. epi. 1
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         of the pr
                           〈1 line〉
                        ests, are as it were with the g
                           〈1 line〉
                        ue of mutuall concorde and bande of vnitie ioyned togither, that if any of our company be author of an heresy, and goe about to destroy and rent the flocke of Christ, the rest should helpe, and as profitable and mercyfull shepheards, gather togither the sheepe of the Lorde. Whereby it is many fest, that the appeasing and composing of controuersies and heresies, was not then thought to be most fitte to be in one bishops hande: but in as many as coulde conuemently assemble togither, according to the daunger of the heresie which sprang, or depe roote which it had taken, or was like to take.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Bishops agrée not one whit the worse, when they haue a superior, by whom they may be called togither, and put in minde of their office and duetie. Neyther doth Cyprian deny this when he affirmeth the other. For thoughe the chiefe cause of vnitie is the consente and agreement of the Bishops one with another: yet to haue one that shall haue the chiefe care thereof, must néedes be a great helpe thervnto, euen as it is in other societies. For if the Bishops were deuided among themselues, & at variance, and had no superiour, who should compounde the controuersies?
                        Our Archbishops doe not take vpon them (neyther can they) to decide any controuersieHowe farre our Archbishops deale in controuersies. in doctrine and religion of their owne authoritie, but therein doe they deale eyther according to the lawes of the Churche prouided for that purpose, or else expecte a newe Parliament or Synode. Neyther doth any Bishop in his Dioces, otherwise meddle in suche matters, than by the common consent of the Churche is appoynted vnto him: and yet it was neuer otherwise taught by any, but that a Bishop in hys owne Diocesse, or an Archebishop in his Prouince, mighte vse persuasions to ende controuersies, and execute the lawes prouided for the same: other kinde of deciding controuersies, by any priuate authoritie I knowe none in this Church of Englande. Wherfore al these allegations be but in vayne, for surely not in Cyprians time, was the determining of suche controuersies committed to the Pastor and Seigniorie of euery Parishe, neyther doth Cyprian make mention of any suche matter, if he did, yet for gouernment the diuersitie of the time, and state of the Church is to be considered,Tract. 2. &. 3. as I haue before noted.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 77. Sect. 4.
                     And that there was in his time no such authoritie giuen, as that any one might remoue the causes or controuersies which rose, as now we see there is, when the Bishop of the Di
                           〈1 line〉
                        es taketh the matters in controuersie which rise in any Church within his Dioces from the minister & Elders, to whom the decision perteyneth, and as when the archebishop taketh it away from the Bishop, it may appeare in the same thirde Epistle of the first booke, where he sayth after this sort: It is ordeyned, and it is equall and right, that euery mans cause should be there heard, where the fault was committed. And a little after he sayth: It is meete to handle the matter there where they maye haue both accusers and witnesses of the faulte, whiche although it be spoken of them whiche fled out of Affrike vnto Rome: yet the reason is generall, and dothe aswell serue agaynst these ecclesiasticall persons, whych wyll take vnto them the deciding of those controuersies, that were done a hundred myle of them.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Cyprian as I sayd, speaketh not one worde of your Seigniorie, & in that place by you alleages, he speaketh of the seueral Prouince▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            Dioces of euery bishop, & would haue euery matter ended in that Prouince 
                              〈◊〉
                            Diocesse where it is cōmitted, & therfore he speaketh there of suche as fled out of Affrica into Italie, to haue their matters heard, so that this place is soluted by your owne selfe. It is méete that the matter should be there handled where there may be had bothe accusers & witnesses: And that was one of the reasons that the Councel of Affrica 
                              〈1 line〉
                           sed agaynst the Bishop of Rome, clayming interest in hearing appeales from thence. But there is no Prouince in Englande so large, but that both the accusers and witnesses may be brought into any parte of it from any other parte. This reason of yours maye serue better agaynst Westminster hall, which is but one place to serue the whole Realme for deciding of controuersies, and yet I thinke it very necessarie▪
                        
                        You may not wrest that to your purpose or proof of Seigniorie, or authoritie therof, whiche Cyprian speaketh of diuers Prouinces: yea diuers Countreys and Nations. This is no good reason, Cyprian mislyked the translating of causes from Affrica to Rome, Ergo, there maye be no causes remoued from Northampton to London.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 77. Sect. 5.
                     And whereas M. Doctor in bothe places of Cyprian seemeth to stande much vpon the words (one Bishop and priest) the reason thereof dothe appeare in another place of Cyprian moste manyfestly,L
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 3. epi. 13 and that it maketh no more to proue that there ought to be one archebishop ouer a whole prouince, than to say, that there ought to be but one husbande proueth, that therefore there should be but one husbande in euery countrey or prouince, whiche shoulde see that all the rest of the husbands do their duties to their wiues. For this was the case, a Nouatian heretike beeing condemned & cast out of the Churches of Affrica by the consent of the Bishops, & not able by embassage sent to them, to obteyne to be receyued to their cōmunion & fellowship agayne, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        oeth afterwards to Rome, and beeing likewise there repelled, in time getteth himselfe by certayne which fauoured his heresie, to be chosen Bishop there at Rome (Cornelius beeing the Bishop or pastor of those which were there godly minded) whervpon it commeth that Cyprian vrgeth (one Bishop, one priest in the church) bicause at Rome there was two, wherof one was a wolfe, which ought not to haue bin there, considering there was but one churche whiche was gathered vnder the gouernment of Cornelius, and therefore by that place of Cyprian it can not be gathered, that there ought to be but one Bishop in one citie, if the multitude of professors require more, and that all can not well gather them selues togither in one congregation, to be taught of one man, muche lesse can it serue to proue that there should be but one in a whole Diocesse or prouince. I graunte that in latter times, and which went more from the simplicitie of the pri
                           〈1 line〉
                        itiue churche, they tooke occasion of these words to decree, that there should be but one Bishop in a citie, This is to pre 
                              〈1 line〉
                           erre your owne iudgemente befo
                              〈1 line〉
                           e the iudgement of worthy Councels. but that can neuer be concluded of Cyprians words, if it be vnderstanded why he vrgeth (one Bishop, and one priest.) If therfore neyther worde (Bishop nor priest) do make any thing to proue an archbishop, nor this word (church) dothe imply any prouince, nor in these words (one Bishop, one priest) there is nothing lesse ment than that there should be one archebishop ouer all the Bishops and clearg
                           〈1 line〉
                        e in a prouince, and if Cyprian wyll neyther allowe of the title of an archebishop, nor of the authoritie and office, but in playne wordes speaketh agaynst bothe, we may conclude that M. Doctor hathe done very vnaduisedly to lay so great waight of the archebishop vpon S. Cyprians shoulders, that will not onely not beare any thing of him, but whiche hathe done all that coulde be, to make him go afoo
                           〈1 line〉
                        e, and hande in hande with his fellowes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        M. Doctor standeth not vpon these words, (one Bishop, and one priest) although the words serue very well for his purpose: Neyther is your shifte of a Noua
                              〈1 line〉
                           ian, beeing chosen Bishop in Rome, any thing to the matter. For though it might séeme partly to interprete Cyprians meaning in his Epistle to Cornelius, yet can it not perteine to that that he writeth of Florentius Pupianus. And be it that Cyprian ment to seclude Nouatus, when he sayde, 
                              Du
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  Episcopus qui vnus est. &c. when as the Bishop whiche is one▪ &c. What can be spoken more to my purpose▪ for Cyprian woulde haue but one Bishop in one citie to gouerne the Church, as his words manifestly declare.
                        
                           And whereas you saye, that it can not be gathered by that place of Cyprian, that there ought to be but one Bishop in one citie if the multitude of professors require more. &c. the Epistle of Cornelius in Eusebius, 
                              lib, 6. cap. 43. dothe conuince you of vanitie in so saying. For
                              Euseb. Lib. 6. Cap. 43. The number of Christians in Rome gret in Cyprians time. in that Epistle he declareth, that there was then in Rome. 46. Priests, seuen Deacons, seuen Subdeacons. 42. Acoluthes. 52. Erorcistes, readers, doorekéepers. 1500. widdowes and diseased: and therfore it is to be presupposed that the number of other Christians there, was very great, séeing that the Cleargie, and those whiche were founde of the Churche, amounted to the number of. 1654. and moste lyke that there were seuerall congregations, for it was not possible for them to méete in one place, and yet was there then but one Bishop. For Cornelius in the same Epistle, speaking of Nouatus sayth, 
                              Ita
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  vindex ille Euangelij ignorauit vnum esse debere Episcopum in catholica ecclesia, This defender of the Gospell was ignorant that there ought to be one Bishop in a catholike Churche.
                        
                        The olde Canons and auncient Fathers doe testifie, that in one Citie there ought to be but one Bishop. Chrysostome tolde Sisinius, that one citie must haue but oneSocrat. lib. 6. cap. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              2. Bishop, as we reade, lib. 6. cap. 22. of Socrates. Neyther are you able to shewe from Christes time, that euer there was allowed to be two Bishops in one citie. Wherefore the words of Cyprian are yet in force (for any thing you haue alleaged to the contrarie) to proue the office of an Archbishop, or metropolitane to be, to compounde schismes, and prouide that there be vnitie in the Churche. &c.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 78. Lin. 26.
                     There are other reasons which M. Doctor vseth, as this, a notable one. S. Cyprian speakethThis argument is of your owne ioyning, and not M. Doctors. not of the vsurped power of the Bishop of Rome, therfore he speaketh of the office of an Archebishop and Metropolitane. It is harde to call this argument to any head of fallation, for it hath not so muche as a colour of a reason. I thinke it can deceyue no body but your selfe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I tell you that the place is not to be vnderstanded of the vsurped authoritie of the Bishop of Rome, but of the authoritie of the Archebishop in his Prouince, or Byshop in his Diocesse. I doe not make any argument of it: dothe it gréeue you to heare that Cyprian dothe not speake of the vsurped authoritie of the Bishop of Rome? or doth euery man make an argument when he dothe interprete? But this dealing of yours is not straunge, I must be content to beare with it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 15 Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 78. Lin. 30. & Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4.
                     An other reason is, that all the godlyest and best learned men doe expounde the place of Cyprian in the thirde Epistle of the first booke, of an Archebishop. The vanitie of this saying, that the godly and learned wryters so expounde it, I haue shewed before, and heere it commeth to be considered agayne. I wil not say that no godly nor learned writer expoundeth the place of Cyprian of the authoritie of an Archbishop.
                     But first I desire M. Doctor to sette downe but one, and then I will leaue it to thy consideration (gentle Reader) to thinke whether M. Doctor hathe read any learned or godly mans exposition to be suche, when he hathe not read those which are nearest him, I meane our owne countreymen. I saye he hathe not read them, bicause I woulde thinke charitably so of him, rather than that he should haue read them, and yet speake vntruely of them, and father those things of them which they neuer spake.
                     M. Iewell the Bishop of Sarisburie expounded this place, and yet did Vntruthe, as will appeare. neuer expounde itIn his 
                              〈◊〉
                            booke. 4. article, and in 
                              〈◊〉
                           , 5▪
                         of the office and authoritie of an Archbishop of all the Bishops, and Cleargie of the prouince, but cleane contrarywise applieth it to the authoritie that euery Bishop had in his Dioces. His words are these. Nowe therefore to drawe that thing by violence to one onely Bishop, that is generally spoken of all Bishops, is a guylefull fetche to misleade the Reader, and no simple nor playne dealing. Heere you see that M. Iewell dothe not vnderstande this of any Archebishop, but of euery Bishope
                     
                        M. Nowell Deane of Paules hauing occasion to talke of this place saith on thys sorte. So that(b) M Nowell will wi
                              〈1 line〉
                            esse against you. 
                        First booke against Dor man &. 25. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . when he speaketh (meanyng Cyprian) of one Byshop, one Iudge, in the Churche, for the time, or of the Byshop which is one, and ruleth the Churche absolutely, he meaneth euery Byshop in hys owne Diocesse, without exception, if he speake specially, he meaneth the Bishop of the citie or Diocesse whereof he intreateth, whether it be the Byshop of Rome, Carthage, or any other place.
                     M. Foxe also expoundeth this of euery Byshop within his owne Churche or Diocesse. YouFol. 93. heare the iudgement of these three writers, that cannot picke out neyther the name nor the office of an Archbyshop out of Cyprians place, and yet I thinke you will not denie, but these were learned and godly writers.
                     Nowe I haue shewed you three. I aske once againe of you, one godly and learned writer, that expoundeth it as you doe. And by this time I suppose all men vnderstande what a smallfriend S. Cyprianis either to the name or office of an Archbyshop. Let vs heare whether Hierome make any more for the Archbyshop then did Cyprian.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           M. Iewell Byshop of Sarisburie expounding the place of Cyprian in the fourth articleM. Iewell. 5. Diuision. 228. page of his first booke hath these wordes. Vpon occasion hereof he sheweth (meaning Cyprian) what hurte and confusion of sectes and scismes ensueth in any prouince or diocesse whereas the Byshops authoritie and ecclesiasticall discipline is despised. I pray you what call you that Byshop that hath gouernement of a prouince? Is he not a Metropolitane or Archbyshop? and doth not my L. of Sarisbury as well speake of a prouince, as he doth of a diocesse? I do not deny, but that Cyprians words may be fitly applyed to euery Byshop in his diocesse: but is the Archbyshop therefore secluded? seing he of whome, Cyprian did write was a Metropolitane, or Archbyshop. That whiche is the office of the Archbyshop in his prouince, is also the office of a Byshop in his diocesse, and therefore that whiche is spoken of the prouince, in respecte of the Archbyshop, is also spoken of the Diocesse in respecte of the Byshop. And pag. 230. he saith that vniuersa fraternitas, is taken for one whole particularIdem. brotherhoode, within one prouince or diocesse: so that your firste witnesse testifieth with me, else would he not haue named a prouince.
                        M. Nowell fol. 22. 23. 24. doth expounde this place of the authoritie of euery ByshopM. Nowell. in his owne Diocesse, which is sufficient for me, and is as much against you as can be, for you would haue no Byshops ouer Diocesses, but only pastors in seuerall townes. That whiche he speaketh of a Byshop in his Diocesse, he also meaneth of an Archbyshop in his Prouince, whose both name and office he doth allow, as it is manyfest in these wordes of his in his thirde booke against Dorman, fol. 320 where he answeringIdem. this question of Dormans, whether he will condemne the whole Church for making of Archbishops, saith thus. I answere I much commend the Churche for so doing, so farre of is it that I will condemne the whole Church therfore. But what shal I neede to vse any circumstances, seing he doth most euidently apply this place of Cyprian to that purpose which you wil not acknowledge, yea euen vnto the office of an Archbyshop in his Prouince, for thus he writeth fol. 33. of his firste booke (speaking of this epistle of Cyprian to Cornelius, and confuting Dormans argument taken out of it for the Popes supremacie, whiche is grounded vpon this place, 
                              Non aliunde haereses obortae sunt. &c.) Concerning the auoyding and quieting of schismes and troubles in the Churche, VVe saye that as the seuerall Kings of euery kingdome, the seuerall gouernours of euery countree and cittie. &c. are able to ouersee their seuerall charges, and to keepe their people in ciuill order and peace, so are the seuerall Byshops of euery Diocesse, and the seuerall chiefe Prelates of euery Prouince, able to auoide or to appease if they ryse al Schismes and troubles ecclesiasticall, as S. Cyprian out of whome this reason is borowed, and falsely wrested by them to an other purpose, doth most plainely teach saying thus. Cum statutum sit omnibus nobis. &c.
                            What call you chiefe prelates of euery Prouince? Be they not Archbyshops? Likewise fol. 60. &, 61. in the same booke, speaking of this and such like places he saith, And further whatsoeuer M. Dorman eyther out of Deutero▪ or any other place of Scripture doth vntruely apply to the proofe of the Supremacie of one head, to witte the Byshop of Rome, the same doth S. Cyprian, M. Dormans owne vsuall witnesse, euerie where alleage
                           
                           for the proofe of the superiorite of euerie Byshop in his owne Diocesse, and for the obedience due vnto him there, he doth neuer apply it as doth M. Dorman to the Supremacie of one Byshop ouer all other, but rather against such supremacie of one: & it agreeth very well with the estate of the lewes, that as they beyng one nation had one chiefe Prieste, so is it good lykewise that euery Christian nation haue their chiefe Priest or Byshop: it agreeth not that bycause the Iewes (one nation) had one highe Prieste to gouerne them in doubtes, therefore all nations throughout the worlde shoulde haue one high Priest ouer all other, for not onely the vnlikelyhood betwene these two, but the impossiblitie of the latter is most euident.
                        
                        The words of M. Foxe in that place speaking against the Papisticall interpretationM Foxe. Tom. 1. fol. 93. of Cyprians wordes be these, when their meaning is otherwyse, howe that euery one catholike Church or Diocesse, ought to haue one Byshop ouer it: whyche also iustifyeth my interpretation. For if it be vnderstanded of one Byshop ouer one Diocesse, then is it in lyke maner of one Archbyshop ouer one Prouince: For the reason is all one, and you denie them both alike: For you would haue no Bishops but in seueral Parishes. Nowe therefore you sée that euen these authors whom you would abuse against me, doe make wholy and fully against you, and with me. For they confesse the two places of Cyprian to be ment of Cornelius, and of himselfe, who were both Archbyshops and Metropolitanes, and had ample iurisdiction, especially Cyprian as I haue declared. And M. Fexe hymselfe Tom. 1. Fol 21. sayth that the sea of Rome was a PatriarchallIdem. sea appoynted by the primitiue Church, and the Bishop therof, an Archbishop, limited within his owne bordering Churches: so that the one place beyng ment of Cornelius Archbyshop of Rome, the other of Cyprian Archbyshop of Carthage (for so they were in déede though they were not in those places so called), S. Cyprian may well be sayde in both places to speake of an Archbyshop, though he expresse not his name. And that which is there spoken of Cornelius or Cyprian within their Prouinces, may most aptly also be vnderstoode of euery Byshop within his Diocesse, and therefore my L. of Sarum expounding this place speaketh of them both vnder these names of Prouince and Diocesse: and so doth M. Nowell vnder the name of chiefe Prelate and Prouince, and M. Foxe also vnder the worde Diocesse, beyng plaine and euident, that they allow of the office.
                        That learned man and godly Martyr M. Philpot, as it is recorded in the booke ofM. Philpot exam. 5. Actes and Monumentes in his fifte examination answering this place of Cyprian obiected vnto him by D. Sauerson, answereth most plainely in these wordes: And nowe for the vnderstanding of that place, you doe misconstrue it, to take the high Priest onely for the Byshop of Rome, and otherwyse than it was in his tyme. For there were by Nicene Councell foure Patriarches appoynted, the Patriarche of Ierusalem, the Patriarche of Constantinople, the Patriarche of Alexandria, and the Patriarche of Rome, of which foure the Patriarche of Rome was placed lowest in the Councell, and so continued many yeares, for the time of seuen or eight generall Councels as I am able to shewe. Therefore S. Cyprian writing to Cornelius Patriarch of Rome, whome he calleth fellowe Byshop, findeth hymselfe offended that certaine heretikes being iustly excommunicated by him (as the Nouatian, were) did flie from his Diocesse which was their chiefe Byshop (refusing to be obedient vnto him & to be reformed) to the Bishop of Rome & to the Patriarch of Constantinople, and there were receiued in communion of congregation in derogation of good order, & discipline in the Churche, & to the mainteining of heresies and schismes. And that heresies did spring vp & schismes dayly arise hereof, that obedience was not giuē to the Priest of God, nor once considered him to be in the Church for the time the Priest, and for the time the iudge in Christes steade (as in decree of Nicene Councell was appointed) not meaning☞ the Bishop of Rome only, but euery Patriarch in his precinct, who had euery one of them a colledge or a Cathedrall Church of learned priests in hearing of whom, by a conuocation of all his fellow Byshops, with the consente of the people, all heresies were determined by the word of God, & this is the meaning of S. Cyprian, hetherto M. Philpot. Thus the reader may easily perceiue how you haue dalied about this place of Cyprian, and that this interpretation is not mine alone.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 70. Sect. 1. 2. 3. &. Pag. 71. Sect. 1.
                     And therfore Hierome writing vpon the first to Titus sayth, thatHierome. in the beginning a Bishop and a Priest was all one. But after that there began to rise factions in Religion, and some saide they helde of Apollo, some of Paule, some of Cephas, and some of Christe, it was decreed that one should be chosen to beare rule ouer the rest, to whō the chiefe care of the Church should apperteine, and by whom sectes and schismes should be cut of.
                     Here a man may reason thus. The distinction of degrees began in the Church, when men began to say I holde of Paule, I holde of Apollo. &c. But this was in the Apostles time, the. 1. Cor. 1. Therefore these distinctions of degrees beganin the Apostles time.
                     The same Hierom in his Epistle ad Euagrium teacheth, that the cause why one was chosen amongst the Bishops to rule ouer the rest, was 
                           in schismatis remedium, ne vnusquis
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ad se trahens Christi ecclesiam rumperet, to meete vvyth Schismes, leaste euery one according to his ovvne fansie should teare in peeces the Church of Christe, and saith further, that in Alexandria, from S. Marke vnto Heracla and Dionisius Byshops, the Ministers vsed to electe one among themselues vvhom they placing in a higher degree, called a Byshop, euen as an armie shoulde choose their Captaine, or Deacons shoulde choose one of themselues vvhom they knevv to be painefull, and call him an Archdeacon. Haec Hieronymus.
                        
                     
                     In all these places Hierome doth not maynteine the authoritie of one man ouer the whole Church, but thinketh it necessarie that in euery Prouince there be one to be chiefe ouer the reste, for vnitie sake, and for rooting out of contentiōs & sects. And therfore contra Luciferianos he sayth that vnlesse this superioritie were, there would be as many schismes in the Church as there be priests.
                  
                  
                     T C. Pag. 79. Sect. 1. 2.
                     The Hebrues do deriue the name of time of a verbe, which signifieth to corrupt, bycause in deede it doth corrupt all, & as the times are so are mē which liue in them: that euē very good men cary the note of ye infection of the times wherin they liue, & the streame of the corruption therof being so vehement & forcible, doth not only driue before it light things, but it eateth also & weareth ye very hard & stonie rockes, & therfore there is not to be looked for This is your vsuall practise, whē you cannot answere to cauill at the credite of the author. such sinceritie at Hieromes hand, Which we found in S. Cyprian, considering yt he liued, some ages after Cyprian, what time Satan had a great deale more darkened ye cleere light of the Sunne of the Gospell, than it was in S. Cyprians time. For as those yt came neerest vnto the Apostles times, bicause they were nearest the light dyd sce best, so those that were further of from these lightes, had vntill ye time of the manifestation of the sonne of perdition, their heauens more darke & cloudy, & consequently did see more diuiely, which is diligently 
                           〈1 line〉
                         be obserued of ye reader, both the better to vnderstand ye state of this question, and all other controuersies, which lye betwene vs and the Papistes.
                     And althoughe Hierome besides his other faultes, myghte haue also in this matter spoken more soundly, yet we shall easily perceiue yt he is a great deale further, from either the title or office of an Archbishop, or else from ye authoritie, that a Bishop hath with vs, than he is from the simplicitie of the ministerio which ought to be, and is commended vnto vs by the word of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is but a poore refuge, when you cannot answere to discredite the author: it is euident that Hierome saythe nothing touching this matter, but that which is both consonant to the scriptures, & confirmed by the practise of the Church, long before his time, as appeareth by that which is saide before. And I pray you what difference is there, betwixte that which Hierome speaketh in this place, and that which Cyprian

hath s
                              〈1 line〉
                           id before? For Cyp
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ian said, That heresies & schismes haue sprong & do spring of this, bicause the priest of God is not obeyed. &c. And bicause the Bishop which is one, & is set o
                                 〈1 line〉
                              er the church, is through the proude presumption of some contemned. &c. And Hierome saith that ye cause why among ye Bishops one was chosen to gouerne ye rest, was to remedie schismes. Do you not perceiue how these two fathers ioyne in one truthe, & directly affirme ye self same matter? It is true yt time corrupteth, & therfore much more occasion is offered to appoint gouernment according to ye times, least the corruptions preuaile & get the vpper hand, & for this cause, Hierome saith that vpon these corruptions of time, the Church was constreined to appoint this order.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 79. Sect. 3.
                     And here I must put M. Doctor in remēbrance, how vnfitly he hath dedicated his booke vnto ye church, which hath so patched it & peeced it of a number of shreddes of the Doctors, yt a sentence ofA friuolous di
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            from the matter. the scripture either truly or fal
                           〈1 line〉
                        ly alleaged, is as it were a Phenix in this booke. If he would haue had ye church beleue him, he oughte to haue setled their iudgement, & grounded their faith vpon the scriptures, which are ye only foūdations whervpon ye church may build. Now he doth not only not giue thē ground to stand of: but he leadeth them into wayes which they cannot follow, nor come after him. For except it be those which are learned, & besides haue the meanes & abilitie, to haue the bookes which are here cited (which are ye least & smalest portion of the Church) how can they know that these things be true, which are alleaged, & as I haue said if they could know, yet haue they nothing to stay themselues vpon, & quiet their conscience, in allowing ye which M. Doctor woulde so faine haue them like of. Therfore he might haue much more fitly dedicated his booke vnto ye 
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        earned and riche, which haue furnyshed lybraries.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        M. Doctor hath brought more scriptures thā you haue answered, as in the sequele it wil fal out, although (as I said before) in such matters, ye scripture hath not expreslyTract. 2. determined any certeintie, but hath left them to the Church, to be appointed according to the circumstances of time, place, and person, as I haue proued both out of the scriptures & learned writers, & intend to do hereafter more particularly, whē I come to entreat of your Seigniorie. If al other men should do as you haue done, that is, borrow the sayings of the Doctors out of other mens collections, & not read ye authors thē selues, a few bokes wil serue, & with very smal charges, they mightbe prouided.
                        The patches, peeces. & shreds of Doctors that be in my boke, are taken out of the Doctors thēselues, & they be whole sentences faithfully alledged. But the shreds of doctors, that your boke is stuffed with, you haue borrowed of other: you haue falsifyed thē, & cut them off by the half: you haue fathered vpon them that which is not to be founde in them: and the words of late writers, you haue set downe vnder the name of ancient fathers: and the scriptures you haue falsely alleaged, and vntruely translated: I would not gladly haue burst out into this accusation at this time, being from the matter, but that you haue vrged me therevnto.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 79. Sect. 4. 5. 6.
                     Hierome saith, ye at the first a Bishop & an elder (which you call a priest) were all one, but afterward through factions & schismes, it was decreed yt one should rule ouer ye rest. Now I say against this order, that ye Bishop should beare rule ouer all, ye which our sauiour Christ saith vnto ye Phariseis, from ye beginning it was not so, & therfore I require that ye first order may stand, which wasContr
                              〈1 line〉
                            Prax. that a Bishop & elder were all one. And if you place so great authoritie against the institution of God in a mortall man, heare what Tertullian saith vnto you.
                     That is true, whatsoeuer is first, and that is false whatsoeuer is latter.
                     Hierome & you confesse yt this was first, that ye Bishop was all one with ye elder, & first also by ye
                        Tertullians meaning falsified, word of God, thē I conclude yt, that is true. You both do likewise confesse, yt it came after that one bare rule ouer the rest, then I conclude, ye that is false: for all that is false, that is latter. Furthermore Hierome in the same place of Titus saith after this sort. As ye elders know themselues to be subiect by a custome of the Churche, vnto him that is set ouer them, so the Byshops must knowe, that they are greater than the elders, rather by custome, than by any truth of the instatution of the Lord, and so they ought to gouerne the Church in common.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It followeth after in my answere to the Admonition, that there was superioritie among

the ministers of the word, e
                              〈1 line〉
                           ē in the Apostles time, which I 
                              〈◊〉
                            by the 
                              〈1 line〉
                           riptures & other testimonies, it is also 
                              〈◊〉
                            that great factions & schi
                              〈1 line〉
                           mes did 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            the Church euē in the Apostles time: & therfore most like these that Icrome sp
                              〈1 line〉
                           keth of, to haue bin thē determined. The which to be true, his words ad 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            touching ye church of Alexādria doth euidently declare: for he saith yt this order was kept 
                              〈◊〉
                            frō S. Marke. But admit these were not true (which you wil neuer be able to proue) yet your argument is of no force, & the place of Tertullian is not vnderstanded, for Tertullian in that boke, after he hath repeated the rule of faith, which is to beleeue in
                                 
                                    〈◊◊〉
                                 
                                 ▪
                               one God, and in his sonne Iesus Ch
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ist. &c. he saith, that this rule hath come from the beginning of the Gospell euen before all former heretikes, muche more before 
                                 〈◊〉
                               that was but yesterdaye, as well the posteritie of all heretikes as the verye noueltie of 
                                 〈◊〉
                               which was of late will proue. VVhereby iudgement may hereof be indifferently gyuen against all heresies, that that is true whatsoeuer is first, & that count
                                 〈1 line〉
                              rfeit, whatsoeuer is last. Wherby it is e
                              〈1 line〉
                           ident that Tertullians rule is to be vnderstanded in matters of saluation,
                              
                                 〈◊◊◊◊〉
                               is to be 
                                 〈◊〉
                               s
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ode. 
                                 
                                    〈◊◊〉
                                  gin. veland.
                            & of faith, & not in matters of ceremonies, & kinds of gouernment: which thing he himselfe in plaine words declareth in his booke de virginibus velandis, where in lyke maner after he hath recited this rule of faith, he addeth this lawe of 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              aith remaining, other things of discipline & conuersation admit newnesse of correction, the grace of God working and going forward, euen to the end. So that Tertullian thinketh that matters of ceremonies and discipline may be altered (ye rule of faith remaining 
                              〈◊〉
                           ) notwithstanding his former rule.
                        If you will not haue this to be the meaning of Tertulliā, then will I reason thus.The reason of the 
                                 〈◊◊◊◊〉
                               gainst 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            In the beginning there were Apostles, therfore there must be Apostles now: in ye beginning it was forbiddē to eate yt which was strangled, Ergo we may not eate it now: In ye beginning there were no Christian Magistrates Ergo there must 
                              〈1 line〉
                           e no
                              〈1 line〉
                           e now: In the beginning the Apostles baptized in riuers, the cōmunion was ministred to. 12. only. &c. 
                              Ergo quòd posterius falsū, that which is latter is false: these be as good arguments as yours. But it is manifest that Tertullian speaketh of matters of faith, & necessarie to saluation, & therfore these arguments, & yours also with such like, be starke naught.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 79. Sect. vlt.
                     Now seing that Hierome confesseth yt a Bishop & an elder, by God his institution are all one, & that custome of ye Church hath altered this institutiō, for y^ taking away of this custome, & restoring of the Lords institution, I say as our sauiour Christ said, why do you breake the cōmaundementsMath 15. of God, to establish your own traditions▪ for the one is the institution of God, & the other the tradition of the Church, & if a mans testimonie be so much with M. Doctor, let him heare what y• sameDeveland. virg. Tertullian saith, whatsoeuer sauoreth against the truth, shalbe accounted heresie, euen although it be an olde custome.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your whole bóoke is groūded vpon the sands, yt is vpō foūdatiōs not proued, as this is. For you should first haue proued, that Christ hath so cōmaunded equalitie of Ministers in gouernment & ecclesiastical pollicie, that one of them may not be aboue the other: the contrary is to be sene in scripture, both in words & examples, as I haue after declared, so far of is it, that you can shew any cōmaundement to the contrary. Thys text of ye. 15. of. Mat. did the Anabaptistes, obiect vnto Zuinglius in the like case, as it appeareth in his boke de Baptismo. But he answered thē as I must answere you, I speakeZuing. de 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 
                               not as you feyne me to speake, I speake only of external & indifferent things, wherof there be many which are neither cōmaunded nor forbidden by any expresse worde of God. &c. & againe, for this that we speake of is not necessarrie vnto saluation, but it is external, of the which things many may be foūd omitted in the scriptures. &c. Wherfore except you can proue, that we bring into the Church some thing as necessary vnto saluation which is not expressed in the scriptures, this text is no more aptly applyed by you against me, than it was by the Anabaptists, against Zuinglius.
                        
                        The wordes of Tertullian are true, and make nothing for your purpose, for you must first proue that these degrées be against the truth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 20. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 80. Line. 3.
                     Now I will turne M. Doctors owne argument vpon his head, after this sort. A sillogisme 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           . In the Apostles times there were (b) schismes & heresies but in their times ther were no archbishops ordeined to appeare them: therfore the best meanes of composing of controuersies and keping concorde, is not
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            you are 
                              〈◊〉
                            to your 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ pag. 7
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           5. by hauing an Archbishop to be ouer a whole Prouince.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I will seuerally answere your arguments, that the reader may the better vnderstand the pith of them. And first I denie this argument, bicause it is neither in modeA 
                                 〈◊〉
                               argument dis
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              . nor sigure. For first you must cal to memory, that in the third figure where you wold seeme to place it, the Minor may not be negatiue as yours is. Secondly there is more in the conclusiō then there is in the premisses which is against al rules of sillogismes. If you had concluded according to your former propositions, you shoulde haue sayde thus, Ergo when there are Archbishops there are no schismes. For this is the true conclusion of that false sillogisme. Thirdly Minus extremum should be subiectum conclusionis, and in this argument it is praedicatū. Seing therfore that your argument hath no true forme in any respect, I denie it, vntill it be better framed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 21. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 80. Line. 7.
                     That there was none in the yt Apostles times, thus it may appeare. If there were any they were either ordeined by the Apostles, & their authoritie, or else without and besides their authoritie. If there were any without & besides their authoritie; then they are therefore to be condemned yt more, bicause in their time they starie vp without their warrant. And if the Apostles did ordeine them, there was some vse of them, to that whervnto they were ordeined, but there was no vse of them to that whervnto they were ordeined, therfore the Apostles did not ordeine them. The vse whervnto M. Doctor saith they were ordeined, was to compose controuersies and ende schismes, but to this they were not vsed: wherevpon it followeth, that if there were any they were vnprofitable. That they were not vsed to any such ende it shall be perceiued by that which followeth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This should be the proofe of your former Minor, if the argument had bene good: but be it as you would haue it, here is yet no sufficient proofe of your Minor. They are but only your owne bare words, which may as easily be reiected, as they be barely by you affirmed. But least the ignorant reader shoulde thinke that I shifte of matters wyth suche quidities as they vnderstand not, I will set a side the deformed face of your argument, and come to the matter, & (as I thinke) your meaning, which is this. Controuersies were compounded in the Apostles time without an Archbyshop, Ergo they maye lykewise be so now, so that there is no neede of any Archbishop. This is the controuersie, whether the Church be bound to the same kind of external gouernment at all times, that was vsed in ye Apostles times. I haue proued hetherto that it is not. And more is to beThe office of an archbyshop in ye Apostles. 
                                 Ad. 4. 15. 18. 1 Cor. 3. 4. 5. 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 
                                 ▪ 
                                 l'tra
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                       que
                                     id tim. epi ad Tit. Euseb. lib 3. Cap. 23. Epibha. lib. 1. Tom. 2.
                            said of the same afterwards. In the meane time this I giue you to vnderstand, that althoughe the Apostles had not this name of Archbishop among them, yet they had the same authoritie and office. For they had the gouernment & direction of diuers Churches, both in matters of doctrin & discipline: they ended controuesies, repressed errors, kept them in quietnesse: ordeined them Bishops, & visited them, as appeareth Act. 14. 15. 18. 1. Cor. 3. 4. 5. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . & in the Epistle to Timothie & Titus. 
                              Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 23. declareth of Iohn the Euangelist, that after he returned from Pathmos, he visited & gouerned sundry Churches, & ordeined them Ministers. The like doth Epiphanius report of Peter in Pontus & Bithinia Lib. 1. Tom. 2. And what other office then those hath the Archbishop. Therfore though the name of Archbishop was not among the Apostles, yet was his office & function. And notwithstanding that part of the office of the Apostles is ceased which consisted in planting & founding of Churches, throughout ye world: yet this part of gouernment & direction of Churches remaineth still and is committed to Byshops. Therefore saith Ambrose in the. 4. ad Ephe. Apostoli Episcopi sunt, Apostles are Byshops,
                           Ambro. in. 4. Ephe. bicause Bishops do succeede them in preaching the word, & gouerning ye church.
                        
                           Now if I shal also proue by good authoritie that among the Apostles themseluesSuperioritie among the Apostles. and in their tymes, there was one chiefe (though he were not called Archbishop) then I suppose that it will not seeme straunge vnto you, that in this state of the Church, it should be cōuenient to haue the like in euery Prouince or Diocesse. Ierome in his firstIerom. aduers. Ioni. lib. 1. booke aduersus Iouinianum sayth thus. Yet among the twelue one is chosen, that a head being appoynted, occasion of schisme might be remoued. And least ye should wipe this away with your accustomed deprauing of the Authour, I will ioyne vnto him the testimonie of M. Caluine in his Institutions 
                              Cap. 8. who writeth thus. That the twelueCaluine. Apostles had one among them to gouerne the rest, it was no marueyle, for nature requireth it, and the disposition of man will so haue it, that in euerie companie (although they be all equall in power) yet that there be one as gouernour, by whome the rest may be directed. There is no court without a Consull, no Senate without a Pretor, no Colledge without a president, no societie without a master. M. Bucer likewise in his booke, De regno Christi, hath these wordes. Now we see by the perpetuall obseruation of the Churches euen fromBucer. the Apostles themselues, that it hath pleased the holy Ghost, that among the Ministers to whome especially the gouernment of the Church is committed, one should haue the chiefe eare, both of the Churches and whole ministerie, and that he shoulde go before all other in that care and diligence, for the which cause the name of a Bishop is peculiarly giuen to such chiefe gouernors of Churches, &c. Againe vpon the. 4. to the Ephe. he sayth as before is alledged. Paule in the Acts called the same men, Bishops & Ministers, whē he called for theIdem. Ministers of Ephesus to Miletum, yet bicause one among them did rule, and had the chief eare of the Church, the name of a Bishop did properly belong vnto him. Neither was his age alwayes considered, so that he were vertuous and learned, as we haue an example in Timothie being a yong man. Thus then you sée, that euen amongst the Apostles themselues, and in the Churches in their tymes, there were some, that had the chiefe authoritie ouer the rest, and to this ende especially, that schismes and contentions might be compounded, and the rest might be directed, whiche are the chiefe partes of the Archbishops office: and therefore all this that you haue here sayde, falleth flat to the ground: And yet still I do affirme, that if it had not béene so in the Apostles time, yet might it haue bene both lawfully and necessarily, at other tymes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 22. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 80. Sect. 1.
                     At Antioch there rose a great & daūgerous heresie, that had in a maner infected al the Churches which shaked the very foūdation of the saluation of gods childē, that was, whether faith were sufficient to iustifie without circūcision. The matter was disputed of both sides, it could not be agreed of. What do they now? Do they ordein some Archbishop, Archprophet, Archapostle, or any one chief to whō they will referre the coutrouersie, or vpon whō they wil depend? Nothing lesse. And if they would haue had the controuersies ended by one, what deuine was there euer, or shall there be more fitter for that purpose than S. Paule, which was amongst them? Why do they send abrode for remedie, when they had it at home? Why with great charges and long iourneyes, which they might haue had without charges, or one foote set out of the doore? what do they then? They sende Paule and Barnabas to Ierusalem, as if the lesser townes should send to the Churches of the Uniuersities, & of London, to desire their help in the determining of the controuersie. And what is Paule & Barnabas ambassage, is it to desire the iudgement or mind of some one? It must needes be answered with S. Luke, that they came to know the resolution of the Church, and yet there were the Apostles, whereof euerie one was better able both sharpely to see, and to iudge incorruptly without affection, than any Archbishop that euer was. If therefore in so great aboundance and ouerflowing of the giftes of God, and in that tyme when as controuersyes might haue beene referred without daunger of error vnto one onely, this ministerie of one aboue all, was not thought good: now when the giftes are lesse, and the daunger of error more; to make an Archbishop for the deciding of controuersyes, and auoyding of schismes, is a thing so straunge, that I am not able to see the reason of it. For to which soeuer of the Apostles the controuersie had bene referred, it is certaine that he would haue giuen a true sentence of it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It was tolde you before, that an Archbishop of himselfe alone doth not take vponSupr. diui. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              .
                           
him to determin matters of doctrine in controuersie: But if any such contention arise, either he determineth the matter according to the law, & rule alreadie by the Church established, or else with the consent of the Prince doth he set an order in the same by a prouinciall and lawfull Synode: in the which he is the chiefe, as some one of the Apostles were in such like assemblies, according to that which I haue before declared: & therfore all this speach might well haue bene spared. Your argument also is faultie in two respectes: first it is 
                              Ab authoritate negatiuè, or à non facto ad non ius,
                            which is good 
                              Neque in diuinis ne
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  in humanis, neyther in diuine nor in humane matters: Secondly, you go about to conclude an vniuersall doctrine of one particular and singular example: which at no time, nor in any matter is tollerable.
                        Moreouer it rather iustifyeth my assertion, for it euidently proueth that euerieThe example of T. C. is rather against him, than for him. Parish within it selfe, hath not absolute authoritie to ende controuersies, but that it behoueth them in such weightie matters, to resort to the chiefe Church, as they now did to Ierusalem. This example therefore, if you well consider it, is directly against you: neither doth it in any respect proue, that there was then no chiefe gouernour or guide of the rest, to supplie that place and office which now the Archbishop hath.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 23. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 80. Sect. 2.
                     And if any can shew me one man in these tymes, of whom we may be assured, that he will pronounceThe Archbishop hath 
                              〈◊〉
                            to thanke you for your gentlenesse the truth of euery question which shall arise, he shall make me somwhat more fauorable to the Archbishop, than presently I am. For although there were found one such as could not erre, yet I could not consent that the matter shoulde lie only vpon his hande, seeing that the Apostles which could not erre in these matters, would not take that vpon them, & seeing that by that meanes the iudgement of the Church should be contemned, and further, for that the iudgement of one man in a controuersie, is not so strong to pull vp errors that are rooted in mens minds, as the iudgement and consent of many. For, that the iudgement of many is very apt either to confirme a truth, or to confute falsehoode, it is euident that S. Paule doth holde forth, as it were a buckler agaynst the frowardnesse of certaine, the authoritie of the Church.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You take great paynes in fighting without an aduersarie, and bicause otherwise (as it should séeme) you lacke matter to lengthen your booke, therfore you deuise matter of your owne to striue agaynst. For who hath affirmed that, which you so earnestly séeke in this place to ouerthrowe? It hath bene tolde twise alreadie, that neyther of our Archbishops taketh vpon him to compounde controuersies in doctrine by himselfe alone, neyther is it their office so to doe. The Archbishops authoritie in thisThe authoritie of Archbishops in our Church. Church is, to prouide by lawfull and ordinarie meanes that vnitie be obserued in the Church: that contentions and schismes be cut off: that the religion and orders of the Church, by the whole consent of the Church agréed vpon, be mainteyned: that euery Bishop in his prouince doe his duetie according to the same: this is his principall charge (as I take it) agaynst the which you haue not as yet spoken any thing, but deuise with your selfe, to improue that which no man affirmeth: this is but verie shifting and dallying.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 24. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 80. Sect. 3.
                     Furthermore, if this distinction came vp in the Apostles tyme, and by them, how commeth it to passe, that they neuer mention it, nay how commeth it to passe that euen S. Paule in that very Epistle where these voyces are founde (I holde of Paule, I of Apollo, I of Cephas whiche are1. Cor. 14. sayde to be the cause of the Archbishop) ordeyneth a cleane contrarie to this that M. doctor commendeth? A place farre se
                              〈1 line〉
                           ched to improue the office of the Archbishop. For when two or three Prophets haue expounded the scriptures, he appoynteth that all the rest that are there, should iudge whether they haue done well or no.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I contend not that the name of the Archbishop was in the Apostles tyme, but you haue not yet proued that the office was not then, or that there was then no superioritie among the Cleargie, which you notwithstanding denie. Your negatiue reason proueth nothing, as you haue bene oftentymes tolde.
                        The place in the. 1. Cor. 14. is farre fetched, it speaketh not of gournment, andT. C. faulteth with the Admonition in vnapt allegations of scripture. discipline, or externall pollicie of the Church, but of expounding the Scriptures. And what a reason cal you this S. Paule, saith. 1. Cor. 14. 
                              Prophet
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  duo aut tres loquantur, caete
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 i dijudicent: Let two or three Prophets speake, and let the other iudge, Ergo
                            he speaketh agaynst an Archbishop? Surely if the Authours of the Admonition had not bene detected of their vnskilfull allegations of Scriptures, I shoulde haue had as much a doe with you in that poynt: for euen of these fewe which you haue vsed, there is not almost one rightly and truely applied. S. Paule in that place to the Corinthians sheweth, that the hearers must iudge of the doctrine of the Prophets, whether it be according to the worde of God or no, as those did whiche are commended in the. 17. of the Actes: but what is this to an Archbishop?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 25. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 81. Sect. 1.
                     And howe commeth it to passe that S. Paule being at Rome in prison, and looking euery day when he shuld giue vp his last breath, cōmended vnto the Church a perfect & an absolute ministerie,Ephe. 4. 
                        Howe oft hath this beene repeated. standing of fiue partes, wherein he maketh mention, not one worde of an Archbishop: and sayeth further, that that ministerie is able to enterteyne the perfect vnitie, and knitting togither of the Church? Do not all these things speake or rather crie, that there was not so much as a step of an Archbishop in the Apostles times?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        How oft haue you alledged this place to ye same purpose? If I should do the like, youThe place Eph. 4. no per
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ect pater
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            would bestow one whole side in iesting at it. But I answere you as I did before. In this place the Apostle as you confesse, reciteth offices that be but temporall, as Apostle, Prophet, &c. he leaueth out those offices which you say are perpetuall, as Deacon, and Senior. Therefore it is no such perfect patterne, as you would haue it. And if you say that these offices are conteyned vnder the names of Pastors and Doctors, then I say that Bishops and Archbishops be so in like maner. If you will haue the Apostle to speake of these ministeries onely, which are occupied in the worde and sacraments, then I say vnto you, that an Archbishop is a name of Iurisdiction and gouernmentArchbishop, a name of iurisdiction, not of a new ministerie. committed to a Bishop, Pastor or Minister of the worde, as necessarie for the good gouernment of the Church, but not as any new ministerie, as you vntruly both now, and also before haue surmised. But to let all this passe: in those offices whiche S. Paule here reciteth is the office of an Archbishop conteyned, though it be not named, and namely vnder the Apostles and Pastors as I haue before shewed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 26. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 81. Sect. 1.
                     And if you will say, that the Apostles did ordeyne Archbishops (as you haue indeed sayd, and do now againe) when as there is not one worde in the writings of them, I pray you tell vs, howe we shall hold out of the Church the vnwritten verities of the Papists? For my part if it be true that you say, I cannot tell what to answere vnto them. For our answere is to them, the Apostles haue left a perfect rule of ordering the Church written, and therefore we reiect their traditions, if for no other cause, yet bicause they are superfluous and more than need. Now this degree of Archbishop being not only not mentioned in the scriptures, but also manifestly oppugned, it is to bold, & hard
                           〈1 line〉
                         a speech (that I say no more) to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        et the petegree of the Archbishop from the Apostles times, and from the Apostles themselues.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I must answere you still as Zuinglius answered the Anabaptists in the like obiection, and as I haue answered you before: the Papists make their traditions necessarie vnto saluation, and therefore they are to be reiected, bicause the worde of God conteyneth all things necessarie to saluation. I make those offices part of decencie, order, Ecclesiasticall gouernment and pollicie, whiche admitteth alteration as the tymes and persons require, and are not particularly expressed in the Scriptures, no more than diuerse other things be in the same kinde, as I haue prooued before. And that this may séeme no straunge matter, or any thing fauouring the Papists vnwritten verities, you may call to remembrance that which M. Caluin sayth of such traditionsCaluine. vpon these wordes. 1. Cor. 11. Quemadmodum tradidi vobis instituta tenetis. I do not denie (sayth he) but that there were some traditions of the Apostles not written &c. as ITract. 2. haue before recyted, speaking of Ceremonies not expressed in the worde. And you may sée that wise and learned men are not so scrupulous in Apostolicall traditions not written, so that they be not such as are made necessarie vnto saluation: neyther is any learned man of contrarie iudgement. And therefore Archbishops may well be brought from the Apostles tymes, without any daunger of admitting the vnwritten verities of the Papists. You haue not yet proued that eyther the name or office of Archbishoppes is in any respect oppugned in the worde of God, and therefore that is but feyned.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 27. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 81. Sect. 1.
                     But all this time M. doctor hath forgotten his question, which was to proue an Archbishop, whereas all these testimonies which he alledgeth, make mention onely of a bishop, & therefore this may rather confirme the state of the bishop in this realme, than the Archbishop. But in the answere vnto them it shal appeare, that as there is not in these places so much as the name of an Archbishop mentioned, so except only the name of a Bishop, there shall be founde very little agreement betwene the Bishops in those dayes, and those which are called Bishops in our time, and with vs.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        M. Doctor remembreth that the Authours of the Admonition aswell denie the office of a Bishop, as the office of an Archbishop, and hée is not ignorant, that the proofe of the one is the confirmation of the other, and therefore he vseth suche testimonies as perteyne to them both: of the whiche nature those places be that he hath hitherto alledged. For you muste vnderstande, that I spake before of the name, and nowe according to my promise I speake of the office, whiche is not so farre distant from the Bishops, but that in moste things they be confounded: But let vs nowe heare how you performe your promise.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 28. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 81. Sect. 2.
                     And consequently, although M. doctor thought with one whiting boxe to haue whited two walles (by establishing our Archbishop and Bishop by the same testimonies of the fathers) yet it shall be plaine, that in going about to defend both, he left both vndefended.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Wordes of pleasure, too too vsuall with T. C. but of smal weight (God be thanked) and of lesse truth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 29. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 81. Sect. 2. 3.
                     Let vs therfore come first to examine Ieromes reasons, why one must be ouer the rest, for in the testimonie of men that is onely to be regarded which is spoken either with some authoritie of the scripture, or with some reason grounded of the scripture: otherwise, if he speak without either scripture or reason, he is as 
                           〈1 line〉
                        asily reiected as alleaged. One (sayth he) being chosen to be ouer the rest, bringeth remedie vnto schismes: how so? least euery man (sayth he) drawing to himselfe do breake the Church in pieces.
                     But I would aske if the Church be not in as great daungerHere you cō
                           found a monarchie, and a tyrannie. when all is done at the pleasure and iust of one man, and when one carieth all into error, as when one pulleth one piece with him, an other another piece, & the third his part also with him. And it isNot so, if tha
                              〈1 line〉
                            one do gouerne by lawe. harder to draw many into an error, than one, or that many should be caried away by their affections, than one, which is euidentYour similitudes hold not. in water, which if it be but a little, it is quickly troubled and corrupted, but beeing much, it is not so easily. But by this ecclesiasticall Monarchie, all things are kept in peace: Nay, rather it hath bene theVntruth. cause of discorde, and well spring of most horrible schisme, as it is to be seene in the very decretalsDecret. par. 2. c. 9. q. 3. & can. Apost. 33. &. alibi passim. themselues.A good 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           tor for contentio
                              〈1 line〉
                           . And admit it were so, yet the peace which is without truth, is more execrable than a thousande contentions. For as by stryking of two flintes togither, there commeth out fyre, so it may be, that sometymes by contention, the truth which is hidden in a darke peace maye come to light, which by a peace in naughtinesse and wickednesse being as it were buryed vnder the ground, doth not appeare.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Ierome being a man of such singular learning, and great credite among those that be learned, in a matter of Hystorie as this (for hée reporteth when one Byshop wasT. C. descredueth the author whom he cannot answe
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e. placed ouer the rest, and for what cause) is more to be beléeued withoute reasons, than you with all your popular and friuolous arguments. Let the reader againe consider whether this be your maner or no, by vaine reasons to shake the credite of the authour, when you cannot otherwise answere.
                        The reasons that you vse for the popular or Aristocraticall gouernment of the Church, when they come among the people, will be easily transferred to the state of the common weale, and peraduenture bréede that misliking of ciuill gouernment, that you would now haue of Ecclesiasticall, to a further inconuenience and mischiefe, than you and all yours will be able to remedie. In the meane time you vtterly ouerthrowT. C. ouer
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              he 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               in 
                                 〈◊〉
                               ecclesiasti
                                 〈1 line〉
                              all. the Quéenes authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matters, giuen vnto hir by the lawes of God, as hereafter shall be proued. For if the state must eyther be popular or Aristocraticall, then must there be no one supreme gouerner in Church matters, but I wil come to your reasons.
                        First you aske whether the Churche be not in as great daunger when all is done at the pleasure and lust of one man, and when one carieth all into errour. &c. Here you do eyther ignorantlyDifference betwixt a king and a tyrant. or wilfully confounde Monarchiam with tyrannie. For betwixt a king and a tyrant, this is one difference, that a king ruleth according to the lawes that are prescribed for him to rule by, and according to equitie and reason: a tyrant doth what him list, followeth his owne affections, contemneth lawes, and sayth, 
                              Sic volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. So I will, so I commaund, my pleasure standeth for reason. Now therefore to vse those reasons to ouerthrow a lawful Monarchie, which are onely proper to wicked tyrannie, is eyther closely to accuse the gouernment of this Church of England of tyrannie, or maliciously by subtile dealing, and confounding of states, to procure theThe ecclesiasticall gouernment in this Church not tyrannicall but lawfull. misliking of the same in the hearts of the subiects. There is neyther Prince nor Prelate in this land that ruleth after their pleasure and lust, but according to those lawes and orders that are appointed by the common consent of the whole realme in Parliament, and by such lawes of this Monarchie as neuer hitherto any good subiect hath mislyked: and therefore your grounde being false: how can the rest of your building stand? It hath bene sayd before that the Archbishop hath not this absolute authoritie, giuen vnto him, to doe all things alone, or as him lust. He is by lawe prescribed both what to doe, and howe to procéede in his dooings. Moreouer this Churche of Englande (Gods name bée praysed therefore) hath all poyntes of necessarie

doctrine certainly determined, Ceremonies and orders e
                              〈1 line〉
                           presly prescribed, from the whiche neyther Archbyshoppe nor Byshoppe maye swarue, and according to the whiche, they must bée directed, to the obseruing of the whiche also, their dutie is to constreyne all those that 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ée vnder them. So that whosoeuer shall wilfully and s
                              〈1 line〉
                           ubburnely seuer himselfe from obedience, eyther to Archbyshoppe or Bishoppe in suche matters, may iustly be called a Schismatike, or a disturber of the Church. And in this respect is that saying of Cyprian nowe most true: For neyther doo HeresyesLi
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . Epist. 3. aryse, nor Schismes spring of any other thing, but hereof, that the Priest of God is not obeyed. And so is this of Ieromes in like maner. 
                              Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis pendet
                              Contra Luciscrianos. 
                              dignitate, cui si non exors & ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesia efficiuntur schismata, quot sacerdotes. The safetie of the Churche dependeth vppon the dignitie of the highe Priest, to whom vnlesse a singuler and peerelesse power be giuen, there will be, as manie schismes in the Church, as there be Priests.
                        
                        You say that it is harder to draw many into an error than one, &c. whiche is not true,The gouernment of one by lawe, more safe than of many without lawe. when that one ruleth and gouerneth by lawe. For the minde of man euen of the best may be ouerruled by affection, but so cannot the lawe. Wherefore a wicked man directed by lawe gouerneth more indifferently, than multitudes withoute lawe, bée they neuer so godly. Moreouer one Godly, wise, and learned man is muche more hardly moued to any errour, than is the multitude, whiche naturally is prone and bent to the same: in whome not onely Philosophers, but singular Diuines also haue noted great inconstancie and a disposition moste vnméet
                              〈1 line〉
                            to gouerne.The s
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ilitude of water returned agaynst the Replier.
                        
                        Your similitude of water holdeth not: for a little water in a grauelly or stonie Well or Ryuer is not so soone troubled and corrupted, as are multitudes of waters in Fennishe and Marrishe groundes. Againe, a little water in a running Ryuer or Fourde is at all tymes more pure and cleare, than is a great quantitie in standing Puddelles: to bée short, is not the water of those little springs, and Cundite heades, (which béeing safely locked vp, and inclosed in stone and Leade, do minister greate reléefe to whole Cities) muche more pleasaunt, hardlyer corrupted, lesse troubled, than the great waters in the Thames. Therefore is a little water procéeding from a good Fountaine, by stones and Leade kept from things that may hurt it, hardlier putrifyed and corrupted, than all the Fennishe waters in a whole Countrey, than mightie Pooles, yea than the Thames it selfe. So is one wise and prudent man gouerned and directed by order and by lawe, further from corruption and errour in gouernement, than whole multitudes of people, of what sorte soeuer they bée.
                        You further say, that this Ecclesiasticall monarchie hath beene the cause of discorde, &c. I aunswere, that it hath béene the cause of the contrarie, vntill suche tyme as it was turned into tyrannie, as by all Ecclesiasticall storyes and wryters it may appeare, and namely by these two, Cyprian and Ierome.
                        
                        In all that decretall part. 2. c. 9. 
                              quaest. 3. noted in your Margent: there is nothingThe places c
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ed by T. C maketh for the Archbishop. agaynste any forme of gouernment vsed by the Archbyshoppe in this Churche of Englande, but in plaine and manifest wordes bothe the name and office of the Archebishoppe is there mainteyned and approoued. And I wishe that the learned Reader woulde peruse ouer all that parte of Gratian, then shoulde he easily perceyue your faythfulnesse in alledging Authorities. And thoughe it be somewhat tedious, yet that the vnlearned also may haue some taste of your dealing, I will sette downe some Canons conteyned in that parte of Gratian. Out of the Councell of Pope Martine hée cyteth this Canon. 
                              Per singulas prouincias oportet Episcopos cognoscere. &c. In euerie Prouince the Bishoppes must knowe theyr Metropolitane to haue the cheefe authoritie, and that they ought to doe nothing withoute him, according to the olde and auncient Canons of oure forefathers, for the whiche cause also the Metropolitane muste take vppon him nothing presumptuously without the councell of other Bishoppes. And out of the councell of Antioch, he hath this. 
                              Per singulas prouincias Episcopos singulos scire oportet, &c. In euery prouince the Bishops must know their Metropolitane which gouerneth,

to haue the chiefe care of the whole prouince: and therefore those that haue any causes must resort to the Metropolitane citie. &c. In all the rest of the Canons he manifestly attributeth superioritie and gouernment to the Archbishop and Metropolitane, euen the same that we do in this Church, only he denieth that the Metropolitane or Archbyshop hath such absolute authoritie, that he can deale any thing in criminall causes agaynst a Byshop, or in other common matters without the consent of other Bishops, which is not agaynst any thing by me affirmed, or contrary to any authoritie claymed by the Archbishop, for it hath bene from the beginning denied that the Archbishop of his own absolute authoritie can determine any thing in matters doubtfull, and not determined by the lawes and orders of this Churche, to the which the whole realme hath consented.Can. apost. 33.
                        
                        The. 33. Canon of the Apostles quoted in the margent is this: 
                              Episcopos singularum gentium scire conuenit quis inter eos primus babeatur, quem velut existiment. &c. It behoueth the Bishops of euery prouince to know who is chiefe among thē, whom they must esteeme as their head, and do nothing without his knowledge, saue such things only as pertayne to their owne parish and villages, which are vnder it, neyther shall he do any thing without the knowledge of all. For so shall vnitie be kept and God shall be glorified through Christe in the holy Ghost. What haue you gotten by this Canon? you see here manifestly that in euery prouince or nation there must be one chiefe Bishop, that is Archbishop, to whom the rest muste submitte themselues, and do nothing without his knowledge. This is asmuch as I require: And if this Canon was made by the Apostles (wherof you seeme not to doubte) then is the name and authoritie of an Archbishop, of greater antiquitie than you would gladly haue it, and the reason and saying of S. Ierome most true.
                        Both of this Canon, and of the Canon of the councell of Antioch confirming it, I haue spoken before. Your Passim in the margent, if it be meant of such like plac
                              〈1 line〉
                           s as this, I graunt it: but if of any other popular or Aristocraticall state and kinde of gouernment, or to the improuing of the office and authoritie of an Archbishop, it will fall out to be nusquam. You say, that it appeareth in the decretalls themselues that this kinde of gouernment hath bene the wellspryng of most horrible schisme. Shew one place: why are you not ashamed to vtter manifest vntruthes? Shew one sentence there tending to that ende. I haue recited some Canons out of that place, and I haue shewed the entent of Gratian both in them, and in the rest. They all signifie that an Archbyshop may not do any thing of his owne authoritie without the consent of the other Byshops, which no man denieth, and this is the whole scope of that question.
                        Our peace is in truth and due obedience, we haue the true doctrine of the worde of God: and the right administration of the Sacramentes: and therefore to make contention in this Church, and to disturbe the quietnes and peate, cannot be but mere schismaticall, I will say no worse. Zuinglius in his Ecclesiastes sayth, that the Anabaptistes went aboute to defende their contentions then, after the same manner that you do yours nowe. But I answere you as he answered them: your contention is not agaynst Infidels, Papists, and such like: but agaynst the faythfull, agaynst the true professors of the Gospell, and in the Church of Christe, and therefore as it is of it selfe wicked, so is it the cause of contempt, disobedience, and much other vngodlinesse. And the two flintstones may be in such time and place striken togither, that the sparkes of fire which commeth from them, may consume and burne the whole citie and countrie too. And surely he is but a mad man that will smite fire to light a candle to sée by at noone day, when the sunne shineth most clearely.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 30. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 81. Sect. 4.
                     If therefore superioritie and domination of one aboue the rest haue such force to keepe men frō schismes, when they be in the truth, it hath as great force to keepe them togither in errour, and so besides that one is easier to be corrupted than many, this power of one bringeth as great incōmoditie in keping them in error, if they fall into it, as in the truth, if they are in it.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is as though you should saye, that if a Monarchie be an excellent kynde of gouernment, and in déede the best, when the lawes rule and not man (as Aristotle sayth) then also is it the worste, when affection ruleth and not the lawe, which is true: for that is the worst state of gouernment which is opposed to the beste. But if you will therefore conclude, that a Monarchie is not the best state, your argument hath no reason in it: euen so is it in the gouernment of the Churche, if the chéefe gouernour thereof should follow his owne appetite and be ruled by his priuate affections: but it is farre otherwise when he ruleth according to the lawes wherevnto he himselfe is subiect.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 31. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag 81. Sect. 4.
                     Morouer if it be necessary for the keping of vnitie in the Church of England, that one Archbishop should be primate ouer all, why is it not as meete that for the keping of the whole vniuersall Churche, there should be one Archbishop or Byshop ouer all, and the like necessitie of the byshop ouerA popish reason. all Christendome, as of the byshop of all England, vnlesse peraduenture it be more necessary, that there should be one byshop ouer the vniuersall Church; than ouer the Church of England, for as much as it is more necessarie, that peace should be kept, and schismes be auoyded in the vniuersall Church than in the particular church of England.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is the reason of the Papistes for the Popes supremacie, and you haue borowedThe reasons serue not for the Pope that serue for the Archbishop. Caluine.
                            it from them. Wherefore I will answere you as M. Caluine answereth them in his Institutions Cap. 8. Sect. 95. That which is profitable in one nation, cannot by any reason be extended to the whole worlde, for there is great difference betwixt the whole world and one nation. And a little after, it is euen as though a man should affirme, that the whole world may be gouerned by one King, bycause one fielde or towne hath but one ruler or Mayster. And agayne, that which is of force among fewe, may not by and by be drawne to the whole worlde, to the gouernment whereof no one man is sufficient. M. Nowell also answereth Dorman (making the same reason that you doe) in theseM. Nowell. lib. 3. fol. 321. woordes. To your third question (sayeth he speaking to Dorman) the lewdest of all why the same proportion may not be kepte betweene the Pope and the reste of the Byshops of Christendome, that is betweene the Archbishop and the other Bishops of the prouince? I answere, you might as well aske, why the same proportion may not be kepte betweene one Emperour of all the worlde, and all the Princes of the worlde to be vnder him, that is betweene the King of one realme and his Lordes vnder him. The reason that the same proportion can not be kept, is first, bycause there is no lyke proportion at all betweene the abilitie of mans witte and power (being but weake) to gouerne one prouince, and his abilitie to gouerne the whole Churche, and all Churches throughout the worlde, which no one man can haue knowledge of, much lesse can haue abilitie to rule them. Secondly you can bring no such proportion of antiquitie for your Pope to be cheefe head of the whole Churche, as is to be shewed for Archbishops to be the chiefe Bishops in their owne prouinces, &c. Hitherto M. Nowell. I marueyle that you will ioyne with the Papistes in so grosse a reason.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 32. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 82 Sect. 1.
                     If you say that the Archbishop of England, hath his authoritie graunted of the Prince, the Pope of Rome will say that Constantine or Phocas which was Emperour of al Christendome, did graunt him his authoritie ouer all Churches. But you will say that is a lie, but the Pope will set as good a face, and make as great a shew therein, as you do in diuerse poyntes here. But admit it to be, yet I say further, that it may come to passe, and it hath bene, that there may be one Christian

Cesar ouer all the realmes which haue Churches. What if he then will giue that authoritie to one ouer all, that one king graunteth in his lande, may any man accept and take at his handes such authoritie? and if it be not lawfull for him to take that authoritie, tell me what fault you can finde in him which may not be founde in them?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Pope doth chalenge muche of his temporalties from Constantinus and Phocas: but his supremacie and iurisdiction ouer all Churches he claymeth from Peter, and from Christe: wherein his clayme is more intollerable being most false, and his iurisdiction more vsurped beyng wrongfully chalenged: you erre therefore in that 
                              〈1 line〉
                           oynt greatly. The Archbishop doth exercise his iurisdiction vnder the Prince, and by the Princes authoritie. For the Prince hauing the supreme gouernment of the realme, in all causes, and ouer all persons, as she doth exercise the one by the Lorde Chancellor, so doth she the other by the Archbishops.
                        Your supposition of one Cesar ouer all realmes that haue Churches is but supposed, and therfore of no weight: but admit it were true, yet is there not the like reason for one Archbishop to be ouer all those Churches, and ouer one prouince: the reasons I haue alleaged before out of M. Caluine, & other, neither is there any man not wilfully blinded, or papistically affected, that seeth not what great diuersitie there is betwixt one prouince and many kingdomes: the gouernment of the one, and the gouernment of the other. 
                              Si vnus duodecim bominibus praefuit, an propterea sequetur vnum debere
                              Inst. cap. 8. 
                              centum millibus hominum praefici? If one was ouer twelue men, shall it therefore follow, that one may be appoynted ouer an hundred thousand men? Sayth M. Caluine.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 33. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 82. Sect. 2.
                     It will be sayd that no one is able to do the office of a Bishop, vnto all the whole Church, neyther is there any one able to do the office of a byshop to the whole Churche of England, for when those which haue bene most excellent in knowledge and wisdome, and most ready and quicke, in doing and dispatching matters, being alwayes present, haue founde ynough to do to rule and gouerne one seuerall congregation: what is he which absent, is able to discharge his duetie toward so many thousand churches? And if you take exception, that although they be absent, yet they may do by vnder ministers, as Archdeacons, Ehauncellors, Officials, Commissaries, and such other kinde of people, what do you else say, than the Pope, which sayeth, that by his Cardinalles, & Archbishops, and Legates, and other such lyke, he doth all things? For with their handes he ruleth all, and by their feete he is present euery where, and with their eyes he seeth what is done in all places. Let them take heede therefore, least if they haue a common defense with the Pope, that they be not also ioyned nearer with him in the cause, than peraduenture they be aware of. Who can beleue you mean
                              〈1 line〉
                            good fayth▪
                         Truly it is agaynst my will, that I am constrayned to make such comparisons, not that I thinke there is so great diuersitie betweene the Popedome and the Archbyshopricke, but bycause there being great resemblance betwene them, I meane hauing regard to the bare functiōs, without respecting the doctrine good or bad which they vphold, that I say there being great resemblance betwene them, there is yet as I am persuaded, great difference betwene the persons that execute them. The which good opinion conceyued of them, I do most humbly beseech them by the glorie of God, by the libertie of the Churche purchased by the precious bloud of our sauiour Christe, and by their owne saluation, that they would not deceyue, by reteyning so harde, such excessiue and vniust dominion ouer the Church of the liuing God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        But one man may do the office of an Archbishop in one prouince, euery seuerall diocesse whereof hath a Bishop. And one man may do the office of a Bishop in one diocesse, euery seuerall parishe whereof hath a seuerall Pastor. The Archbishop hath a generall charge ouer the prouince to sée that vnitie be kept among the Bishops, and that the Bishops do their duties according to the lawes and order of the Churche, or else to sée them reformed according to the sayd lawes & orders, if they shall be cōplayned of to haue neglected the same. The lyke care haue the Bishops ouer the seuerall Pastors of their diocesse, and other persons. Neyther doth their office consiste in preaching onely, but in gouerning also: in the respect whereof they are ouer & aboue the rest. This office of gouernment may be well executed in one prouince, so much

and so far as by the lawes is required, and as is cōuenient for the state of the Church, but it could not be so ouer all Christendome.
                        It may be that some Pastors hauing small charges, and busie heades, may finde and procure moe matters and controuersies than eyther they be able or willing to compound: such busie Pastors there be in England: but their vnquietnesse, or lacke of abilitie to dispatch those controuersies which they themselues are the authors and causes of, doth not proue but that eyther the Archbishop or Bishop may do those things sufficiently, and well, that do apperteyne to their office and calling.
                        So much may they do by vnder ministers as Archdeacons, Chauncellors, &c. as by the rules of the Churche are permitted vnto them, and may be conuenient for the time and persons. But the office of preaching, of ordeyning ministers, of suppressing heresies and schismes, with such lyke, they do not commit vnto them, but execute them themselues, the which bycause they cannot do throughout all Churches, as they may in one Prouince, therefore your reason is no reason. Moreouer a Bishop of one diocesse or prouince, may haue conference with his Archdeacons and Chauncellor, and be priuie to all and singular their doings: So cannot the Pope with his Cardinalles, Archbyshops, and Legates &c. dispersed thorough out whole Christendome. And therefore an Archbishop or Bishop may well gouerne a prouince or diocesse, and vse the heipe of Archdeacons, Chauncellors &c. but so cannot the Pope doe whole Christendome, what helpe or deputies soeuer he haue.
                        If agaynst your will you were constrayned to make such comparisons, why do you makeDifference betwene the Pope and our Archbishops. them when there is no cause? why do you forge that which is vntrue? why do you ioyne togither offices which in no poynt are like. The Pope chalengeth authoritie ouer all Christendome: so do not our Archbishops. The Pope exalteth himselfe aboue Kings and Princes: so do not our Archbishops, but with all reuerence acknowledge their subiection to the Prince. The Pope sayeth, that to be subiect vnto him, is of necessitie to saluation, so do not our Archbishops. The Pope maketh his Decrées equall to the woorde of God, our Archbishops thinke nothing lesse of theirs. To be short, the Pope oppresseth and persecutetth the Gospel: they earnestly professe it, and haue suffered persecution for it. Therefore your comparison is odious, & your riotous speach more presumptuous than becommeth a man pretending your simplicitie.
                        Your good opinion conceyued of them, is well vttered in your booke: what spirit hath taught you thus to dissemble? surely euen the same that hath falsified Scriptures, and wryters in your booke: that hath vttered so many prowde and contemptuous speaches agaynst your superiours: that hath moued you to make contention in the Churche: euen 
                              spiritus mendax, spiritus arrogantiae & superbiae, a lying spirite, the spirite of arrogancie, and pryde, for such frutes cannot procéede from any other spirite.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 34. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 82. Sect. 3. 4.
                     But Ierome sayth that this distinction of a Bishop, & a minister or elder, was frō S. Marke his tyme, vnto Dionysius time, whereby M. Doctor would make vs beleeue, that Marke was the author of this distinction: but that cannot be gathered by Ieromes wordes. For besides that things being ordered then by the suffrages of the ministers and Elders, it might (as it falleth out oftentimes) be done without the approbation of S. Marke: the wordes from Marke may be rather taken exclusiuely, to shut out S. Marke, and the time wherein he liued, than inclusiuely, to shut him in the tyme wherein this distinction rose.
                     Howsoeuer it be, it is certayne that S. Marke did not distinguishe, and make those things diuers, which the holy ghost made all one. For then (which the Lord forbid) he should make the storie of the Gospell, which he wrote suspected.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is no answere to Ieromes woordes, but a dallying with them: the place is euident: he sayth, from the time of Marke the Euangelist, whom vndoubtedly he would not haue named, vnlesse the same manner had bene in his time. But be it

that the wordes (from Marke) be taken exclusiuely (which no man of Iudgement will graunt) yet doth it argue a great antiquitie of this distinction, euen from the moste pure and best time of the Churche.
                        It is certayne that these thinges were not otherwise distinguished than the holy Ghost had appoynted: and therefore your (for then &c.) is an vngodly collection, and vnbeséeming your person in any respect, to imagine of the glorious Gospell written by that holy Euangelist.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 35. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C Pag. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        2. Sect. 5.
                     Againe it is to be obserued that Ierome sayeth it was so in Alexandria, signifying thereby,An absurde collection. that in other Churches it was not so. And indeede it may appeare in diuers places of the auncient fathers, that they confounded Priest and Bishop, and tooke them for all one, as Eusebius out of Ireneus calleth Ani
                           〈1 line〉
                        ete, Pius, Telesphorus, Higinus, Xystus, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,Lib. 5. 16. De dignitate sacerdotali. Elders, and presidents. Cyprian confoundeth Priest and Bishop in the Epistles before recited, so doth Ambrose in the place alledged before by M. Doctor, and yet it is one thing with vs, to be a priest (as M. Doctor speaketh) and an other thing to be a Bishop.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This argument passeth of all that euer I heard, Ierome sayth, there was a BishopThe passing Logike of T. C. in Alexandria aboue the other ministers, from S. Markes time, therefore there was no Bishop in any place else. God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob. Ergo, he is no bodies God else: he is the God of the Iewes, Ergo, not of the Gentiles. There be Bishops in England, Ergo, there are none in any other place. No marueyle it is, though you riot in your Logike, when such stuffe is set abroad. Like vnto this are the other: Eusebius out of Ireneus, calleth Anitete, Pius, Telesphorus, &c. elders, and presidents, and Cyprian confoundeth Priest, and Bishop, and so doth Ambrose, Ergo, euery Priest is such a Bishop as Ierome here speaketh of. These be pretie argumentes.
                        Euery Bishop is a Priest, but euery Priest hath not the name and title of a Bishop,Difference betwixt byshop & priest. Hieronymus ad Euagrium.
                            in that meaning that Ierome in this place taketh the name of a Byshop. For his woordes be these: 
                              Nam Alexandriae à Marco Euangelista vsque ad Heraclam &c. At Alexandria from Marke the Euangelist, vntill Heracla and Dionysius Bishops, the ministers alwayes chose one from among themselues, and placing him in a higher degree of dignitie, called him a Bishop: as if an armie should make a Captayne▪ &c. Neyther shall you finde this woorde (Episcopus) commonly vsed, but for that Priest that is in degrée ouer and aboue the rest, notwithstanding (Episcopus) be oftentimes called Presbyter, bycause Presbyter is the more generall name: so that M. Doctor sayth truely, that it is with vs one thing to be a Byshop, an other thing to be a priest, bycause euery Bishop is a Priest, but euery Priest is not a Bishop.
                        I know these names be confounded in the Scriptures, but I speake according to the manner and custome of the Church, euen since the Apostles time. And this is not onely my opinion, but other learned men affirme it in lyke manner: as M. Bucer in his booke De regno Christi, and vpon the. 4. Ephes. Whose woordes I haue before rehersed. Thus you sée that M. Doctors distinction is with better authoritie cōfirmed, than you haue any to ouerthrow it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 36. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 82. Sect. vlt.
                     Ierusalem was a famous Church, so was Rome as the Apostle witnesseth, so was AntiocheRom. 1. and others, where also were great contentions, both in doctrine and otherwise, and yet for auoyding of contention & schisine there, there was no An vntruth. one that was ruler of the rest. Therfore we ought rather to follow these Churches beyng many, in keping vs to the institutiō of the Apostles, than Alexandria beyng but one Church and departing from that institution, & if there had bene any one set ouer al the rest in other places, it would haue made much for the distinctiō that Icrome had recited.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Iames was byshop of Ierusalem, and in authoritie aboue all other ministers there.Bishops at Ierusalem in the Apostles time. Eusebius, lib. 2. cap. 23.
                            
                           Eusebius so reporteth of him out of Egesippus, who liued immediatly after ye Apostles time, his wordes out of Egesippus be these: 
                              Ecclesiam gubernandam post Apostolos Iacobus frater Domini accepit: Iames the brother of the Lorde had the gouernment of the Churche after the Apostles, Lib. 2. Cap. 23.
                            And in the beginning of that chapter Eusebius speaking of this Iames sayeth thus, 
                              Cui Hierosolymis ab Apostolis Episcopalis sedes concredita fuerat: to whom the Byshops seat at Ierusalem was committed by the Apostles. In the first chapter of that booke: he sayeth out of Clement, that Peter and Iohn after the ascension of Christe. 
                              Constituerunt Iacobum Iustum Hierosolymorum Episcopum, did appoynt Iames theLib. 2. Ca. 1. Iust, Bishop of Hierusalem. The same thing do all Ecclesiasticall histories and wryters (that make any mention of this matter) affirme of him. After Iames, was Simeon the sonne of Cleop
                                 〈1 line〉
                              as appoynted Byshop there, as the same Eusebius reporteth, lib. 3. cap. 11.
                           Idem. and lib. 4 cap. 22. Therfore you are greatly deceyued in saying that there was no one ouer the rest at Ierusalem: although if there had bene none, yet would it not haue serued your turne, bicause the Apostles as yet beyng aliue, this office of Byshops was lesse néedefull: But it is certayne that they placed Byshops in all great and famous Churches, after they had planted them, as Zuinglius sayeth in his Ecclesiastes: and auncient authors do testifie.
                        
                           Linus was Byshop of Rome as Eusebius witnesseth Lib. 3. cap. 2. and he liued inOther bishops in the apostles time. Eus. Li. 3. cap. 2. & 4.
                            the Apostles time. Timothie byshop at Ephesus, Titus at Creta, Dyonisius Areopagit
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            at Athens &c. as he also wryteth in the same booke 
                              cap. 4. But this thing is so manifest and so well knowne to all that read Ecclesiasticall histories, that I am sure they will maruayle at your grosse ouersight in denying the same. Wherefore Ieromes distinction standeth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 37. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 83. Lin. 2.
                     But agaynst this distinctiō of S. Ierome, I will vse no other reason than that which Ierome vseth in the same epistle to Euagrius. Ierome in that Epistle taketh vp very sharply the ArchdeaconIerome speaketh not in that place of an Arch deacon, but of a deacon. that he preferred himselfe before the Elder, and the reason is, bycause by the Scripture the Deacon is inferior vnto the Elder. Now therfore Ierome himself confessing that by the scripture, a Bishop and an Elder are equall, by Ieromes owne reason, the byshop is to be sharply reprehended, bycause he lifteth himselfe aboue the Elder.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Without doubt you forget your selfe, else would you not reason in this manner: The Archdeacon is inferior to the elder, therefore the byshop is not superior to the elder in any respect: I sée no sequele in this reason, neither yet any likelyhoode. Besides that, you vntruely report of Hierome, for hée speaketh of a Deacon, and not of an Archedeacon. But it is your manner so to deale: suerly I marueyle that you will vtter so manifest vntruthes. But if Hierome should so saye, yet is your argument nothing: for though an Archedeacon be inferiour to a minister (whome you call Elder) yet doth not that proue but that there mayé bée degrées among the ministers, and that the chéefest of them in authoritie, may be called a Bishop, as Hierome also in that Epistle declareth. And although Hierome confesse that by the scripture, Presbyter and Episcopus is all one, (as in déede they be quoad ministerium.) yet doth hée acknowledge a superioritie of the Bishop before the minister. For besides these places that I haue alleaged in my Aunswere to the Admonition, he saith thus in the same Epistle. 
                              Presbyter & Episcopus aliud
                              Ad Euagr. 
                              
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 tatis, aliud dignitatis est nomen, the one is a name of age, and the other of dignitie. And a litle after: 
                              In Episcopo & Presbyter continetur, the Elder or minister is conteyned in th
                                 〈1 line〉
                               Bishop. Therefore no doubte this is Ieromes minde, that a Bishop in degrée and dignitie is aboue the minister, though he be one & the selfe same with him in the office

of ministring the word and sacraments: and therfore he sayth, presbyter continetur in episcopo: bicause euerie Bishop is presbyter, but euery presbyter is not Bishop.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 38. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 83. Lin. 8.
                     But what helpeth it you that there was a Bishop of Alexandria, which vrge an Archbishop, or what auantageth it you, that there was one chief, called a Bishop in euery seuerall congregation, which wold proue that there ought to be one Bishop chief ouer a thousand congregations? What coulde haue bin brought more strong to pull downe the Archbishop out of his throne, then that which Ierom faith there, when he affirmeth that the Bishop of the obscurest village or hamlet, hath as great authoritie and dignitie as the Bishop of Rome? Erasmus did see this, and sayd 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , that is, But in the same place speaking in earnest he a
                              〈1 line〉
                           firmeth a
                              〈1 line〉
                            muche as I r
                              〈1 line〉
                            quire. testingly, that Hierome spake that of the Bishops of his tyme, but if the had seene howe the Metropolitanes of our age excell other Bishops, he woulde haue spoken otherwise. And what could haue ben more fit to haue confuted the large dominion and superioritie of our realme, than that that Ierome sayeth, when he appointeth the Bishops sea in an vplandish town, or in a poore village or hamlet, Vntrue. declaring therby that in euery town there was a Bishop, and that the Bishop that he speaketh of, differeth nothing at all from an elder, but that the Bishop had the ordeyning of ye ministers, whervpon it doth appere (which I promised to shew) that by this place of Ierome, there is neither name of Archbishop, nor so much as the shadowe of his authoritie, and that the Bishoppes whiche are nowe, haue besides the name, no similitude almoste with the Bishopes that were in Ieromes tyme. As for his reason ad Luciferanos, it is the same which he hath ad Euagr. and to Titus, and is alreadie answ
                           〈1 line〉
                        red.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If this be true that you say, why haue you then hitherto sought so to deface this worthie writer? why did you not in the beginning tell vs, that this saying óf Ierome made nothing against you, bicause he only speaketh of Pastors in seuerall parishes, and not of one to haue charge and gouernment ouer one whole dioces? But fullIeromes bishop differeth from an elder in dignitie and rule. 
                                 Hier. in Tit. 1.
                            well knew you the vanitie of this your fansie, & how vnlyke it is to stande with Ieromes words: For in his cōmentaries vpon ye epistle to Titus, he sayth that 
                              Post
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  v
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 usquis
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  eos quos baptizauerat. &c. After that euery one did think those to be his, & not Chri stes, whom he had baptized, it was decreed throughout the whole world, that one of the ministers being chosen should be set ouer the rest, vnto whome the whole care of the churche should aperteyn, and the seeds of schismes be taken away. Do you thinke yt this is ment of the Pastor of euery towne? To what purpose shoulde Ierome saye so? For the pastor of euery seueral towne, had from the beginning his a
                              〈1 line〉
                           thorite ouer his flocke, without any such constitution. Moreouer, there are not in euery seuerall congregatiō many pastors or priestes, ouer whom one shold be placed as chief. But Ierome speaketh of a Bishop that must gouerne the other Priestes, and procure that vnitie bée kept among them, and therfore his iurisdiction must of necessitie extend to many parishes, bicause it is ouer many pastors. He sayth lykewise, that the care of the whole was cōmitted vnto him. In his epistle ad Euagrium, he vttereth his meanyng as plainly, For he sayeth, That the Priests did choose one among themselues, whome they placingIdē ad Eu
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 gr. in a higher degree called a Bishop: Wherby it apeareth yt he had authoritie ouer many Pastors, and therfore ouer many congregations, for you will not denie but that euery presbyter, that is minister of the worde had his seuerall flocke. This he declareth more euidently by the examples there vsed, of souldiers choosing their Captain, for though the Captain before was a common souldiour, yet now being 
                              〈1 line〉
                           hus preferred, he ruleth and gouerneth the reste of the souldiers, euen so the Bishop being before a minister equall with other, yet being chosen to that degrée, he is their guide and gouernoure, a gouernour I say of those that did elect him, that ist of Priests or ministers, & therfore of diuers congregations.
                        This dothe yet more euidentely appeare in these woordes of the same Epistle, That one was afterwardes chosen to rule the reste, it was a remedie against schismes, least euerie one drawing to himselfe the Churche, shoulde breake the same. And in his bookeIbidem. Idem contr
                                 〈1 line〉
                               Lucifer. 
                           contra Luciferianos, he sayeth that except the chief authoritie were giuen to one, tot essent schismata quot sacerdotes, there would be as many schismes as priests. By which places

it is certain that Ieromes meaning is to haue some one in a prouince or dioces ouer the rest (proprely called a Bishop) who should haue chief authoritie, least euery man in his owne seuerall parish being permitted to do what he list, might in the end fyll the Church with schismes, vt tot essent schismata quot sacerdotes. And surely it is vnpossible to expounde Ierome otherwise.
                        But you aske me, what this helpeth for the Archbishop. &c? very much. For if it be so necessarie to haue one Bishop ouer diuers Priests in euery seuerall dioces, for the auoyding of schisme and cōtention, it is also necessarie in euery prouince to haue an archbish
                              〈1 line〉
                           p for the direction of diuers Bishops, & the auoyding of schisme amōg them. And therfore sayth Ierome again in his epistle 
                              ad Rusticū monachū, euerie ecclesiasticallHiero ad Rusticum. order is subiect to hir gouernours.
                        
                        You aske what could haue ben brought more strong to pull downe the Archbishop out of his throne, than that which Ierom sayth there, when he affirmeth that the bishop of the obscurest village or hamlet, hath as gret authority & dignitie as the bishop of Rome? I answer, that this nothing at alderogateth frō the Archbishop. For it is not denied, but that euery bishop, & euery minister are equal 
                              quoad ministerium, but not quoad ordinem & politiam:
                            & this is that which Ierome saith, 
                              eiusdem sunt meriti & sacerdotij, they be of the same merite and priesthod yt is, their ministerie & office in preaching the word, & administring ye sacraments, is al one. And their authoritie also toward such as were vnder their iu
                              〈1 line〉
                           isdiction:Metropolitanes &c. in Ierome his tyme. but he doth nor say, ye one Bishop hath not more ample & large iurisdictiō thā the other, for the contrarie of that is manyfest. And in S. Ieroms tyme there wer Metropolitanes, Archbishops. &c. as you may read in the defe
                              〈1 line〉
                           se of the Apol. 
                              edit. 2. pag. 121.
                        
                        These obscure townes doe derogate nothing from the authoritie of a bishop: for we see it oftentimes come to passe, yt the Bishops seate is but in obscure towns, as it is in diuers places of England: & yet is the bishops iurisdiction in his dioces no whit the lesse. If we respect the places, Canterburie is far inferior to London. And therefore Ieroms meaning is, yt the place neither addeth any thing, or taketh any thing away from the worthinesse, authoritie, and office of a Bishop. Wheresoeuer a Bishop is in citie or in towne, he is of the same authoritie and worthinesse.
                        
                           Erasmus in his Scholies vpon that epistle of Hierome hath these words: 
                              Certè Metropolitanus
                              Erasmus. 
                              habet aliquid dignitatis &c. Surely the Metropolitane hath some dignitie & iurisdi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              tion aboue the other bishops, therfore that he here maketh the Bishops of base cities equal with the rest, it is to be referred vnto the deacons, which in some places were preferred before the ministers, whom he doth in a maner make equall with Bishops. And in an other place he sayeth, that the ministers, succede into the place of the Apostles, the Byshop into the place of Christ. In this thing therefore are Byshoppes and ministers equall, that wheresoeuer they are, they are to be preferred before Deacons. Here Erasmus speaketh in good earnest howsoeuer he iested before. He she weth that these obscure villages or hamlets (as you terme them) were cities, and no doubt, as good as eyther Ely, or Peterborough: but in the respect of Rome, contemptible, as these be in respect of Lontō. And yet the Bishops of euery one of them 
                              eiusdem meriti & sacer dotij. of the same merite, priesthood & authoritie. Erasmus also here telleth in what respect he hath made this cōparison betwixt Bishops and other ministers, in the respect of Deacons. For both Bishops & Priests are to be preferred equally before Deacons, bicause of their ministerie & office, which is aboue the office of a Deacon. 
                              Nam ex Diacono ordinatur presbyter. For a minister or priest is made of a Deacon, not 
                              ex presbytero diaconus, the Deacon of the priest. It is most euident (neither can it be so vnknown vnto you) ye Ierome in al these places meaneth to haue one bishop gouernour of many priests. And therefore this interpretation of yours is without all probabilitie, or shadow of truth, that Hieromes meaning is to haue suche a Bishop in euery towne.
                        I trust the reader will note with what vaine reasons you first went about to shakeThe shift of T. C. in his answer to Hierom. the credit of this wryter: Then, how without reason, you tooke vpon you to answer his reasons: and now in the ende, how vnpossible an interpretation you feine of his words: which if he well consider, he shall note in you great audacitie, smal iudgemēt, and no truthe. For the author is of greate learning and worthynesse, his reasons

strong, and his wordes playne and euident for the authoritie of the Bishop ouer the rest of the Cleargie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the 3. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 71. Sect. 2. 3.
                     
                        Chrysostome writing vpon the twentieth of Mathevve sayth, thatChrysostome, the rebellious nature of man caused these distinctions of degrees, that one. should be an Apostle, an other a Bishop, an other a minister, an other a lay man. And that vnlesse there vvere suche distinctions of persones, there coulde be no discipline.
                     
                     And vpon the. 13. to the Romaines he sayth, that bicause equalitie engēdreth strife & contētion, therfore superioritie and degrees of persons were appoynted.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 83. Sect. 1.
                     What is that to the purpose, that Chrysostome sayth, there must be degrees? who denyeth that there are degrees of functions? we confesse there is, and ought to be a degree of pastors, an other of Doctors, the third of those which are called Elders, the fourth of Deacons. And wher he saith, there should be one degree of Byshop, an other of a minister, another of the lay man,It proueth that there are degrees among ministers of the word, which you denie. what proueth that for the office of an Archbyshop, whiche is your purpose to shew? how often times must you be called ad Rhombum? and that he meaneth nothing lesse, than to make any such difference betwene a byshop, and a minister, as is with vs, whiche you woulde fayne make your reader beleeue, I will send you to Chrysostome, vpon the third chapter. 1. Epistle to Timothie, wher he saith: the office of a byshop differeth little or nothing from an Elders, and a little after, that a byshop disierreth nothing from an Elder or minister, but by the ordination only. Still M. Doctor goeth forward in killing a dead man, that is in confuting that whiche all men condemne, and prouing that which no man denye
                           〈1 line〉
                        h, that there must be superioritte amongst men, and that equalitie of all men alike confoundeth all, and ouerthroweth all.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Chrysostome in that place maketh degrées in the ministerie, and placeth the Bishop in degrée aboue the minister, which vtterly ouerthroweth your equalitie. As for your distinction of degrées it hath a small grounde in the scripture to warrant it, as can be, and in déed it is but your owne inuētion. For the Pastor, doctor, and elder in office are all one, as the most & best writers thinck. Howsoeuer it is, you haue them not thus distinguished in the Scripture, that the Pastor should be firste, the Doctor next, the Elder third, & the deacon last: and it is strange that you will inuent a new order of ministers, without the expresse warrant of Gods worde, misliking the same so muche in other.
                        This superioritie that Chrysostome talketh of, ouerthroweth that part of the Admonitiō that I confute, for they do not only disallow the office of the Archbishop, but of the Bishop also, & would haue a mere equalitie amōg the ministers: this I refel, as well as the other: and indéede the ouerthrow of this, is the ouerthrow of the other. And therefore this place of Chrysostome serueth my turne very well, and aptly.
                        Chrysostom vpon that. 3. chapter of the first to Timothie, giueth asmuch superioritie to the Bishop as I doe: and maketh asmuch difference betwixt him and the minister: for I graunt that quoad ministerium, they be all one, but yt there be degrees of dignitie, and so sayth Chrysostom, that there is little difference betwixta Byshop and a priest, but that a Byshop hath authoritie to ordaine priests, and all other things that the Byshop may do, the priest also may do, that excepted: so that Chrisostome here speaketh only of the ministerie of the Byshop, not of his authoritie, in the ecclesiasticall gouernment, for of that he spake in the place before alledger, where he sayth thatIn: 20. Math. there is one degree of the Byshop, and other of the minister. &c. which distinction of degrées was long before Chrysostomes time, as I haue declared.
                        To proue these degrées of superioritie among ministers, is to proue ye which both the Admonition, & you denie, & which is the grounde of this controuersie: & therfore

I haue not herein gone about to kill a dead man except you count the grounde of your assertion dead.
                        If there must be superioritie amongst men, and that equalitie of all men alyke confoundeth all, and ouerthroweth (as you confesse, and is most true) then equalitie of ministers confoundeth all among them: and therefore it is requisite, that in that state also there be supe
                              〈1 line〉
                           iours to auoyde confusion: whiche being graunted, what haue you to saye, eyther against Archbishops or Bishops, except you haue some newe deuise of your owne? which is not vnlyke, bicause nothing doth please you but your owne.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 40. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 83. Sect. 2.
                     This is a notable argument, there must be some superiour amongst men, ergo one minister must be superior to an other: again ther must be in ye ecclesiastical functions some degrees, ergo ther must be an archbishop ouer ye whole prouince, or a Bishop ouer ye whole dioces. And albert M. Doctor taketh great paine to proue yt which no man denieth, yet he doth it so 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and so vn
                           〈1 line〉
                        itly, as that i
                           〈1 line〉
                         a man had no better proofes than he bringeth, the degrees of ye ecclesiasticall functions might fal to the ground. For here to proue the degrees of the ecclesiastical functions he bringeth in that, that Chrysostome sayth there muste be magistrate and subiecte, him that commaundeth and him that obeyeth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The argument is good, & foloweth verie wel. For as superioritie & gouernment isSuperioritie conuenient among ministers. necessarie in al other states & degrees of men, so is it in ye ministerie also: for ministers be not angels, nor they are not of yt perfection, yt they may safely be left in their own absolute gouernment. That which Chrysostom in this place speaketh of gouernmēt in the ciuil state, the same doth he speak in the. 13. to the Hebrues of ye ecclesias
                              〈1 line〉
                           ical in lyke maner: for expounding these words, Parete his qui praesunt vobis. &c. whiche is vnderstood of Bishops, he sayth, that there be thrée euils which oue
                              〈1 line〉
                           throw the church, &Chrysost. all other societies. The first wherof is, to haue no superiour, none to rule: and this he proueth by diuers examples, as of a Quier without a Chaunter, an armie of souldiours without a captaine, a ship without a maister, a 
                              〈1 line〉
                           locke of shéepe without a shepeheard. Now if superioritie be so needfull among the clergie, then why may not one Bishop be ouer one diocesse, & one 
                              〈1 line〉
                           rchbishop ouer one Prouince? Wherfore I conclude thus: It is necessary yt among the cler
                              〈1 line〉
                           ie some should be in authoritie ouer the rest and therfore there may be both Archbishops & Bishops: but I know you wil answer yt there may be gouernment without these degrées: then say I vnto you againe, stand not so much in your owne c
                              〈1 line〉
                           ceyt, this order is most auncient in the Church, it is confirmed by the best and noblest Councels, it is allowed by the best learned fathers, it hath the pattern from the practise of the Apostles (a
                              〈1 line〉
                           l whiche hath bin shewed before) it is most méet for this state and kingdome: and therfore be no
                              〈1 line〉
                            wilful in a new deuise, the triall wherof was neuer as yet, the maner wherof is vnknown to your selfe, and the end no doubt mere confusion. Your welfauoured and 
                              〈◊〉
                            speeches together with your accustomed cōtempt, I omit here, as I doe in other places.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 41. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 83. Sect. 3.
                     The moste therfore that he can conclude of this, for the ministerie, is that there must be minister that shall rule, and people that shall be obedient, and hereby he can 1. of proue, that ther should be any degrees amongst the ministers and ecclesiasticall gouernours, vnlesse he wyl say peraduenture, that as there are vnder magistrates, and a kyng aboue them all, so there shoulde be vnder ministers, and one minister aboue all. * But he must remember that it is not necessary in a commonNote this suspicious speache of the kinde of gouernment. wealth, that there should be one ouer all: for that there are other good common wealthes, wherin many haue lyke power and authoritie. And further if bicause there is one kyng in a lande aboue all, he wil conclude there should be one Archbishop ouer all. I say as I haue sayd, that it is not against any word of God, which I know (although it be inconuenient) but that there may be one Cesar ouer all the worlde, and yet I thinke M. Doctor wyll not say, that there maye be one Archebishop ouer all the worlde.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.Why there ought to be superioritie among ministers as well as other. The gouernmente of the churche in a Christi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              n cōmon wealth oughte to bee according to the forme ther in vsed.
                        
                        Yes, I wil cōclude that ther ought to be degrées of superioritie amōg ye ministers also, bicause they labour of imperfections as wel as other mē do, & especally of pride, arrogancie vainglorie, which ingender schismes, heres
                              〈1 line〉
                           es, contentions, as the examples of all times and ages euen from the Apostles to this time declare.
                        I am persuaded yt the externall gouernment of the church vnder a christiā Magistrate, must be according to the kinde & forme of the gouernment vsed in the cōmon wealth, else how can you make the Prince supreme gouernour of all states & causes ecclesiastical? wil you so deuide the gouernment of ye Churche from the gouernment of the cōmon wealth, that the one being a monarchie, the other must be a Democratie, or an Aristocratie: this were to deuide one realme into two, and to spoyls the Prince of the one halfe of hir iurisdiction and authoritie. If you will therefore haue the Quéene of Englande rule as Monarche ouer all hir dominions, then muste you also giue her leaue to vse one kinde and forme of gouernment, in all and euery parte of the same: and so to gouerne the Church in Ecclesiasticall affaires, as she doth the common wealth in ciuile.
                        But you say, that I must remember that it is not necessarie in a common welth, that thereT. C. speaketh suspiciously of gouernment. should be one ouer all: & I say, that you must remember that in this cōmon wealth it is necessarie, yt one shuld be ouer al, except you wil trāsform aswel ye state of ye kingdom as you would of ye church: which is not vnlike to be your meaning, for not long after you adde that the common wealth must be stamed a
                              〈1 line〉
                           cording to ye church, as the hangyngs to the house, & the gouernmēt therof wt her gouernment, &c. & not contrary: meaning yt the gouernmēt of the cōmon wealth, ought not to be monarchical, but either democratical, or Aristocratical, bicause (as you say) the gouernment of the Church ought to be such. What this in time wil bréed in this common wealth, especially when it cōmeth to the vnderstanding of the people, who naturally are so desirous of innouations, I referre it to the iudgement of those that can and ought best to consider it.
                        The vnlike linesse that is betwixt one Cesar being ouer all the world, & of one archbishop being ouer all the world. I haue shewed before, they be most vnlike, & yet this is but a friuolous & vaine supposition, & M. Caluin in his Inst. cap. 8. sect. 96. doth say, that it is 
                              absurdissimum, most absurd.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the 42. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 71. Sect. 4.
                     It is not to be denied but that ther is an equalitie of al ministers ofEqualitie among ministers touching minist
                              〈1 line〉
                           rie. gods word, 
                           quoad ministeriū, touching the ministerie, for they haue allike power to preach the word, to minister the sacraments, that is to say, the word preached, or the sacramēts ministred, is as effectual in one (in respect of the ministerie) as it is in an other. But 
                           quoad ordinem & politiam, touching order & gouernment, ther always hath bin & must be degrees and superioritie among them. For the churche of God is not a cōfused congregation, but ruled & directed aswel by discipline & policie in matters of regimēt, as by the word of God in matters of faith.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 84. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Nowe M. Doctor cōmeth to his olde hole, where he would fayn hide himself, and with him all the ambition, tyrannie, & excesse of authorttie which is ioyned with these functions of Archebishop and bishop, as they are now vsed: & this his hole is, that al the ministers are equall with bishops & Archbishops, as touching the ministerie o
                           〈1 line〉
                         the word & sacramentes, but not as touching policie & gouernment. The Papists vse the very self same This distinction is allowed of those that be sarre from Papistrie. distinction for the maintenance of the Popes tyrannie and ambition, and other their hierarchie.
                     M. Doctor hath put out the mark & concealed the name of the Papists, & so with a little change of wordes, as it were with certayn newe colours he would deceyue vs. For the Papistes saye, that euery syr Iohn or hedge Prieste hathe as greate authoritie to sacrifyce, and offer for the quycke and the deade, and to minister the Sacramentes, as the Pope of Rome hath, but for gouernment, and for order, the Bishoppe is aboue a Prieste, the Archebishoppe aboue a bishop, and the Pope aboue them all. But I haue You haue no
                              〈1 line〉
                            yet declared 
                              〈◊〉
                           , neyther can you. declared before out of the Scriptures, h
                           〈1 line〉
                        we vayne

a disrinction it is: and it appeareth out of Cyprian, that as all the Bishops were equall one to another, so he sayth that to euerie one was giuen a portion of the Lords flock not only to feed with the worde and sacraments, but to rule and gouerne, not as they which shal make any accompt vnto an archbishop, or be iudged of him, but as they which can not be iudged of any but of God. And Ierome vpon Cituz sayth, that the elder or minister But you con 
                              〈◊〉
                            that which foloweth. did gouerne and rule in common with the Bishops, the Churche wherof he was elder or minister.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.The distinetion (quoad ministerium, & quoad ordinem) tustisyed. Caluine. Beza. Lib. con. cap. 7 art. 12.
                           
                        
                        The distinction is good and true, allowed of the best writers, though the Papists wrongfully applie it. M. Caluin vpon the 2. Cor. 10. hath the same distinction. Quamuis (sayth he) 
                              commune sit omnibus verbi ministris idem
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  officium, sunt tamen honoris gradus: Although there is one office cōmon to al the ministers of the word, yet are there degrees of ho nour. M. Beza likewyse lib. conf. cap. 7. saith thus: that pastors in proces of time wer distinct into Metropolitanes, Bishops, and those we now call curates, it was not in therespect of the ministerie of the worde, but rather in respecte of iurisdiction and discipline. Therefore concerning the office of preaching the vvorde and administrating the Sacramentes, there is no difference betwixt Archbishops, Bishops, and curates. &c. The same distinction doth Hemingius vse in his Enchiridion,
                           
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               the. 72. 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of this chapter. as shall be seene hereafter. What say you now? is this a starting hole, or rather a true distinction, allowed by such as are far frō Papistrie? except you wil accuse M Caluine and Beza for Papists. You are not able to improue this distinction with all the learning you boast of: and bitternesse of words will not carie away the matter.
                        You haue declared nothing tending to the improuing of this distinction, & the wordes both of Cyprian and of Hicrom do manifestly confirme it: for they both would haue one chief among the ministers to gouerne the rest, as it is said before. You deale corruptly in reciting Hieroms words: for you haue left out his purpose and meaning, I wil set them down as they be in déed. 
                              Idē est ergo presbyter. &c. VVherfore the ministerHeir. ad Tit. 1. and bishop are al one, and before that through the instinct of the deuil, there were diuisions in religion, and that it was sayd among the people, I hold of Paule, I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, the churches were ruled in cōmon by the coūcell of the ministers: But after that euery one accompted those whom he baptized to be his, and not Christes, it was decreed thorowout the whole world, that one being chosen from amōg the ministers should be placed ouer the rest, to whom the whole care of the church should appertein, and the seedes of schismes be taken away. Wil you not leaue off to deale thus guilefully with your Reader? haue you no care to deale plainly and simply? Ierome in that place verifieth this distinctiō, and she weth that it was for order & policie, that among the ministers there was one bishop apointed, ad quē omnia ecclesiae cura pertineret, & schismatū semina tollerētur. And what can be spoken more directly to the purpose? But one thing here I note, that you wold be controlled of none but of God, that is, you would be exempted from all authoritie of man, euen as the Pope himselfe is.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 43. Diuision.
                  
                     Answere to the Admonition. Pag. 72. Lin. 4.
                     And therfore wel saith M. Caluin, in his Institutions cap 8. that theCaluine alloweth superioritie. twelue Apostles had one among them to gouerne the rest, it was no maruel: sor nature requireth it, and the disposition of man wilso haue it, that in euery companie (although they be al equal in power) yet that there be one as gouernour, by whom the rest may be directed: there is no Courte without a Consul, no Senate without a Pretor, no Colledge without a Presidente, no societie vvithout a maister. Haec Caluin.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 84. Sect. 3.
                     After foloweth M. Caluin, a great patron forsoth, of the Archbishop, or of this kinde of bishop, which is vsed amongst vs here in England. And here to passe ouer your strange citations & quota tions which you make, to put your answerer to pain, sending him sometimes to Musculus common places for one sentence, to Augustins works, to Chrysostoms works, to Cyril, to M. Foxe, & here

sending him to ye. 8. chapter of ye Institutiōs 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . as though you had neuer red Caluins institutions, but tooke she sentence of some body else, withoute any examination, whereby it seemeth that you were loth, that euer any man should answer your booke, letting I say al this passe: what maketh this eyther to prone, that there should be one Archbyshop ouer all the ministers in the prouince, or one Byshop ouer all in the diocesse, that amongst twelue that were gathered togyther into one place, there was one which ruled the action for which they mette.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.A practis wor thy the noting
                        
                        This is to be obserned throughout your whole booke, as I haue noted in other places, that when any authoritie is alleadged that pincheth you, then you fall to cauilling by and by I haue no where referred you to Iustinians code, to Gratians decrees, to Augustines works, to diuers councels, to Theodorete, to the centuries. &c. Without noting eyther booke, Chapter, distinction, number, Canon, or such like, as you vsually deale with me: and yet these be farre more tedious to reade ouer, than is the. 8. Chap. of Caluines Institutions. I do not remember that I referred you to Augustine, Chrysostome, or any other writers, for any matter in controuersie (Cyrill, Museulus, and M. Foxe onely in one place excepted) but I quoted the places, as particularly as I coule. And why will you then so vntruly report of me? vndoubtedly I neuer red a booke for the quantitie of it, so pestered with slanderous reportes, false accusations, and contentious deriding speaches, as this your booke is. But let it go.Diuers editions of Caluines institutions.
                        
                        This booke of institutions which is distinguished into Chapters and not into bookes, I red and noted thorough before you (as it shoulde seeme) knew whether there were any such booke or no, and bycause I haue laboured in it, noted it, and am well acquainted with it, therefore I vse it, and follow it, and so will I do still: Neyther are you ignorant I am sure, that there be sundry editions of those institutions: although you séeme to dissemble the matter in this place, I mighte say of purpose (for you haue answered after your manner places before, out of the same booke quoted in like manner) but let it be of ignorance, you take occasion by it, to vtter your cynicall 
                              〈◊〉
                           , but to your owne shame.
                        The place alledged maketh much for my purpose, for it proueth superioritie to haue 
                              〈◊〉
                            among the Apostles, and therefore that it may be among ministers, which you denie▪ and I affirme: which also being graunted (as it cannot be denyed) whatsoeuer I affirme eyther of Archbyshops or Byshops, will soone be proned. But let vs heare the proofe of this new deuise of yours in soluting this, and such like places: that one ruled the action. &c.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 44. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 84. Sect. 3.
                     And that it may appeare what superioritie it is, whiche is lawfull amongst the ministers, and what it is that M. Caluine speaketh of, what also the fathers and councels do meane, when they giue more to the Byshop of any one Church, than to the elder of the same Church, and that no man be deceiued by the name of gouernoure, or ruler ouer the rest, to fansic any such authoritie and domination or Lordship, as we see vsed in our Church, it is to be vnderstanded, that amongst the pastors, elders and beacons of euery particular Church, and in the meetings and companies of the ministers, or elders of diuers Churches This is a deuise neuer hard or before. there was one chosen by the voyces aud suffrages of them all, or the most pare, which did propound the matters that were to be handied, whether they were difficulties to be soluted, or punishments and censures to be decreed vpon those which had faulted, or whether there were elections to be made, or what other matter soeuer occasion was gyuen to entreate of: the which also gathered the voyces and reasons of those which had interest to speake in such cases, which also did pronounce according to the number of the voyces whiche were gyuen, which was also the mouth of the rest, to admonish, or to comfort, or to rebuke sharply, such as were to receule admonishment, consolation, or rebuke, and which in a word did moderate that whole action, which was done for the time they were assembled. Which thing we do not denie, may be, but affirme that it is fitte and necessary to be, to the auoyding of confusion.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        All this is spoken of your owne head, and a deuise withoute proofe or reason as yet, and contrary to the testimonies of all histories, Councels and fathers: affirmed by no learned writer, as it may appeare by that whiche I haue hitherto alledged

out of the canons attributed to the Apostles, the Councel also of Nice, Antioch, Arelat, Carthage, Calcedon, likewise out of Cyprian, Eusebius, Epiphanius, Athanasius, Gregory Nazian. Ambrose, Ierome, Socrates, Sozom. Theodoret, Caluin, Illiricus: All whiche manifestly declare that the office of an Archbyshop, and iurisdiction of a Byshop is permanent, and affixed to certayne places, not moueable, nor during one action only. And vndoubtedly I maruayle what vrgeth you to such absurd and vnlearned paradoxes: vnlesse it be ignorance and lacke of reading. But let vs heare your reasons.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 45. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 84. Sect. 3.
                     For it were an absurd hearing that many should at once attempt to speake. Neyther coulde itA needlesse proofe. be done without great reproch, that many men beginning to speake, some should be bidden to holde their peace, which would come to passe, if there should be no order kept, nor none to appoint when euery one should speake, or not, to put them to silence, when they attempted confusedly to speake, and out of order. Moreouer when many ministers meete togyther, and in so great diuersitie of gifts as the Lord hath giuen to his Church, there be found that excell in memorie, facilitie of tongue, and expedition or quicknesse to dispatch matters more than the rest: and therefore it is fitte, that the brethren, that haue that dexteritie, should especially be preferred vnto this office, that the action may be the better, and more speedily made an end of.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely and your deuise of saluing it, is as absurd: for there would be as great contention at such elections, as there is confusion in the former equalitie: and the rather bycause there is none to direct them therein. For who shall call them togyther before this election be made? where shall they meete? who shall declare vnto them the cause of their meeting? or what remedie if they cannot agrée of some one that hathe thys dexteritie, but are drawen into diuers parts, some thinking one most meete, and some another, other some the third. &c? how if there be sects and schismes among them, as there is at this time? an hundreth inconueniences are there in this deuise of yours: and to tell you the truth, it may be vsed in places where there is no gouernment, no lawes, no forme of a common wealth, no order: But in a kingdome, in a Church vnd
                              〈1 line〉
                           r ciuill gouernment, in a place of order. &c. it is the very high way to subuersion and confusion.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 46. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 85. Sect. 1.
                     And if any man will call this And what scripture hau
                              〈1 line〉
                            you for this▪
                         a rule or presidentship, and him that executeth this office 
                           〈1 line〉
                         president or moderator, or a gouernour, we will not striue, so that it be with these cautions, that he be not called simply gouernour, or moderator, but gouernour or moderator of that action, and for that time, and subiect to the orders that others be, and to be censured by the company of the brethren, as well as others, if he be iudged any way faultie. And that after that action ended, and meeting dissolued, he sit him downe in his old place, and set himselfe in equall estate with the rest of the ministers. Thirdly, that this gouernment or presidentship, or whatsoeuer like name you will gyue it, be not so tyed vnto that minister, but that at the next meeting it shall be lawfull to take another, if another be thought meeter.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These cautions are méete for such a deuise, and apt for a tumultuous company and a congregation of proude and arrogant persons, that cannot abide any superioritie or gouernment. This I am well assured of, and it is euident both by that which is already spoken, and that which is to be said herea
                              〈1 line〉
                           ter, that there can neyther patterne norByshops gouernours simply, not of one action only. forme be found of it in any Church since the Apostles time, recorded in any writer of credite, but the cleane contrary for ecclesiasticall writers do both cal Byshops gouernours simply, and manifestly also declare, that their office of gouernment was not for one action only, but during their life or at the least during their continuance in that seate or byshopricke▪ and it is playne by that which I haue sayd before, that the office

of the Metropolitane (which was to call Synods, and to moderate them, to ordeyneThe 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               the 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ixed to a place. byshops, or at the leas
                              〈1 line〉
                            to consent therevnto, to suppresse schismes and such like) was affixed to the place and byshop of the same, as to Rome, Cō
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           tantinople, Alexandria, &c. this do all the olde canons declare, as the. 6. and. 7. Canon of the councell of Nice, the. 9. of the councell of Antioch, and the. 5. of the generall councell of Constantinople, the. 12 of the second councell of Carthage, the. 21. Concilij Mileuitani: the. 11. of the generall councell of Chalcedon: to be short all these testimonies and examples alleadged of me before, out of Cyprian. &c. and the continuall practise of the Church. And therefore such new cautions here by you set downe, be only méete for such a strange and mishapen platforme and kynd of gouernment as is by you and your faction deuised.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 47. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 85. Sect. 2. 3. 4.
                     Of this order and pollicie of the Church, if we will see a liuely image, a
                           〈1 line〉
                        d perfect patterne, let vs set before ou
                           〈1 line〉
                         eyes the most auncient and gospellike Church that euer was or shal be.
                     In the first of the Actes the Church being gathered togither, for the election of an Apostle into the place of Iudas the traytor, when as the interest of election belonged vnto all, and to the Apostles especially aboue the rest, out of the whole company Peter riseth vp. telleth the cause of their comming togyther, with what cautions and qualities they ought to choose another, conceyueth the prayer, whereby the help of God in that election, and his direction is begged, and no doubt ex
                           〈1 line〉
                        cuted the resi
                           〈1 line〉
                        ue of the things which perteyned vnto the whole action.
                     In the. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        . of the Actes all the Apostles are accused of dronke
                           〈1 line〉
                        nesse. Peter answer
                           〈1 line〉
                        d for them all, wypeth away the infamie they were charged with. But you will saye, where are the voyces of the rest, which did choose Peter vnto this? What is this but a meere con 
                              〈◊〉
                           , or 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ather an imagine
                              〈1 line〉
                            answer o
                              〈1 line〉
                            yo
                              〈1 line〉
                           r ow
                              〈1 line〉
                           e▪
                         First you must kn
                           〈1 line〉
                        w that the scripture setteth not downe euery circumstance, and then surely you do Peter great iniurie, that aske whether he were chosen vnto it: for is it to be thought, that Peter would thrust in himselfe to this office or dignitie, without the consent and allowance of his fellowes, and preuent his fellowes of this preheininence? vndoutedly if it had not bin done arrogantly, yet it must needes hau
                           〈1 line〉
                         a great shew of arrogancie, if he had done this without the consent of his fellowes. And here you shall heare what the scholiast saith which gathereth the iudgement of greeke diumes, This is not 
                              〈1 line〉
                           poken o
                              〈1 line〉
                            cho
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ing 
                              〈1 line〉
                           eter to be speaker, but of 
                              〈1 line〉
                           lecting Matthias, which pe
                              〈1 line〉
                           eyned not to Peter alone. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         (speaking of Peter) 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Behold how he doth all with their common consent. And if any man hervpon will say, that Peter exercised domination ouer the rest, or gat any ar
                           〈1 line〉
                        hapostleship, beside that the whole storie of the Actes of the Apostles, and his whole course of life doth refute that, the same scholiast which I made mention of in the same place, sayth he did nothing 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , imp
                           〈1 line〉
                        riously, nothing 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , with dominion or power: further I will admonish him to take heede, least if he s
                           〈1 line〉
                        riue so farre for the Archbishop, he slide or euer he be aware into the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        entes of the Papists, which vse these places to proue that Peter had authoritie, and rule ouer the rest of the Apostles.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is a rodd to beate your selfe with, for it is euident euen by these wordes of yours, that your deuise is most farthest from the Apostolicall forme: for Peter in allPeter chee
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e in Apostolicall assemblies. such assemblies is the chiefe, speaketh the first and moderateth the rest, in whiche respect most of the olde ecclesiastical writers count him the chiefe of the Apos
                              〈1 line〉
                           les, neyther do the la
                              〈1 line〉
                           e writers diss
                              〈1 line〉
                           nt from them in that poynt, and yet is there no daunger of sliding into the Papists tents, who by this woulde proue the Popes supremacie, whose arguments you haue vsed, and I haue confuted before.
                        To preuent subtily that question which neyther yo
                              〈1 line〉
                            do
                              〈1 line〉
                           , nor can answer, that is, where it is in scripture mentioned that at euery action, or at any time Peter was chosen to speake before the rest, or to gouerne the action? 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ou say, that first I must know that the scripture setteth not downe, euery circumstance, and then that I do Peter great iniurie that aske whether he were chosen to it. &c. To the first I answer, that you ought to know, how wicked and vngodly a thing it is, to ground the alteration of any lawfull kinde of g
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           uernment so long continued, and in the best times of the Church practised, vpon your owne fonde deuise and coniectures, without any ground of scripture, yea to make thatPeter not cho sen in euery action to be chee
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e. your foundation which you cannot fynde in the whole scripture, but the cleane contrary. For shew me one péece of a text that doth but insinuate Peter, to haue bin at

any time in any action chosen to direct the action: I can shew you the contrary, especially in the second of the Actes, where Peter sodainly answered with a notable apologie in the presence of the Apostles, the accusation of dronkennesse layde agaynst him, and them: neyther can it be that he should expect the voyces of the rest, to choose him to be the chéefe, for that time in that action.
                        Whosoeuer shall well consider the first of the Actes, and the. 15. and other places where mention is made of Peters speaking, as he shall perceiue that this was Peters peculiar office, and always apperteyning vnto him, from the ascensiō of Christ to his dying day, so shall he also easily vnderstand, that he was not at any time chosen to that office by voyces, much lesse at euery particular méeting or singular action. And dare you presume vpon vaine coniectures, without warrant of scripture, to bild the foundation of your kinde of gouernment, whyche you before sayde is a matter of faythe and saluation? is not thys to open a way to vnwritten veri
                              〈1 line〉
                           ies, and phantasticall interpretatious? if your wordes be of suche weighte wyth the Reader, that bycause you speake them, therefore hée will be
                              〈1 line〉
                           aeue them, per me▪ licebit: but thys I will assure hym of, that he shall beléeue that, that is neyther grounded vppon Scripture, nor anye learned or aunciente authoritie.
                        To the seconde, that is, that I doe Peter great iniurie. &c. I saye that I doe him no iniurie at all, when I affirme that of hym, that the scripture dothe, and presume not of mine owne brayne, for the mainteyning of an euill cause, to imagin that of him, whych I haue my selfe deuised besides the word of God, as you do most manifestly.
                        Peter did not thrust himselfe into any office or dignitie, whiche was not appoyuted vnto hym by God, neyther did he otherwise vse himselfe therein, than his office and duetie required: and it is impietie thus to dallie and trifle in Gods matters. We are w
                              〈1 line〉
                           ll assured in scripture that Peter did this, and had this preheminence, and therefore you must knowe that he was lawfully called vnto it, and did lawfully execute it.
                        The Gréeke Scholiast saith, that Peter in such assemblies did conclude nothingThe scholiast playeth not ye parte which is layde vpon him. without the consent of the rest, the which also the scripture it selfe dothe plainly declare. But the Gréeke Scholiast no where sayth that Peter was at euery assemblie, or at any time chosen by the voyces of the rest, to speake first, and to moderate the action: which is your assertion. For in the place by you cited, he speaketh not of the election of Peter to his prolocutorship, but of the choosing of Matthias to the Apostleship. Wherein Peter tooke not that preheminence to himselfe to appoint him alone, but communicated the matter with the rest of the disciples. So that you haue eyther wittingly, or ignorantly applyed the Scholiast to a wrong matter.
                        It is true that Peter did nothing imperiously, nothing with dominion or power: no more doth any man that executeth lawfull iurisdiction, and gouerneth by law, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           quitie, and order, no not the king himselfe: for in superioritie there is humilitie, and in rule and authoritie there is seruitude: as I haue before shewed in the exposition of the places in the. 20 of Matth. 22. Luke. &c. And yet doth the Gréeke Scholiast in the same place say, that Peter rose vp and not lames, as being more feruent, 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           ,Tract. 1. 
                           and as hauing receiued the presidentship of the Apostles. Your admo
                              〈1 line〉
                           ishment of falling into the tents of the Papists, howe necessary it is for your selfe, whi
                              〈1 line〉
                           h vse their manner of reasoning vpon this example of Peter, and vpon deuised interpretations of the scripture, I haue touched before. As for my selfe I refuse no warning▪ But I trust it is not so necessary, for I know what they haue said, & what they can say in that matter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 48. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 85. Sect. 4.
                     And that it may be vnderstanded, that this inoderate rule, voyd of all pompe and outwarde

shew, was not perpetuall, nor all wastyed vnto one man, whiche were the last poynts of the c
                           〈1 line〉
                        utions I put before, turne vnto ye. 15. of the Actes, where is shewed, how with the rest of the church, the Apostles, and amongst them Peter, being assembled, decide a great controuersie, This 
                              〈◊〉
                            aga
                              〈1 line〉
                           nst your 
                              〈◊〉
                            as 
                              〈◊〉
                            appeare. Iames 
                           〈1 line〉
                        he Apostle, and not Peter, moderated and gouerned the whole action, when as after other had sayde their iudgements, and namely Paule and Barnabas, and Peter, he in the end in the name o
                           〈1 line〉
                         all, pronounced the sentence, and that whereof the rest agreed, and had disputed vnto, and the residue rested in that iudgement: the which also may likewise appeare in the. 21. of the Actes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.Peter moderat
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ur 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              o 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ong as the Apo
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              tles 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              nco 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ogyther.
                        
                        It is euident by the story of the Actes of the Apostles, that this function remayned to Peter, so long as the Apostles cōtinued togither, and that he did execute the same when soeuer they mette: and therefore it is vntrue that this off
                              〈1 line〉
                           ce was not tyed to one man: the. 15. of the Acts helpeth you nothing: for euen there, Peter kéepeth his accustomed manner in making the 
                              〈1 line〉
                           irst oration: and in that place it may appeare, that he did it as chéefe in that assemblie, for the text saith, that when there had bin greatActes. 15. disputation, Peter rose vp and said vnto them. &c. so that Peter as one hauing authoritie to appease the tumult and bitter contention, rose vp and said vnto them. &c. Then spake Barnabas and Paule, after them, Iames, not as moderator or gouer
                              〈1 line〉
                           oure of the whole action, but as one hauing interest to speake as the rest of the Apostles had, and bycause he had spoken that which the rest well liked of, therefore they consented to his opinion, and iudgement. This is no more to giue preheminence 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o Iames in moderating that action, than it is to giue the speakership in the Parliament to hym that speaketh last in a matter, and whose oration hath most perswaded, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o whome also the whole house consenteth. So that Peter kéepeth his prerog
                              〈1 line〉
                           tiue still for any thing that is here spoken to the contrary: which may also euidently appe
                              〈1 line〉
                           re by this,The of
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ice o
                                 〈1 line〉
                               the 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              peaker o
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              . that when there was greate contention among them about the matter, the cause whereof is like to be, for that they did not vnderstand the state of the cause, Peter stoode vp, & 
                              in hoc maximè insistit, vt statum quaestionis demonstraret, and stoode especially vppon this point, that he might declare the state of the question, as M. Caluine saith, whiche is the office of the speaker or moderatour: wherefore not Iames, but Peter did moderate the action.
                        But best as you would haue it, that Iames did moderate the action: it maketh most againstThe example o
                                 〈1 line〉
                               Iames 
                                 〈◊〉
                               the Re plyer. you, for if we beléeue the auncient writers, and namely the gréeke Scholiast vpon the. 15. of the Acts, Iames was now Byshop of Ierusalem: and therefore the Synode being 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ithin his charge, it was not 
                              〈◊〉
                           , that he according to his office, should moderate the same, as other bishops did in their seuerall Churches.
                        The. 21. of the Acts is nothing to your purpose, but Paule comming to Ierusalem, went with certaine other in vnto Iames, and told him and all the rest that were gathered togyther, what God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministration. What is this to proue your purpose? Peter is not here, and Iames was now 
                              〈◊〉
                            op of Ierusalem, as the note in the margent of the 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ible printed at Geneua doth testify. The place in no respect proueth your assertion, but the contrary: for there is no doubt, but that Iames was the chiefe gouernour of the Churche of Ierusalem in all actions, during his life, after that he was once placed in the Byshopricke.
                        You talke in another place of raking of Doctors to proue my purpose, but if these be not rakings of scriptures, gathered togither to no purpose, for the cōfirming of your fonde deuises, I know not what you should meane by the name of rakings.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 49. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 85. Sect. 4.
                     This is he which is called the Byshop in euery Church, this is he also, whome Iustin whereof mention is made afterwards, called 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . And fynally this is that great Archbyshoppricke, and great Byshoppricke, that M. Doctor so often stumbleth on. This order and preheminence, 
                           〈◊〉
                         Apostles tune, and those that were neare them kept, and the nerer they came to the Apostles 
                           〈◊〉
                        , the nearer they kept them to this order, & the farther of they were from those tunes, vntill the discouering

of the sonne of perdition, the further off were they from this moderation, and the nearet they came to that tyrannie, and ambitious power, whiche oppressed and ouerlayed the Churche of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Indéede this is one parte of the office of the Archbyshop and Byshop, but not the whole, no more than it was of Iames being Byshop of Ierusalem, nor of him whome Iustine calleth 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : But your chéefe purpose now is to proue that this office is not perpetuall, but changeable at euery action, and durable only continuing that action, which how soundly you haue done, and with what straunge argumentes euery childe that hath discretion may iudge.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 50. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 86. Sect. 1.
                     And therefore M. Caluine, doth warely say, that one amongst the Apostles indefinitely, not any one singular person, as Peter, had the moderation and rule of the other: and further shadoweth out what rule that was, by the example of the The Archbyshop contenteth himselfe with lesse authori
                              〈1 line〉
                           ie than the Co
                              〈1 line〉
                           suls had. Consull of Rome, whose authoritie was to gather the Senate togyther, and to tel of the matters which were to be handled, to gather the voices, to pronounce the sentence. And although the Antichrist of Rome had peruerted all good order, and taken all libertie of the Churche into his handes, the Cardinals, Archbyshops, and Byshops, yet there are some colde and light footings of it in our synods, which are holden with the Parliament: where amongst all the ministers which are assembled, out of all the whole realme, by the more part of voyces, one is chosen whiche shoulde go before the rest, propound the causes, gather the voyces, and be as it were the mouth of the whole company, whome they terme the prolocutor. Such great force hath the truth that in the vtter ruines of Poperie, it could neuer be so pulled vp by the rootes, that a man could neuer know the place thereof no more, or that it should not leaue such markes and prints behind it, whereby it might afterwardes recouer it selfe, and come agayne to the knowledge of men.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It followeth in the same place of M. Caluine immediatly. 
                              Sic nihil absurdi esset
                              Instit. cap. 8. 
                              si fateremur Apostolos detulisse Petro talem primatum. Sed quod inter paucos valet non protenus trahendum est ad vniuersum o
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 bem terrarum, ad quem regendum nemo vnus sufficit. So shoulde it be no absurditie if we shoulde confesse that the Apostles did giue this kynde of preheminence vnto Peter. But yet that whiche auayleth among fewe, must not by and by be drawen to the whole worlde, to the ruling whereof no one man can suffice. You sée therefore that M. Caluine speaketh of one singular person, euen of Peter hym selfe, and yet dothe he not slide into the tents of the Papistes, but teacheth rather how to beware of them, and yet to acknowledge the truthe of Peter.
                        We gyue no greater authoritie eyther to Archbyshop or Byshop, than theThe example of T. C. against himselfe. Consuls, and their authoritie. Consull, or Pretor had among the Romanes, or a Master and president in a colledge: for the Consuls (vppon whose authoritie you séeme so muche to stay) were appoynted to gouerne the common wealth of the Romanes, after they had banished theyr kynges, and they were called Consuls, 
                              quia plurimum reipublicae consulebant: bycause they profited the common wealth very muche: whose authoritie in thys dyd differ from the authoritie of a king, that there mighte be appeale from them, and that they could
                              〈1 line〉
                            not put to deathe any citizen of Rome, withoute the consente of the people: but they mighte otherwise punishe them, and 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ast them into prison: They had authorite also to make frée th
                              〈1 line〉
                           se that were in bondage, they were of the greatest honoure (si nullus esset Dictat
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 r) if there were

no Dictator) in the common wealth, and their authoritie was offorce, not onely in the Senate, but else where. And it is manyfest that they had not onely authoritie to call the Senate, to tell those matters that were to be handled, and to take their voyces, but to commaunde that none shoulde depart oute of the Citie, that had anye v
                              〈1 line〉
                           ycè in the Senate and to electe Senators. &c. It appeareth that you little knewe what the offyce of a Consull was, when you wrytte thys. If you take aduantage of thys, that the office of the Consull was annuall and not perpetuall, yet it helpeth not you anything, for he was moderator and ruler not of one action onely, but of so manye, as were by occasion, eyther ordinarie, or extraordinarie in the whole yeare of 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ys Consulshyp. For my part I doe not thinke that the Archbyshop, either hath, or ought to haue that authoritie in his prouince, that the Consull had in Rome.
                        A Master of a Colledge (the which example also Master Caluine doth vse) hath aMasters of Colledges and their authoritie. perpetuall offyce, he is chiefe gouernour of that societie, and all the members thereof owe duetie and obedience vnto him, as to their head: he hathe authoritie to puni
                              〈1 line〉
                           he and to sée lawes executed: neyther doe I thynke that eyther Archbyshop or Byshop claymeth greater authoritie and iurisdiction ouer theyr Prouinces and Diocesse, than is due to the Master within hys Colledge. And therfore those examples of Master Caluine do confute your assertion, they doe in no poynt confirme it.
                        In Synodes thoughe there be chosen a prolocutor for the inferior sorte of the Cleargie, yet dothe the Archbyshop reteyne still bothe hys office, place, and authoritie: euen as the Prince dothe, or the Lorde Kéeper, notwythstanding it be permitted to the lower house of Parliament to choose them a Speaker, and therefore this is nothyng, nor alleaged to anye purpose: excepte you wyll saye that in the ciuill state all was equall, and that there was no superior, but in eueryaction some chosen by the multitude, to gouerne the action, bycause in the lower house of Parliament they choose a Speaker, whose offyce continueth but duryng that Parliament. You passe not what you alleage, so you maye séeme to alleage something.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 51. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 86. Sect. 2.
                     Nowe you see what authoritie wee allowe amongst the Ministers, bothe in theyr seuerall Churches, or in prouinciall Synodes, or nationall, or generall or what so euer other meetings shall be aduised of, for the profitte and edifying of the Churche, and wythall you see, that a
                           〈1 line〉
                         we are farre from thys tyrannie, and excessiue power whyche nowe is in the Churche, so we are by the grace of God as farre from confusion and disorder, wherein you trauell so muche to make vs to seeme guiltie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I sée you allowe muche more authoritie in wordes, that is in the examples you haue vsed, than you wyll willingly acknowledge: I sée also that this authoritie, whyche you call tyrannie and excessiue, is moderate and lawfull, and according bothe to the lawes of God and man. To conclude, I see that you are as farre from order, and a ryghte forme of gouernment, as you are from modestie and due obedience, and that the ende you shoote at, is nothyng else but a méere confusion, not onelye of the Churche, but of the common wealthe also: the gouernment whereof you would haue framed, according to your platforme of the Churche: that is, you would haue it brought from a Monarchie, to a popular or Aristocraticall kinde of gouernmente, euen as you would haue the Church.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 52. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 72. Sect. 1.
                     Paule was superior both to Timothie and Titus, as it may easily be gathered out of his Epistles written vnto them.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 86. Sect. 3.
                     M. Doctor reasoneth agayne, that Paule an Apostle, and in the hyghest degree of ministerie▪
                        They are not yet proued Euangelistes. was superior to Timothie and Titus Euangelistes, and so in a lower degree of ministerie, therefore one Minister is superior to another, one Byshop to another Byshop, which are all one office▪ and one function. As if I shoulde saye my Lorde Maior of London is aboue the Sherifes, therefore one Sherife is superior to another.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There was no difference betwixte them in respect of preaching the Gospell andThe example o
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               proueth 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              ritie among yt ministers of the worde. administring the sacramentes, but in respecte of gouernment, therefore among Ministers of the worde, and Sacramentes there may be degrées of dignitie, and superioritie, and one may rule ouer another: which is the grounde of my assertion, and the ouerthrow of yours. And this doth the example of Paul proue euidently, euen as the example of my Lorde Mayor doth proue, that there is superioritie in gouernment among the Citizens. For thus you should haue reasoned: as my Lord Mayor his authoritie aboue the rest of the Citizens, declareth, that there is superioritie in the ciuill state, and one subiecte to another, euen so Paules superioritie ouer Timothie, Titus, and other Ministers declareth, that there may be superioritie in the state Ecclesiasticall, and that one of them may and ought to be subiect to another: thus you should haue applyed the similitude if you had truely applyed it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 53. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 72. Sect. 2.
                     Titus had superioritie ouer al ye other pastors & Ministers whichTitus had superioritie. were in Creta: for he had potestatem constituendi oppidatim presbyteros: ad Tit. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . The which place M. Caluine expounding, sayth on this sort, 
                           Discimus ex hoc loco. &c. vvelearne of this place (saith he) that there vvas not suche equalitieCaluine confessem superioritie among ministers. among the Ministers of the Churche, but that one bothe in authoritie, and councell did rule ouer another,
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 86. Sect. 3.
                     Againe another argument he hath of the same strength. Titus being an Euangelist was superior to al the pastors in Crete, which was a degree vnder the Euangelists, therefore one 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ must be superior vnto another pastor. And that he was superior he proueth, bycause he had authoritie ordeine pastors: so that the print of the Archbishop is so deepely set in his head, that he 
                           〈◊〉
                         he 
                           〈◊〉
                         imagine nothing, but that Titus should be Archbyshop of all Creta.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Titus was a Byshop as it shal be proued: and you haue not one worde in Scripture of his beyng an Euangelist: it is Erasmus and Pellicane, two famous men, that imagine Titus, to haue been Archbyshop of Creta: scoffe at them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 54. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 86. Sect. 4.
                     I haue shewed before, howe these wordes are to be taken of Saynte Paule. And for so muche as M. Doctor burdeneth vs wyth the authoritie of Caluine so often, I wyll sende him to Caluines owne interpretation vpon this place, where he You shifte of M. Caluines place for superioritie amongst the Cleargie, by flying to another place of election of Ministers. sheweth that Titus dyd not ordeyne by hys owne authoritie: For Saynte Paule woulde not graunte Titus leaue to doe that whyche he hymselfe woulde not, and sheweth that to saye that Titus shoulde make the election of Pastors by hymselfe, is to gyue vnto hym a princely authoritie, and to take awaye the election from the Church, and the iudgement of the insufficiencie of the Minister from the companye of the pastors, which were (saith he) to prophane the whole gouernment of the Church.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Thys is to set Caluine againste Caluine, and not to answere hym: and yet thys is nothyng contrarie to that whyche I haue alleaged oute of hym: for in the place that I haue alleaged he gathereth vpon these wordes 
                              vt constituas oppidatìm presbyteros.
                              The shifts of the Replyer▪
                               
                              &c. that there was not suche equalitie among the Ministers of the Churche, but that one bothe in authoritie, and Councell dyd rule ouer another. You to auoyde thys testimonie of Caluine for superioritie, tell me that Caluine saythe vpon this place, that Titus dyd not ordeyne Ministers by hys owne authoritie. &c. whyche is no answere to the place that I haue alleaged, but a verye quarrell pickte oute, to auoyde the answering of it. Master Caluine sayth that among the Ministers there was one ruled ouer another, authoritate & consilio: by authoritie and Councell. And he dothe gather it oute of the texte by me alleaged: eyther answere it, or gyue place vnto it, or denie it. Of electing Ministers I haue spokē before, it is now out of place to speake of it agayne, and it is to no purpose, but to shift of an Answere.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 55. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 86. Sect. 5.
                     I maruell therefore what M. Doctor meaneth, to be so busye wyth M. Caluine, and to seeke confirmation of hys Archbyshop and Byshop at hym, whyche woulde haue shaken at the namyng of the one, and trembled at the offyce of the other, onlesse it be bycause he woulde fayne haue hys playster, where he receyued hys wounde. But I bare assure hym, that in hys garden he shall neuer fynde the herbe that wyll heale hym. And bycause that the Scriptures, when they make for oure cause, receyue thys answere commonly, that they serued but for the Apostles tymes, and Master Caluines authoritie wyll weye nothyng as I thinke wyth M. Doctor, when he is alleaged by vs againste hym, I will sende hym to the Greeke S choliast, whiche vpon this place of Titus saythe after this sorte. He woulde not (speaking of Saynte Paule) haue the whole Isle of Crete, ministred and gouerned by one, but that euerye one shoulde haue his proper charge and care: for so shoulde Titus haue a lighter laboure and the people that are gouerned, shoulde enioye greater attendance of the pastor, whylest he that teacheth them dothe not runne aboute the gouernmente of manye congregations, but attendeth vnto one and garnisheth that.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What opinion Master Caluine hathe of Archbyshops, and of Superioritie amongest Pastors and Ministers, maye appeare in his wordes that I haue alleaged in my Answere. I thinke Master Caluine neuer vttered in worde or wryting hys

mislyking of the present gouernmente of thys Churche of Englande, by Archbyshops and Byshops, what he hath spoken agaynst the abuse of them in the Popes Church, is not to be wrested against the right vse of them in the true Churche of Christ.
                        I haue answered the Scriptures by you alleaged, truely, and directly. You haue not as yet vrged me wyth that authoritie of Master Caluine, that I haue so shifted of, as you haue done this last.
                        The Scholiast meaneth that euery Citie shoulde haue his Pastor, in the Isle of Creta, and that Titus shoulde gouerne them as Byshop, not as hauyng the wholeTitus Archbyshop. and sole charge of euery seuerall towne or Citie: whych maye euidently appeare to be true, by these wordes of Theodoret placed in the same author. Titus was a notable Diseiple of Paul, but was ordeyned Bishop of Creta, whych was a very large Isle, &Theodoret. in arg. Epist. Tit. apud Scholiast. it was permitted & cōmitted vnto him, that he might ordeine 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , Byshops that were vnder hym. Wherby it may be gathered that euery Citie in Creta had a Byshop, whyche had the seuerall charge, and that Titus gouerned them as Archbyshop. The lyke doth Chrysostome (whom the Greeke Scholiast doth especially followe) affirme of Timothie in. 1. Tim. 5. vpon these wordes 
                              aduersus presbyterum. &c. Timotheo credita fuerat ecclesia, imò gens ferè tota Asiatica: The Churche, yea almosteChrysost. the whole people of Asia was committed to Timothie. But what néede I vse manie wordes, when Chrysostome hymselfe affirmeth the same directly of Titus. 1.Idem. 
                           
                              ad Titum: neque eius profectò illi. &c. Truely Paule woulde not haue committed the whole Isle to hym, neyther woulde he haue commaunded those thyngs to be supplyed whyche were wanting, (for he sayth that thou myghtest correcte those thyngs whyche are wanting) neither woulde he haue committed vnto him the Iudgemente of so manye Byshops, if he had not trusted hym very well.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 56. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 87. Sect. 1.
                     Nowe M. Doctor maye see by thys, that Titus was not as he fansyeth, the Archbyshop of all Crete: but that he had one flocke, wherevpon for the tyme he was there, he attended, and that where it is sayde he ordeyned Ministers: it is nothyng else but that he was the chiefe, and the moderator in the election of the ministers, as I haue declared before by many examples. And it is no maruell, althoughe the reste graunted hym this preheunnence, when he had both most excellent giftes, and was a degree aboue the Pastors, being an Euangelist.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Thys I maye see, that firste you haue no conscience in falsifying and corruptyng of authors: Secondly, that you speake contraryes, euen in these fewe lynes: for you saye that Titus had one flocke in Creta, wherevpon he dyd attende for the tyme heT. C. contrarie to himselfe. was there▪ whiche muste néedes proue hym to be a Pastor: and yet you afterwardes denye hym to be a Pastor, affirming hym to be an Euangelist, and you take the office of an Euangelist to be so distincte from the office of a Pastor, that they may not méete together in one man. Thirdly, I sée that you confidentlye take vpon you, to expounde Paules meanyng agaynste hys playne woordes, and agaynste the Iudgemente of the olde interpreters, and diuerse of the newe, as I haue shewed before in the election of Ministers. Besydes these, I see nothing answered to this example of Titus.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 57. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 72. Sect. 3.
                     Timothie bare rule ouer all the other Ministers of the ChurcheTimothies authoritie▪
                         of Ephesus: for Paule saythe vnto hym. 1. Timo. 5. aduersus presbyterum accusationem. &c. Agaynst a Minister receyue no accusation, vnlesse there be two or three vvitnesses. In which words Paul maketh him a Iudge ouer the rest of the Ministers.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 87. Sect. 2.
                     Unto the place of Timothie, where he wylleth hym not to admitte an accusation agaynste an Elder, vnder two or three witnesses, I answere as▪ I haue done before to the place of Titus: that is, that as the ordination of the Pastors is attributed vnto▪ Titus, and Timothie, bycause they gouerned, and moderated that action, and were the firste in it, so also is the deposyng, or other censures of them, and that for as muche as he wryteth his Epistles vnto Timothie and Titus, he telleth them howe they shoulde behaue them selues in theyr offyce, and dothe not shut oute other from thys censure and Iudgemente. And it is more agreeable to the inscription of the Epistles that he shoulde saye admitte not thou, or ordeyne not thou, wryting vnto one: than if he shoulde saye ordeyne not ye, or admitte not ye, as if he shoulde write to manye, for so shoulde neyther the endyng agree wyth the begynnyng, nor ye myddest wyth them both. And if thys be a good rule, that bycause Paule byddeth Timothie and Titus to Iudge of the faultes of the pastors, and to ordeyne Pastors, therefore none else dyd but they: then A meeres▪ uill. whereas Saynte Paule byddeth Timothie that he shoulde commaunde, and teache, that godlynesse is profitable to all thyngs, and admonisheth hym to be an example of the whole flocke, by your reason he wyll haue no other of the Ministers of Ephesus, or of the Isle of Creta, to teache that doctrine, or to be examples to their flockes, and an hundreth suche thyngs in the Epistles of Timothie and Titus, whyche althoughe they be there particularly directed vnto Timothie and Titus, yet doe they agree, and are common to them, wyth all other Ministers, yea sometymes vnto the whole flocke.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue certeyne common shiftes, to put of suche places as you can not answere, among whiche thys is one, that you vse in thys place. But it wyll not serue, beyng grounded neyther vppon authoritie nor reason. These woordes of Saynte Paule in déede be not spoken to Timothie alone, but to all other Byshops of lyke authoritie: for that whiche is prescribed to Timothie is also prescribed to all other in the lyke function, whyche argueth that thys authoritie gyuen to Timothie ouer all the Ministers of the Churche of Ephesus, dothe perteyne also to all other Byshoppes, ouer the Ministers of theyr seuerall Diecesse. But as Saynte Paule in these Epistles wryteth onely to Byshoppes, and Pastors, so are the preceptes gyuen therein properly perteyning to the offyce of Byshops and Pastors, and therefore not to be wrested to anye other. And howe can the Papistes more grossely abuse the Scriptures, in interpretyng them to serue their turne, and to shifte of theyr authoritie alleaged agaynste them, than you doe in thys and suche other places, agaynste the whole scope of the Epistle, and the playne and euidente wordes of the texte? for what is this, but to giue Timothie superioritie and gouernment ouer the other Ministers of Ephesus, to saye vnto hym, 
                              aduersus presbyterum, Agaynst a Minister receyue no occusation &c? and as thys authoritie of Iudgement is not onely gyuen vnto Timothie, but to all Byshops, of like callyng, so that also of teachyng (that godlynesse is profitable to all thyngs. &c.) perteyneth to all Ministers of the worde generally, and not to Timothie alone. This is onely the difference, that the firste is common to Timothie wyth all other

Byshops of like iurisdiction: the other common to him with all other ministers of the worde.
                        You knowe that euery Pastor, or other Minister of the worde, hath not other Pastors and Ministers of the worde vnder hym, that it maye be sayde vnto hym aduersus presbyteros. &c. as it is here sayde to Timothie, for I haue proued before that presbyter dothe signifie the Ministers of the worde and Sacramentes, and shall haue occasion to speake more of it hereafter.
                        You saye that there is an hundreth suche things in the Epistles of Timothie and Titus▪ I thinke that there is not one hundreth seuerall preceptes in all the thrée Epistles. These stoute and hyperbolicall bragges, wyth so manyfest resisting of the playne sense and meanyng of the Scriptures, argueth an euill conscience, and a mynde so addicted to errour, that it will not be reformed. Manye things in these Epistles perteyne to all Christians, many things be proper to Byshops, suche as Timothie was, and many common to all Ministers. But this aduersus presbyteros▪ &c. muste néedes to proper be those that haue vnder them other Ministers, committed to theyr gouernment, which euery Pastor hath not.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 58. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 72. Sect. 3.
                     And Epiphanius Lib. 3. Tom. 1. contra Haeresim Aerij
                         proueth Timothie his superioritieEpiphanius. ouer the rest, by this selfe same place.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 87. Sect. 3.
                     As for Epiphanius, This is your practise to discredite the author that speaketh against you. it is knowen of what authoritie he is in thys place, when as by Aerius sides, he goeth about to pricke at the Apostle▪ whilest he goeth about to confute the Apostle, which maketh a distinction and difference betwene those which the Apostle maketh one, that is a Bishop and elder, and to spare the credit of Epiphanius, it were better lay that opinion vpon some Pseudepiphanius, which we may doe not without great probabilitie, seyng (*) Augustine sayth, that theAd quod vult deum. true Epiphamus vttereth all after a storie fashion, and doth not vse anye disputation, or reasoning for the truth agaynst the falshood, and this Epiphanius is very full of arguments and reasons, the choise whereof M. Doctor hath taken.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue not heard any probable reason alleaged of any, why these bookes of EpiphaniusThe writings of Epiphanius contra. 80. haereses, not counterfeite. should be suspected, whether they be his or no, seeyng they be both learned and very auncient, mentioned also of sundry olde writers. But to omitte all other proofes I wyll onely vse the iudgement (at this tyme) of the authors of the Centuries who are to be credited in suche matters, bycause they haue diligently and carefully laboured in them: their opinion of these bookes of Epiphanius, Cent. 4 cap. 10. is thys, 
                              Nunc de scriptis. &c. Nowe we wyll speake of hys bookes: of the which that worke againstCent. 4. cap. 10. the foure score heresyes is most noble: which booke he hymselfe in his Epistle to Acacius, and Paulus Ministers, And in his booke called Anacephaleosis, calleth 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              . &c. Of the which writing Augustine in his booke ad quod-vult-deum, maketh this mention. Our Epiphanius Byshop of Cyrus (sayth he) which dyed not long since, speaking of foure score heresies, wrote also himselfe sixe Bookes making mention of all things after an Historicall maner, & disputing nothing either against the falsehood, or with the truthe: They be but short bookes, and if they were all made in one, yet were it not to be compared to ours, or to diuerse other mens bookes in length. Out of the which words it is euident, that Augustine neither had, nor at any time dyd see that worke which Epiphanius intituled Panarium, for Epiphanius is very long in recountyng the historie, as concerning the beginning, the endeuour & countrey of the heretikes, the occasiō of the heresie, the successe, increase, and suche

lyke throughout euery heresie. Then is he very long in confuting and condemning the heresies by true Scriptures, and the interpretation of them: wherfore it should seeme that Augustine had belyke onely the arguments prefixed before the Tomes of bookes of Epiphanius, whiche he dothe therefore call shorte bookes, or at the least, had his booke called Anacephaleosis,
                            (which is the summe of his worke called 
                              Panarium) Cornarius that writethCornarius. the Preface before this booke of Epiphanius, is of the same iudgement, and addeth these wordes: VVherefore eyther Augustine dyd not see this worke of Epiphanius, or the right worke of Augustine is not extant, but loste, or else Augustine dyd not in deede performe that whiche he promised. I can reade of none that doubteth whether these bookes were Epiphanius his, or no. And certaynely this kinde of answering is nexte the worst, especially when it is vsed agaynst suche approued authors.
                        And bicause all men may vnderstande, what Epiphanius wordes and reasons be
                              Aerius here sie in denying the difference betwixt a Be shop & priell▪ 
                              
                                 Epi. li. 3. 
                                    
                                       〈◊〉
                                    . 
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  
                                 haeres. 75▪
                              
                            (whiche in déede pinche you very néere, for he calleth you heretikes) I will declare them as I haue there founde them. First he setteth downe the heresie of Aērius in these words: His talke was more outrageous than becōmed a man: and he sayd, what is a Bishop to a Priest? he nothing differeth from him: for there is but one order, and the same honor and dignitie. The Bishop layeth on his handes, and so dothe the Priest: the Bishop ministreth baptisme, and so dothe the priest: the Bishop sayth diuine seruice, and so doth the Priest: the Bishop sitteth in his throne, and so dothe the Priest. In this he hathe deceyued many, and they vse him for their captayne. Then dothe he a little after confute this heresie with Aerius reasons, on this sorte: To saye that a Bishop and a Priest is equall, howe can it be possible? for the order of Bishops, is the begetter of fathers, for it ingendreth fathers to the Churche: the order of Priests not beeing able to beget fathers, dothe beget sonnes to the Churche, by the sacrament of Baptisme, but not fathers or teachers: and howe is it possible for him to ordeyne a Priest, not hauing imposition of hands to electe, or to saye that he is equall with a Bishop? but phantasticalnesse and emulation deceyued the foresayde Aërius: he proueth his errour, aud the errour of those that heare him by this, that the Apostle writte to Priests and Deacons, and dyd not write to Byshops. And to the Bishop he sayth: neglect not the gifte that is in thee, whiche thou hast receyued by the handes of the Presbyterie. And agayne in another place he writeth to Bishops and Deacons: wherefore (sayth he) a Bishop and a Priest is all one: and he knoweth not, whiche is ignorante of the sequele of the truthe, and hathe not read profounde stories, that when the preaching was but newely begonne, the holy Apostle writte according to the state of things as they were then: for where there were Bishops appoynted he writte to Bishops and Deacons: for the Apostle coulde not by and by at the first appoynte all things: for there was neede of Priests and Deacons, bicause by those two, ecclesiasticall matters maye be complete. And where there was not any founde worthy a Bishopricke, there the place remayned without a Bishop, but where there was neede, and worthy men to be Bishops, there were Bishops appoynted. And when there was not so many that there coulde be founde amongst them meete to be Priests, they were content with one Bishop in an appoynted place, but it is vnpossible for a Bishop to be without a Deacon, and the holy Apostle had a care that Deacons shoulde be where the Bishop was, for the ministerie. So dyd the Churche receyue the fulnesse of dispensation, suche was then the state and condition of the places. For euery thing had not the perfection from the beginning, but in processe of time those things whiche were necessarie to perfection were added. &c. The Apostle teacheth who is a Bishop, and who is a Priest, when he sayth to Timothie that was a Bishop, chide not a Priest, but exhorte him as a father: what should a Bishop haue to doe, not to chide a Priest, if he had not authoritie aboue a Priest. As he also sayth agayne, agaynst a Priest admitte no accusation sodenly, without two or three witnesses, and he sayde not to any Priest, admit no accusation agaynst a Bishop: neyther did he write to any Priest, that he shoulde not rebuke a Bishop. Thus mayest thou sée good Reader, that it is not for nought, that T. C. so stormes agaynst Epiphanius, and so vnreuerently vseth him.
                        But I wyll giue him as muche cause to deale in like maner with Augustine, whoAugust. ad Quod-vult. in this matter fully ioyneth with Epiphanius: and in that booke of his, 
                              de haeresibus
                              
                              ad quod-vult-deum
                            (quoted by T. C. in his margent) attributeth this also as heresie to the sayde Acrius, adding that the cause of this and other of his heresies was, bicause he himselfe was not made Bishop.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 59. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 72. Sect. 4.
                     That this worde (presbyter) in this place of the Apostle, signifieth a minister of the worde, bothe Ambrose, Caluine, and other learned writers declare.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 87. Sect. 4.
                     And whereas M. Doctor citeth Ambrose, Caluine, and other godly wryters, to proue that the minister is vnderstanded by the worde Elder or Presbyter, he keepeth his olde wonte, by bringing stickes into the wood, and prouing alwayes that which no man denieth, and yet with the minister of the worde, he also vnderstandeth the Elder of the Churche whiche ruleth, and dothe not labour in the worde: But therein is not the matter, for I doe graunt that by Presbyter the minister of the word is vnderstanded, & yet nothing proued of that which M. Doctor would so fayne proue.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I adde this interpretation, that the Reader may vnderstande Timothie to haue authoritie ouer Bishops and Ministers of the worde, least you by cauilling shoulde shifte off this place, with your signification of Seniors, whiche were not ministers of the worde, as you say.
                        All this whyle haue I looked for the performance of your promise, to proue thatThat Timothie was Bishop. Timothie and Titus were no Bishops: But bicause I perceyue that you are content to forget it, I will héere perfourme mine (least I fall into the same faulte with you) repeating only that which I haue before added to my answere in the 2. edition, least I shoulde put the Reader bothe to coste and paynes in searching for it there.
                        First therefore that Timothie was Bishop of Ephesus, the whole course of the1 The course of the Epistle. two Epistles written vnto him declareth, wherein is conteyned the office and duety of a Bishop, and diuers precepts peculiarly perteyning to that function, as it is manyfest: neyther were those Epistles written to Timothie for the instruction of other onely, but for the instruction of him selfe also, as the whole course of bothe the Epistles doe declare, and all learned expositours confesse.
                        Secondly, the subscription of the seconde Epistle is this: 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .2 The subscrip tion. 
                           The seconde (Epistle) was written from Rome to Timothie, who was ordeyned the first Bishop of the Churche of Ephesus, when Paule appeared before the Emperour Nero the seconde time. Whiche althoughe it be lefte out in some Gréeke Testamentes, yet is it in the moste, the best, and the auncientest, yea almoste in all: neyther is this a sufficient answere to saye, that the subscription of some one or two Epistles séeme to be vntrue, therefore this is vntrue: For the subscription, as it is (no doubt) of great antiquitie, so is it consonant to al olde auncient authoritie.
                        Thirdly, the vniuersal consent of histories conclude him to be Bishop at Ephesus.3 Consent of hystories. 
                           Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 4. saythe, that Timothie was the first Bishop of Ephesus.
                        
                        
                           Dorotheus who lyued in Dioclesians time, wryteth that Paule made him Bishop of Ephesus.
                        
                        
                           Nicephorus lib. 2. cap. 34. sayth, that Paule made him Bishop of Ephesus, before he writ his first Epistle vnto him.
                        
                        
                           Hierome in catalog. scripto. Ecclesi.
                            sayth, that he was made Bishop of Ephesus by Paule.
                        
                        
                           Isidorus de Patribus noui Testamenti,
                            sayth also that he was Bishop of Ephesus.
                        
                        
                           Antoninus parte. 1. titulo. 6. cap. 1. affyrmeth the same oute of Polycrates. So

dothe Supplementum chroni. So dothe also Volaterane, lib. 20. where he calleth him Praesulem Ephesinum. And all the Histories that I haue read, whiche make any mention of him.
                        
                           
                              Historia Magdel. centu. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10. in vita Ioan. Euang.
                            hathe these words: 
                              Constat Paulum Ephesinae ecclesiae Timotheum dedisse pastorem: It is certayne that Paule appoynted Timothie Pastor of the Churche of Ephesus.
                        
                        Surely it is the generall consente of all hystories, that Timothie was Bishop of Ephesus.
                        Fourthly, the fathers affirme the same.4 Content of fathers.
                        
                        
                           Dionisius Areopagita (so called of some men) who liued in the Apostles time, wryteth his booke 
                              De diuinis nominibus, to Timothie Bishop of Ephesus.
                        
                        
                           Epiphanius lib. 3. tom. 1. affirmeth that Timothie was Bishop of Ephesus.
                        
                        
                           Ambrose sayth the same in his Preface to the first Epistle written to Timothie.
                        
                           Chrysostome in his argument of the same Epistle giueth this reason why Paule of all his Disciples writte onely to Timothie and Titus, bicause he had committed to them the gouernment and care of the Church: and the other he carried about with him. The same Chrysostome vpon the fourth to the Ephe. speaking of Pastors and Doctors, vseth Timothie and Titus for an example.
                        
                           Occumenius like wise vpon the fourth to the Ephe. calleth Timothie and Titus Bishops. And vpon. 1. Timoth. 1. he sayth, that Paule ordeyned Timothie Bishop of Ephesus. And in the fifth Chapter vpon these words, Manus citò nemini imponas. he sayth, 
                              Mandat de ordinationibus, Episcopo enim scribebat: he giueth preceptes of ordeyning, for he wrote to a Bishop.
                        
                        
                           Theodoret, vpon the first to Timothie, affirmeth in playne words, that Timothie had cure of soules committed vnto him.
                        
                        But to be shorte, there is not one olde writer whiche speaking of this matter, doth not testifie that Timothie was Bishop of Ephesus.
                        Last of all, I proue him to be Bishop there, by the consent of the late wryters.5 Consente of late writers.
                        
                        
                           Erasmus in his annotations, sayth that Paul made him Bishop: so sayth he likewise in his Paraphr. 1. Timoth. 4.
                        
                        
                           Pellicane sayth the same. 1. Tim. 1.
                        
                           Zuinglius in his booke called Ecclesiastes, sayth directly that Timothie was a Bishop▪
                           
                        
                        
                           Bucer sayth the same, writing vpon the. 4. chapter of the Epistle to the Ephe.
                        
                           Caluine vpon. 1. Tim. 1. calleth him Pastor of the Churche of Ephesus. And in the 1. Timoth. 4. expounding these words, Ne donum quod in te est. &c. he sayth, 
                              Spiritus sanctus oraculo Timotheum destinauerat, vt in ordinem pastorum cooptaretur: The holy Ghost by oracle did appoynt Timothie, that he should be chosen into the order of Pastors. And in the. 2. Timoth. 4. sayth, that he did excell 
                              Vulgares pastores, common Pastors. meaning that he was an excellent Pastor, indued with more singular and notable giftes, and of greater authoritie than the common sorte of Pastors be. And in the same chapter speaking of Paules sending for Timothie from Ephesus to Rome, he saythe, That there was no small cause why Paule sent for Timothie from that Churche which he ruled and gouerned, and that so farre off: Heereby we may gather (sayth he) howe profitable conference is with suche men: for it might be profitable to all Churches, whiche Timothie might learne in a small time: so that the absence of halfe a yere, or a whole yere, is nothing in comparison of the commoditie that commeth thereby. And agayne in the same place he sayth, That Paule sent Tichicus to Ephesus, when he sent for Timothie to Rome, in the meane tyme to supply Tymothies absence. By all these places it is manyfest that Caluine taketh Timothie to be Pastor & Bishop of Ephesus, as I haue beforesayde.
                        
                           Bullinger vpon these words also, ne neglexeris quod in te est donum, &c noteth three things to be obserued in the ordering of a Bishop: and proueth therby that Timothie was lawfully called to his Bishopricke. And vpon these words. 2. Tim. 1. Quamobrem cōmonefacio te vt suscites donum. &c. he sayth, that 
                              per donū Dei, Paule vnderstandeth the gifte of Prophecying, & functionem Episcopalem, the offyce of a Bishop to the whiche the Lord called Timothie, but by the ministerie of Paule. What can be spokē more playner?
                        
                           
                           Illyricus in his epistle dedicatorie to the newe Testament sayth, that Paule praysed Timothie his Bishop, and in his Preface to the epistle written to Timothie, he calleth Timothie and Titus 
                              praestantes doctores, multarum
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  ecclesiarum Episcopos: Notable Doctors, and Bishops of many Churches.
                        
                        Of the same iudgement is Musculus, and all the rest of the late wryters that I haue read, one onely excepted, who notwithstanding in effecte confesseth also that he was Bishop at Ephesus: for in his annotations. 1. Tim. 4. vpon these words, vsquedum venero. &c. he saythe, that when Paule sente for the ministers of Ephesus to Miletum. Acts. 20. he sent for Timothie especially. Cuius ministros
                            (meaning of Ephesus) ac proinde Timotheum inprimis Miletum accersiuit. But it is manyfest Act. 20. that they were all Pastours and Bishops: therefore Timothie was a Bishop. The same author vpon these wordes. 1. Timoth. 5. aduersus presbyterum. &c. sayth, Timotheum in Ephesino presbyterio tum fuisse 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . 1. Antistitē, vt vocat Iustinus. And addeth, that it is manifest by Cyprian, that the Bishop dyd rule in the Colledge of Seniors. Then if he that was chiefe in the Colledge of Seniors, was a Bishop, and Timothie was chiefe in the College of Seniors, it must néedes followe that Timothie was a Bishop.
                        But it maye appeare howe little learning and learned men be estéemed of those, whiche to maynteyne contention, are not ashamed to denie that whiche all learned men agrée vpon.The chiefe reasons to the contrarie answered.
                        
                        Their reasons as in number they be not many, so in substance they be nothing: I will recite the chiefe, and leaue the rest to children to be discussed.
                        The first, is taken out of the. 2. Ti. 4. where Paule sayth to Timothie, 
                              Opus perage
                              1 The place. 2. Tim. 4. answered. The work of an Euāgelist. 
                              Euangelistae: do the worke of an Euangelist. Their reason is this: Paule biddeth Timothie do the worke of an Euangelist, Ergo, Timothie was not Bishop.
                        First therfore we must searche out what Opus Euangelistae is, and then trie whether it be incident to the office of a Bishop, or no.
                        
                           Bullinger vpon that place sayth, that he doth the worke of an Euangelist, which preacheth the Gospell purely, and is not by any persecutions or aduersitie driuen from his calling,
                        
                        
                           Hemingius sayth, that opus Euangelistae, generally taken, is to preache the Gospell.
                        
                        
                           Musculus in locis commun. ticulo de verbi ministris,
                            sayth, that he is Euangelista, eyther that preacheth, or that writeth the Gospel, and that Paul in the first sense speaketh to Timothie, saying, opus fac euangelistae.
                           
                        
                        And in the same place among other things that Paule requireth of a Bishop, he affirmeth this to be one, vt opus peragat Euangelistae. So sayth Illyricus likewise.
                        Zuinglius also is of the same iudgement in his booke called Ecclesiastes, and proueth by that text of Paule, that the worke of an Euangelist and of a Bishop is all one. Nowe howe this reason dothe followe, Paule did bid Timothie preache the Gospell purely and constantly, Ergo, Timothie was not a Bishop, let euery man iudge.
                        The seconde reason is taken out of the. 4. to the Ephe. 
                              Et ipse dedit alios quidem Apostolos,
                              2 The place Ephe. 4. answered. 
                              alios verò Prophetas, alios autem Euangelistas, alios autem pastores ac doctores: He therfore gaue some to be Apostles, and some Prophetes, and some Euangelistes, and some Pastors and Teachers. The reason is framed on this sorte: An Euangelist and a Bishop were distincte offices, and coulde not be bothe ioyned in one. But Timothie was an Euangelist, Ergo, he was not a Bishop. This argumente is very féeble in eueryThe maior false. parte: For first the maior is vtterly false, for those offices named by Paule were not so distinct, but that diuers of them may concurre in one man, as maye easily be proued. Paule was an Apostle and also a Doctor. 2. Timoth. 1. Matthew and Iohn béeing Apostles were also Euangelists, as the consent of al writers doth testifie.
                        Timothie was according to M. Beza his iudgement both an Euangelist and also a prophet: Looke his notes in the fourth chap. of the first to Timothie.
                        
                           Zuinglius in his booke called Ecclesiastes, sayth, that an Euangelist is nothing else but a Bishop or a pastor, as it is manyfest (sayth he) by the wordes of Paule whiche he speaketh to Timothie, saying, opus fac Euangelistae, and Timothie at that tyme when Paule writte this Epistle vnto him, was a Bishop: And therefore it is certayne that according to

Faule his sentence, the office of an Euangelist and of a Bishop is all one. These be the very words of Zuinglius.
                        
                        
                           Bullinger expounding this place in the fourth to the Ephe. hath these words: There is no man whiche seeth not these names to be confounded, and one to be taken for an other: for an Apostle is also a Prophete, a Doctor, an Euangelist, a Minister, and a Bishop: and a Bishop is an Euangelist and a Prophet: A Prophet is a Doctor, a Minister, and an Euangelist. Therefore the Apostle Paule by these sundrie names, dothe signifie these diuers giftes which God hath bestowed vpon his Churche to saluation. And in that he so often vseth this disiunction; alios at
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  alios, he hath signified that all giftes are not giuen to one man, but that diuers men haue diuers giftes of the spirite, wherof he hath spoken more in the. 12. to the Rom. and the. 1. to the Cor. 12. chapter. Hitherto Bullinger.
                        
                        
                           Pellicane in the same place is of the same iudgement.
                        These offices therefore or giftes maye well concurre in one man, so that the maior is false, and this conclusion followeth not. Timothie was an Euangelist, Ergo, he was no Bishop.
                        The minor (which is this, Timothie was an Euangelist) is very doubtfull: ForThe minde doubtfull, first it may be doubted what an Euangelist is. The common opinion of old writers, and also of diuers late writers is, that those were properly called Euangelists which writte the Gospels. Other say, that he is an Euangelist whiche preacheth the Gospell. Some say that he was an Euangelist that was occupied in teaching the people playnly and simply. Caluine and some other thinke, that they were next vnto the Apostles in degree, and helpers of them, and suche as supplied their office oftentimes. Diuers other opinions there are of Euangelists, and scarse two agree in one opinion touching the office of an Euangelist. The moste saye (whiche also the etymologie of the name dothe importe) that those were Euangelistes whiche eyther preached or writte the Gospell.
                        
                           Sainct Augustine in his seconde booke contra Faustum Manichae. wryteth héereof on this sorte: 
                              Narratores originis, factorum, dictorum, passionum domini nostri Iesu Christi propriè dicti sunt Euangelistae: They are properly called Euangelistes, which are the declarers of the birthe, deedes, sayings, and sufferings of our Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ Which may be done both by preaching and writing the Gospell, as I sayde before.
                        Now if Timothie be an Euangelist bicause he preached the Gospell, there is no cause why he may not be a Bishop also. And it is certayn that when Paule sayd vnto him, do the worke of an Euangelist, he ment the preaching of the Gospell.
                        If an Euangelist be taken in any other significatiō, how can it be proued that Timothie was an Euangelist? For this proueth it not, fac opus Euangelistae, a man may do the worke of an Euangelist though he be not an Euangelist, a man may doe the worke of a pastor, though he be not a pastor.
                        To be short the conclusion is not necessarie, howsoeuer the premisses be true, forThe conclu sion not necessary. although it should be graūted that bothe the maior and minor were true, yet the conclusion dothe not followe: for Timothie might first be an Euangelist, and after a Bishop, as Zuinglius in his booke called Ecclesiastes, sayth, That Philip the Euangelist beeing a Deacon, was afterwarde Bishop and pastor of Cesarea: Iames the yonger beeing an Apostle, as Hierome and all the olde fathers doe testifie, was after Bishop of Ierusalem, and there remayned: and dyuers of the Apostles when they lefte off going from place to place, became in the ende Bishops, and remayned in one place, as it appeareth in olde hystories.
                        
                        So that although one man could not be bothe an Euangelist and a Bishop at one time, and if it be graunted that Timothie was an Euangelist, yet doth it not proue but that he was a Bishop also.
                        But certayne it is, that one man at one time might be both an Euangelist and a Bishop: and most certayne it is that Timothie was a Bishop, howe certayne soeuer it be whether he were an Euangelist, or no.
                        But héere it may be sayde that Timothie no more returned to Ephesus, after he had bin the seconde time with Paule at Rome, and therefore not to be like that he

was B
                              〈1 line〉
                           shop there. This argumente is onely coniecturall, and of no force to proue any suche matter. Howbeit if we will credite stories, wherby in such cases we must be directed, it is certayne that Timothie returned to Ephesus, & there dyed.
                        
                           Dorotheus sayth that he died at Ephesus, and was there buried.
                        
                           Polycrates testifieth that he was stoned to death at Ephesus.
                        
                           Isidorus in his booke de Patribus noui Testamenti, writeth that he was buried at Ephesus in the mount Pyon.
                        
                        
                           Symeon Metaphrastes testifieth the same.
                        
                           Nicephorus li. 10. ca. 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 .
                            testifieth, that Iulian the Apostara did tormēt one Artemius for translating the bones of Andrewe, Luke, and Timothie from Patra, Achaia, and Ephesus, to Constantinople. But it is certayne that Andrew was crucified at Patra by Aegeas the Proconsull: and auncient writers testifie that Luke was buried in Achaia: therfore the bones that were brought from Ephesus, must néedes be Timothies.
                        Héereby it may appeare that Timothie not onely returned from Rome to Ephesus, but also continued there euen to his death. And therefore certayne it is that he was Bishop at Ephesus. But nowe to my purpose.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 60. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 72. Sect. vlt.
                     
                        Ignatius who was S. Iohn his scholer, and lyued in ChrystesIgnatius. time, in his Epistle ad Trallianos, speaketh thus of the authoritie of a Bishop ouer the reste: 
                           Quid aliud est Episcopus quàm quidam obtinens principatum,
                           The bishops 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              uthoritie. 
                           & potestatem supra omnes? VVhat is a Bishop, but one hauing povver and rule ouer all? And in his Epistle ad Smyrnenses, he writeth on this sorte: 
                           Honora quidem Deum vt authorem vniuersorum & Dominum: Episcopum autem, vt Sacerdotum Principem, imagi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              em Dei ferentem: Dei quidem per Principatum: Christi verò per Sacerdotium. Honor God as the author and Lorde of all thinges, and a Bishop as the chiefe of Priestes, bearing the Image of God: of God bicause of his superioritie: of Christ by reason of his Priesthoode. And a little after: Let laye men be subiecte to Deacons, Deacons to Priests: and Priestes to Bishops, the Bishop to Christ. And agayne: Let no man doe any thing vvhiche perteyneth to the Churche, vvithout the consente of the Bishop. And agayn: He that attēpteth to do any thing vvithout the Bishop, breaketh peace, and confoundeth good order. The like saying he hath in his Epistle ad Magnesianos. These three Epistles doth Eusebius make mention of Lib. 3. cap. 35. &. 36. and Hiero. de viris illustribus.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 87. Sect. 4.
                     It is no maruell although you take vp the authors of the Admonition for wante of Logike, for you vtter great skill your selfe in writing, whiche keepe no order, but confounde your Reader in that thing which euen the common Logike of the countrey, which is reason, might haue directed you in: for what a confusion of times is this, to beginne with Cyprian, and then come to Ierome and Chrysostome, and after to the Scripture, and backe agayne to Ignatius that was before Cyprian: which tymes are ill disposed of you, and that in a matter wherin it stoode you vpon to haue obserued the order of the tymes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Be patient a whyle, the matter is not great, the Authors be knowne, and theThe order ob serued in placing the authorities in ye answere. antiquitie of them, my mynde is of the matter: and there is reason why I should
                              〈1 line〉
                            thus place them. Cyprian telleth the necessitie of suche superioritie, and so dothe Chrysostome: Hierome, the cause and the originall: Paule, Timothie, and Titus

be examples hereof: Ignatius and the rest are brought in as witnesses of the continuance of such offices and superioritie in the Churche, euen from the Apostles. Now first to proue the name of these offices not to be Antichristian, then to shew the necessitie of the offices, thirdly the cause, and last of all to declare the vse of the same to haue bene in the Churche euen from S. Paules time to this houre, is to kéepe a better order, than you shall be able to disorder, with all the Logike, Rhetorike, and hote Eloquence you haue.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 61. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 87. Sect. 4.
                     But as for Ignatius place, it is sufficiently answered before, in that which was answered to Cyprian his place, for when he sayeth the Bishop hath rule ouer all, he meaneth no more all in the prouince, than in all the world, but meaneth that flocke and congregation, whereof he is Bishop or minister. And when be calleth him Prince of the priests, although the title be to excessiue and big, condemned by Cyprian and the councel of Carthage, yet he meaneth no more the prince of all in the diocesse as we take it, or of the prouince, than he meaneth the Prince of all the priestes in the world, but he meaneth those fellow ministers and elders, that had the rule and gouernment of that particular Church and congregation, whereof he is a Bishop, as the great churches haue for the most part, both Elders which gouerne only, and ministers also to ayde one an other, and the principalitie that he which they called the Byshop had ouer the rest, hath bene before at large declared.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You very lightly shake of Ignatius wordes, but they haue more pyth in them, if it please you better to consider of them. For he maketh degrées of ministers, and the Bishop to be the chiefe: he placeth Deacons vnder Priests, and Priests vnder Bishops, so that he giueth to the Bishop superioritie and gouernment ouer both Priests and Deacons, which is the grounde of this cause: and it being graunted (as it muste néedes, neyther can this authoritie of Ignatius be auoyded) Aerius Heresie falleth, and so doth your whole assertion.
                        What is ment by Prince of Priests, Ignatius himselfe declareth, saying: 
                              Obtinens principatum & potestatem supra omnes: hauing chieftie and power ouer all.
                        
                        How this name may be wel vsed, I haue shewed before, where I haue also declared the meaning of Cyprians woordes, vttered in the hereticall Councell of Carthage, and therefore not coumpted in the number of those Councels.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 62. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 88. Sect. 1. 2.
                     But M. Doctor doth not remember, that whylest he thus reasoneth for the authoritie of the Bishop, he ouerthroweth his Archbyshop quite and cleane. For Ignatius will haue none aboue the Bishop but Christ, and he will haue an Archbishop.
                     I see a man cannot well serue two masters, but eyther he must displease the one and please the other, or by pleasing of one offend the other. For M. Doctor would fayne please and vphold both, and yet his proo
                           〈1 line〉
                        es are such, that euery proppe that he setteth vnder one, is an axe to strike at the other.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I remember it very well: and I know that an Archbishop is a Bishop, and that therfore there may be superioritie among Bishops, and yet nothing detracted from the woordes of Ignatius, I know likewise that as well the one as the other is cōdemned by you: and I am well assured that the proofe of the one is the proofe of the other, and therfore. M. Doctor may well serue two masters, but they be such as be not onely not contrary, one to the other, but so néerely linked and ioyned togither, that what soeuer pleaseth the one, doth also please the other. M. Doctors proppes and proofes are such: as M. T. C. is compelled to vse railing & flouting, in steade of answering, which is a shift, but how honest and Christian let the world iudge.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 63. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 73. Sect. 1.
                     
                        Iustinus Martyr one of the most auncient writers of the Greekes,Iustine Martyr. in his second Apologie ad Antoninum Pium, alloweth this superioritie, & calleth him that bare rule ouer the other ministers 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 88. Sect. 2.
                     But that M. Doctor deliteth alwayes where he might fetch at the fountayne, to be raking in ditches, he needed not to haue gone to Iustine Martyr for 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , when as S. Paule calleth1. Tim. 5▪
                         the ministers and Elders by this title. And if this place of Iustine make for an Archbishop, then in steade of an Archbishop in euery prouince we shall haue one in euery congregation. For Iustine declareth there, the leyturgie or manner of seruing God that was in euery church vsed of the Christians. And I pray you let it be considered what is the office of that 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , & see whether there be any resemblance in the world betweene him and an Archbishop. For he placeth his office to be in preaching, in conceyuing prayers, in ministring of the sacraments: of any cōmaundement which he had ouer the rest of the ministers, or of any such priuiledges as the Archbishop hath, he maketh not one worde. It may be that the same might haue the preheminence of calling the rest togither, and propounding the matter to the rest of the companie, & such like, as is before declared. As soone as euer you founde 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , you snatched that by and by, and went your wayes and so deceyue your selfe and others. But if you had read the whole treatise you should haue found that he was 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         of the people, for thus it is written in the same Apollogie, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Afterward bread is brought to the president of the brethren, calling the people as S. Paule doth continually brethren: And therefore these are Nay, they are yours, and like to the rest. M. Doctors arguments out of Martyrs place. There was a minister which did stand before, or was president of the rest in euery particular Church and congregation, therefore there was an Archbishop ouer all the prouince. And agayne there was one which ruled the people in euery congregation, therfore there was one that ruled all the ministers throughout the whole prouince. And albeit things were in great puritie in the dayes that Iustine liued, in respect of the times which followed, Antiquum obtinet. yet as there was in other thinges which appeare in his workes, and euen in the ministration of the Sacraments spoken of in that place corruption, in that they mingled water and wine togither, so euen in the ministerie there began to peepe out some thing which went from the simplicitie of the gospell: as that the name of 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         which was common to the Elders with the ministers of the worde, was (as it seemeth) appropriated vnto one.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Though notable & famous doctors be ditches with T. C. yet are they pleasant and cleare riuers with men of more liberall sciences. S. Paule 1. Timoth. 5. hath these woordes 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . &c. which derogate nothing frō any thing, that I haue alleaged, but iustifieth the same, for there it signifieth rule & gouernment, but yet in Iustine it signifieth some one that had the chiefe rule and gouernment ouer the rest, as M. Beza noteth vpon these woordes, 1. Ti. 5. Aduersus presbyterum &c. Praeterea
                              Beza. 
                              notandū est ex hoc loco Timotheum in Ephesino Presbyterio tum fuisse
                            
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           
                              id est, Antistitem vt vocat Iustinus. Furthermore it is to be noted out of this place that Timothie in the presbyterie, or colledge of ministers at Ephesus was 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , that is to say, the prelate or Bishop, as Iustinus calleth it. You may say vnto him as wel as to me, that he deliteth where he might search at the fountayne, to be raking in ditches, bycause he might haue had the same wordes spoken of all ministers in the same chapter of that Epistle to Timothie.
                        Furthermore that Iustinus Martyr doth vse this worde for him that hath authoritie
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               ouer ministers aswel as ouer the people. Idem.
                            ouer the rest, not only of the people, but of such also as be presbyteri: the same M. Beza testifieth vpon the first to the Philip. saying: Haec igitur olim erat Episcoporum appellatio, donec qui politiae causa reliquis fratribus in caetu praeerat, quem Iustinus 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           
                              vocat peculiariter dici Episcopus coepit. This therefore was the common name of Bishops, vntill he which for pollicie sake did gouerne the rest in the cōpany, whom Iustine calleth 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , began to be called peculiarly a Bishop. In which words M. Beza testifieth that he whom Iustinus called 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            did gouerne as well the other ministers, as he did the people. And whosoeuer doth duely consider Iustines woordes, & peruse that whole place, he shall easily vnderstand, that those whom he there calleth Brethren, were ministers & Deacons: for afterward speaking of the people, he calleth them by the name of people, as it is there to be séene.
                        
                           I know that Iustine speaketh of their manner of liturgie, but that doth not improue any thing that I haue affirmed, for I speake of the name 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , in that signification that Iustine doth vse it, which is for one that doth gouerne the rest. Wherefore this is my Argument, there was one among the ministers in Iustines time that did rule and gouerne the rest: Ergo, there was then superioritie among the ministers of the Churche, and one was aboue an other, which is the ouerthrow of your ground of equalitie, at the which I shoote: and the which beyng ouerthrowne, the superioritie of Bishops and Archbishops is soone proued. And agayne I say, that in Iustines time there was one that gouerned the rest of the ministers, Ergo, there may be one to do the same now in like manner. These be my reasons, as for yours they be lyke to the rest of your owne. But your best refuge is to discredite the Author, which you do in Iustine, as you haue done in the rest. There is no antiquitie of any credite with you, no not in in a matter of Historie as this is. For Iustinus doth but declare the manner vsed in the Churche in his time. It is well, that in the ende you confesse this name 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , to signifie in Iustine the authoritie of one minister: This bycause you are constrayned to acknowledge, you will do it with nipping and biting the Author, after your manner. Ignatius who was before Iustine, as you haue heard, vseth a more loftie woorde, for he doth call him, 
                              Princeps Sacerdotum: the Prince or chiefe of Priests.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 64. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 73. Sect. 1.
                     Cyrillus calleth him 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .Cyrill.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 88. Sect. 3.
                     An other of M. Doctors reasons, for to proue the Archbishop, is that, Cyrill maketh mention of an high priest, where vnto I answere, that he that bringeth in a priest into the church, goeth about to burie our sauiour Christe: for although it might be proued that the worde Priest were the same with the Grekes 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , yet (as shall appeare in his place) is the vse of this worde (priest) for a minister of the Gospell very daungerous. And as for him that bringeth in an high prieste into the Churche, he goeth about to put our sauiour Christe out of his office, who is proued in the Epistle to the Hebrues to be the onely high priest, and that there can be no more as long as the world endureth. And yet if all this were graunted, you are not yet come to that which you desire to proue, that is an Archbyshop. For if you looke in In what booke ▪
                        . Theodoret you shall finde this worde 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , which signifieth the high priesthood, to be nothing else but a byshopryke and in the seuenth chapter of that booke, and so forth diuers tymes, you shall haue 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         taken for a Bishop, as speaking of the councell of Nice, he sayth that there was 318. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         high priests. Now I thinke you wil not say there were 318. Archbishops, if you do, you are confuted, by all Ecclesiasticall wryters that euer I read, which speaking of them calleth them Byshops.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This name Priest is vsuallly applied to the minister of the Gospell, in all Histories, fathers and wryters of antiquitie. And the most of the latest writers do vse it, and make no great serupulositie in it, neyther doth the name Priest, burie our Sauiour Christe, as long as it is vsed for a minister of the Gospell: neyther is there any daunger in it at all, as long as the office is lawfull.
                        Not onely Cyrill vseth this name (high Priest) but Tertull. also in his booke De
                           Tertull. 
                           Baptismo, where he sayeth that Episcopus, is, 
                              summus sacerdos, The Bishop is the hie Prieste, and in lyke manner Theodorete, as you here say, and yet none of them ment to derogate any thing from the office of Christe.
                        I told you before how names proper to Christe, may be also attributed to men: this beyng graunted, I haue as much as I desire: for as the Bishop is called 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            in the respect of other Priestes that be inferiour vnto him, so is the chiefe Bishop called Archiepiscopus, in respect of other Bishops that be gouerned and directed by him. And as among the ministers there is one chéefe which is called a Bishop,

so among the Bishops there is one chéefe also that is called an Archbishop: and this is that ordo that Augustine speaketh of, as I haue sayd in my Answere to the Admoni
                              〈1 line〉
                           ion, in the woordes of M. Foxe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 65. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 73. Sect 2.
                     Theodoretus, li. 5. ca. 28. wryteth that Chrysostome beyng the BishopTheodoret of Chrysostome. of Constantinople, did not onely rule that Churche, but the Churches also in Thracia in Asia, and in Pontus.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 88. Sect 4.
                     Chrysostome followeth, which as M. Doctor sayth, ruled not only the church of Constantinople, but the churches of Thracia, Asia, & Pontus, and he sayeth it out of Theodorete. But herein it may appeare, that either M. Doctor hath a very euill conscience in falsifying writers, and that in the poynts which lie in controuersie, Or els you plucke your self by the nose. or els he hath taken his stuffe of certaine, at the second hand without any examination of it at all. For here he hath set downe in steade of (had care of the churches of Thracia, &c.) ruled the churches, the Greke is, The wordes of Theodoret clipped. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , it is translated also (prospexit): so that it appeareth he fetched it neyther from Theodorete in Greeke nor in Latine. And what is this to proue an Archbishop, that he had care of these churches: there is no minister but ought to haue care ouer all the churches thorough christendome, and to shewe that care for them in comforting or admonishing of them, by writing or by visiting them, What scrip ture expresseth these conditions and cautions▪
                         if the necessitie so require, and it is thought good by the churches, and leaue obteyned of the place where he is minister, vpon some notable and especiall cause, being some man of singular giftes, whose learning and credite may profite much to the bringing to passe of that thing, for the which he is to be sent. After this sort. As it ap
                              〈1 line〉
                            peareth by diuerse epistles of his. S. Cyprian being in Afrike had care ouer Rome in Europe, and wrote vnto the church there. After this sorte also was Ireneus Bishop of Lions sent by the french Churches, vnto the churches in Vntrue. Phrygia, and after this sorte haue M. Caluine, and M. Bez
                           〈1 line〉
                         bene sent from Geneua in Sauoy, to the Churches of Fraunce.Euseb. li. 5. cap. 3. & 4.
                     
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It shall appeare God willing, whether M. Doctors memory or yours be worse:The falsifying of Theodoret returned vpon the Replier. whether he hath an euill conscience in falsifying writers, or you in slaundering of him: whether he taketh his stuffe at the second hand, or you rather, that haue borrowed of other mē
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            collections, almost whatsoeuer you haue heaped togither in your booke. All this I say shall appeare, euen to trie your corrupt & vntrue dealing in this place: and certainely I cannot but maruell what affection hath so gotten the vpper hand of you, that it prouoketh you to such outrage
                              〈1 line〉
                           us speaches in a matter so manifestly counterfet. If you haue not séene the Author I will ascribe it to negligent ignorāce, but if you haue séene him, I cannot ascribe it to any other thing, than to vnsha
                              〈1 line〉
                           efast malice. The whole storie as it is in Theodoret is this: 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                           Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 28. 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Iohn the great hauing receyued the sterne of the Church, reproued the iniuries of certaine boldly, and counsayled the king and the Queene things c
                                 〈1 line〉
                              uenient, and exhorted the Priest
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              o walke according to the lawes appoynted. But such as were not afrayde to breake them, he suffered not to come to the table, saying it was not meete that those should enioye the honour of Priestes, which would not follow the conuersation of true Priestes. And this care 
                                 〈◊〉
                               vsed not only ouer that citie, but also ouer whole Thracia, which cōteyneth six prouinces, and ouer all Asia, which is gouerned vnder eleuen rulers: and moreouer he gouerned the Church of Pontus with these lawes, in which coūtrie are as many rulers as in Asia. First he sayth that Chrysostome tooke the stern
                                 〈1 line〉
                               or gouernmēt of the Church, then that he did
                           
                           freely reprehend vice. Thirdly, that he commaunded the Priests to liue according to the lawes. Fourthly, that he did excommunicate and depriue of their priestly honour such as durst transgresse. Is not this to rule? what Archbishop in England doth execute greater iurisdiction? Then it followeth immediatly in Theodor. and vvith this care he did prouide for, or embrace not only his citie, but the Churches of Thracia, &c. Where it is to be noted that Theodorete sayth with this care &c. meaning that as he had the gouernment of the Church of Cōstantinople, and did there reprehend vice, cōmaunded the Priests to liue according to the lawes, excōmunicate them that did not, and put them from their office, so did he also in the Churches of Thracia, Asia, and Pontus. Theodoretes words be 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           &c. and you haue craftely left out 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            that you might the rather cloke Theodoretes plaine meaning. Besides this Theodoret sayth in playne woordes, that he gouerned the Churches in Pontus with these lawes, the Gréeke woorde is 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        I shall moste hartely desire the Reader to consider this dealing of yours: surely I thinke fewe Papistes would haue dealt in lyke manner. And if the woordes of themselues were not playne (as they be most playne) yet very reason might haue taught you, that this was Theodoretes meaning, for if he should not haue ment some special care of these Churches, wherfore should he rather make particular mētiō of them, thā of other Churches? do you not thinke that wisé mē can easily espie your grosse shifts?
                        Cyprians care ouer Rome, was not lyke the care that he had ouer his owne Churches, it could not be sayd that he embraced Rome with the same care of gouernment, of reprouing, of excommunicating such as durst offend &c. that he did Carthage, and other places committed vnto him, as it is here sayd of Chrysostome.
                        I omit your ouersight in saying that Ireneus was sent to the Churches in Phrygia: for 
                              Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 3. & 4. (which places you quote in your margent to proue it) hath no such thing: only he sayth that Ireneus was sent to Rome to Eleutherius.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 66. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C Pag. 89. Sect. 1.
                     Now if you will conclude herevpon that Cyprian ruled the church of Rome, or Ireneus the Church of Phrigia, or M. Caluine, or M. Beza the churches of Fraunce, or that they were Bishops or Archbishops of those places, you shall but conclude as you were wont to do: but yet all men vnderstand, that here is nothing lesse than an Archbishop, or any such Bishop as we haue and vse in our church. And if so be that Chrysostome should be Bishop or Archbishop of al these churches, which were in all Asia, Pontus, Thracia, as you would giue the reader to vnderstand, you make him Bishop of Or els you are deceyued. more churches than euer the Pope of Rome was, when he was in his greatest pryde, & his empire largest. For there were sixe presidentships in Thracia, & in Asia there were an eleuen princes, & had seuerall regions or gouernments, & in Pontus as many, & if he were Bishop or Archbishop of all the churches within these dominions, he had neede of a long spone to feede with all. An vntruth as will appeare. It is certayne therfore that he was Bishop only of the church in Constantinople, & had an eye and a care to those other churches. And that he was Bishop of one citie or of one churche, it may appeare by that which I haue before alleaged out of the Greeke Scholiast vpon Titus, who citeth there Chrysostome, where it is sayd that S. Paule did not meane to make one ouer the whole Ile, The wordes of the Scholiast peruerted. but that euery one should haue his proper congregation &c. And in another place he sheweth the difference betwene the Emperour and the Bishop, that the one is ouer the3. Hom. Act. world, and the other, that is the Bishop, is ouer one citie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your exāples proue nothing, neither be they any thing like to this of Chrysostome,
                           Thracia, &c. annexed to the bishoprike of Constantinople. for Theodorete doth mention these Churches as places annexed to the Bishopricke of Constantinople, & properly apperteyning to the care and charge of Chrysostome the Bishop of that citie. Socrates speaking of a councell assembled at Constantinople, sayth thus: They do againe establish the fayth of the Coūcell of Nice: & deuiding prouincesSocrates, li. 5. cap. 8. they appoint Patriarkes, there was therfore allotted vnto Nectarius, the great and ample citie of Constantinople & Thracia, &c. And this Nectarius was Patriarch of Constantinople next before Chrysostome, so that it is manifest that Chrysostome was Patriarch or Archbishop both of Constantinople and also of Thracia, &c. SozomenusSozom. lib. 8. cap. 6. sheweth euidently that Chrysostome had iurisdiction ouer all Asia, and of other

places also, and that he executed iurisdiction there accordingly: For he deposed to theChrysostome 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 xerciseth Archiepiscopal iuris
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ictiō in Asia. number of 13. Bishops, some in Lycia, some in Phrygia, some in Asia, bycause they sould benefices and bestowed them for fauour, and for rewarde. And if you were not eyther very ignorant, or wilfully bent, you might haue read in Ecclesiasticall histories, that one Bishop had authoritie and charge ouer diuers Churches, long before Chrysostomes time, the which thing I haue also before proued by diuers examples.
                        That Chrysostome was Archbishop of all those Churches (although it be sufficiently proued by the testimonie of Theodorete a worthie writer and notable diuine: and by Sozomene also) yet will I adde (as a full confutation of all your phansies in this matter) the iudgement of the wryters and collectors of the Centuries, who being many learned, & trauayling especially in such matters, deserue great credit: In their 5. Centurie. cap. 10. they wryte thus of Chrysostome: 
                              Non autem tantùm istius Ecclesiae Pastorem
                              
                                 
                                    Cent. 5. cap. 10. Chrysostome Archbyshop of Thracia, Asi
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 , &c. 
                              egit &c. But he was not onely Pastor of this Churche (meaning Constantinople) but was Archbishop also or ouerseer of other Churches in Thracia, which was deuided into sixe presidentships, in Asia which was ruled of eleuen pretors, and in the region of Pontus, which is likewise deuided into eleuen presidentships. If 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o report of any historiographer will please you, what remedy: though you remayne willfull still, yet I trust the tractable Reader may here finde sufficient to satisfie him. For a further proofe that the Bishops of Constantinople were called Archbishops, I could referre you to the generall Councell of Calcedon which was Anno. 453. where Flauianus is called ArchbishopAct. 16. of Constantinople sundry times. Where also it appeareth that the Archbishop of Cō
                           stantinople, had the ordeyning, allowing and disallowing of the Bishops in Pontus, Asia, and Thracia. You are greatly deceyued in saying that if he were Archbyshop of al these Churches, he was Bishop of m
                              〈1 line〉
                           e Churches, than euer the Pope was in his greatest pryde: for euen all these Churches, and all other Churches were made subiect to him, when by Phocas he was made the head of the Church and vniuersall Bishop: and though he had not possession of all, yet did he clayme interest in all, and iurisdiction ouer all, or at the least ouer so many of them as professed Christianitie.
                        You say, it is certayne therefore that he was Bishop onely of the Church in Constantinople, and had an eye and care to those other Churches: and against this your owne certayntie without any ground or authoritie, I haue brought in Theodoret, Sozomene, the Councell of Calcedon, and the Centuries: although in effect you confesse asmuch as I desire: for there is neyther Archbishop nor Bishop in this Church, but he hath his peculiar sea and Church, and yet care of gouernment ouer other also, euen as Chrysostome had.
                        You haue alleaged nothing, neyther can you, to proue that Chrysostome had not gouernment ouer mo Churches than one. The Gréeke Scholiast (whom I haue answered) hath not one woorde to that purpose: for euery seuerall parish hath a Pastor,The Scholiast falsified by T. C. and to what purpose. notwithstāding the Bishop hath the care of gouernment of them, euen as Titus had in Creta. The wordes of the author be, 
                              Sed singulas ciuitates suum habere Pastorem, but euery citie should haue hir Pastor, And you haue translated it, that euery one shoulde haue his proper congregation: whereby you meane scant good fayth, but couertly go about to make your reader beleue; that the Scholiast would haue no ministers without a proper congregation. But of this and many other of your like corruptions, I trust the reader is already sufficiently instructed.
                        The woordes of Chrysostome 
                              Hom. 3. in Act.
                            be these: 
                              N
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 nne imperium orbis terrarū tenet imperator? Hic autem vnius ciuitatis Episcopus est. Doth not the Emperour gouerne the world? but this man is Bishop of one Citie. The which woordes are spoken of Chrysostome in this sense, that he which is but Bishop of one Citie, is asmuch subiect to affections and troubles as the Emperour is, that gouerneth the whole worlde. This to be Chrysostomes meaning the woordes following do declare: wherefore he doth not in that place shew any difference betwixt the Emperour & a Byshop, in the largnes or straightnesse of their charges, & places of gouernment (as you say) but in the troubles, in the opprobries & slaunders that they be subiect vnto, wherewith the Bishop of one citie is more tossed, thā the Emperour of the whole world: which Chrysostome speaketh

hyperbolycally, for there was not one Emperour ouer the whole worlde at any time, and he himselfe being Bishop had the care and charge of diuerse Cities, wherfore he must be vnderstoode 
                              secundùm subiectam materiam: as the matter in hand requireth.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 67. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 73. Sect. 3.
                     
                        Theodoretus Episcopus Cyri in an Epistle that he writte to Leo, sayth of Theodoret
                              〈1 line〉
                           , himselfe, that he had gouernment ouer. 800. Churches.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 89. Sect. 2.
                     Touching Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus,You 
                              〈◊〉
                            those that 
                              〈◊〉
                            agayns
                              〈1 line〉
                            you. to let passe that which the Bishops of Egypt cried in the Councel of Calcedon, that he was no Bishop, it is to be obserued, that which the EmperorsIn the. 1. Act. Theodosius & Ualentinian, write vnto Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, that he had commaunded Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus that he should kepe himselfe vnto his owne Church only: wherbyIn the same Act. it appeareth,An 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ & 
                              〈1 line〉
                           oule oue
                              〈1 line〉
                           sight. that he medled in more Churches than was meete he should. Besides, that wanteth not suspition that he speaketh this of himselfe, especially when he sayth that there was not in all those. 800. Churches one 
                           〈1 line〉
                        are, that isVntrue 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ terpretation. one hypocrite or euill man.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In the conuocation holden in the first yeare of Quéene Marie, the testimonie ofTheodorete can haue no credite either with the Papists, or with the Replier. this Theodoret, being alledged agaynst transubstantiation, D. Watson bicause hée coulde not answere the authoritie, denyed the Authour, accusing him to be a Nestorian. To whom replie was made, that it was but a lewde refuge, when he could not answere, to denie the Authour. The same may be sayde to you, dealing in the selfe same maner. For this Theodorete as he is a notable Hystoriographer, & of great credite in the reporting of things done by other, & before his time, so is there no cause at all why he shoulde be suspected speaking of him selfe. And he himselfe doth report of himselfe in that Epistle written by him to Leo, that he had not onely gouerned these 800. Churches, but so gouerned them by the space of. 26. yeares, that he susteyned no reproch or blame of the bishops of Antioche: whereof I might also truely gather, that the Bishop of Antioche was as it were his Archbishop or Metropolitane. This authoritie or rather example of Theodorete is so plaine, that you are driuen to séeke vnlawfull shiftes to deface a worthie wryter: but let vs sée how iustly.
                        You say, that the Bishops of Egypt cryed in the Councell of Calcedon, that he was no Bishop, and you note in the margent the. 1. Act. of that Councell: and I say vnto you againe, that the whole Councell in the. 8. Action, cryed out and sayde, 
                              Theodoretus dignus
                              Act. 8. Con. Cal
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ed. 
                              est sede Ecclesiae, orthodoxum Ecclesia pastorem recipiat. Theodoret is worthie the seat of the Church (that is the Bishoprike) let the Church receyue him as a Catholike Pastor.
                        
                        You adde, that Theodosius and Ualentinian, writte vnto Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria,The corrupt dealing of T. C. that he had commaunded Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus, that he shoulde keepe himselfe to hys owne Church onely, &c. To this I answere, that you haue here delt, as commonly you do, that is, verie corruptly: for the wordes that followe in the same Epistle doe euidently declare, that the Emperours meaning was, that Theodorete shoulde kéepe himselfe at home, and not come to the Synode, vnlesse it should please the whole Synode to accept of him, and to admit him. The which also appeareth in another Epistle of the Emperours to Dioscorus in that first Act of the Councell of Calcedon (in the which Epistle the Emperour calleth the Bishop of Ierusalem Archbishop) It appeareth that Theodorete was first by the Emperours commaundement inhibited from comming to that Synode, which was called the seconde Councell of Ephesus, and afterwarde that he was con
                              〈1 line〉
                           mned in the same Synode in his absence, and not called to answere for himselfe, as he declareth in his Epistle written to Leo. But he was restored in this generall Councell of Calcedon, and that seconde Councell of Ephasus

was afterward condemned: so that all this that you speake to the discredite of Theodorete is but a friuolous, and yet a corrupt shift.
                        You do but as you are woont, when you expounde that which Theodorete speaketh of his 800. Churches being without tares, of hypocrites and euill men. If you had read the authour your selfe, I thinke you would not so grossely haue erred: his words be these. By Gods helpe I deliuered more than a thousande soules from Martions heresie,Theod. in Epist. ad Leonē. and I conuerted many to Christ the Lorde from the sect of Arius, and Eunomius, & vt in octingentis Ecclesijs pastor essem, mibi sortitò obtigit: tot enim paroecias, habet Cyrus: and it was allotted to me to be pastor in 800. Churches, for Cyrus hath so many parishes: in the whichHow Theodorete le
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 t no tares in his 800. churches through your prayers there did not remaine one tare: sed ab omnierrore haeretico liberatus fuit grex noster, but our flocke was deliuered from all hereticall error. Theodorete therefore meaneth heresie, he meaneth not hypocrisie, there was not one heretike in all his Bishoprike, he doth not say one hypocrite or euill man: so that you are farre wyde and do Theodorete double iniurie, for you do both slaunder him, and misconstrue him.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 68. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 89. Sect. 3.
                     Nowe, that it may appeare what great likelihoode there is betwene this Theodoret, and our Lorde Bishops and Archbishops, it is to be considered which he writeth of himselfe in the Epistle vnto Leo, that is, that he hauing beene. 26. yeares Bishop, was knowne of all those that dwelt in those partes, that he had neuer house of his owne, nor fielde, nor halfepenn
                           〈1 line〉
                        e, not so much as a place to be buryed in, but had willingly contented himselfe with a poore estate, be
                           〈1 line〉
                        yke he had a verie leene Archbishoprike, and if the fatte morsels of our Bishoprikes, and Archbishoprikes were taken and employed to their vses of maintenance of the poore, and of the Ministers, and of the Uniuersities, whiche are the seede of the ministerie, I thinke the heate of the disputation, and contention for Archbishops and Byshops woulde be well cooled.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        We speak
                              〈1 line〉
                            of the office and authoritie, not of the liuing, to the spoile of the which,Comparison made in office, not in riches. you and most of your fautors haue more respect, than you haue to the office, thoughe you pretende the contrarie: and yet it followeth not, but that Theodorete had lyuing sufficient, and might haue béene more welthie, but as it séemeth he professed voluntary pouertie of purpose, for he gaue away that also whiche was left vnto him of his parents, as he in that Epistle testifyeth saying, 
                              Sed sponte electam amplexus sum paupertatem: but I imbraced pouertie which I chose willingly. His Bishoprike might be of large reuenues, and yet he poore, séeing that he had chosen, and professed pouertie. But if Bishops be better nowe prouided for, than they were then, it is their partes to be thankefull vnto God and the Prince for it, and to vse it well. It is not your dutie to enuie their prosperitie, bicause you are not in case your selfe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 69. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 73. Sect. vlt.
                     But what shall I neede to vse such proofes in a matter so plaine, and euident to all such as haue read any thing of antiquitie? The best learned men of our dayes, and diligentest preferrers of the Gospell of Christ do with one consent (one or two of the latest writers excepted) acknowledge and confesse that this distinction of degrees, and superioritie in the gouernment of the Church; is a thing most conuenient and necessarie.
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 89. Sect. 4.
                     Now good reader thou hearest what M. Doctor hath beene able to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ake togither out of the olde fathers, which he sayth are so plaine in this matter, and yet can shew nothing to the purpose. Heare also what he sayth out of the writers of our age, all which he sayth (except one or two) are of hys iudgement, and allow well of this distinction of degrees.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Well what I haue raked togither, and howe you haue carted these rakings away, I commit to the iudgement of the learned. These raking termes, in my opinion are not séemely in him, that would séeme so much to iustifie himselfe, and to condemne other of immodestie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 70. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 74. Sect. 1.
                     
                        Caluine in his Institutions sayth on this sort, that euery prouinceCaluin. Cap. 8. Sect. 54. had among their Bishops an Archbishop, and that the Councell of Nice did appoynt Patriarches vvhich should be in order and dignitie aboue Archbishops, it vvas for the preseruation of discipline: Therfore for this cause especially vvere those degrees appoynted, that if any thing shoulde happen in any particular Church vvhich could not there be decided, it might be remoued to a prouinciall Synode: If the greatnesse or difficultie of the cause required greater consultation, then vvas there added Patriarches togither with the Synodes, from vvhom there vvas no appeale but vnto a general Coūcel▪ This kind of gouernment some called Hierarchiam, an improper name and not vsed in the scriptures: for the spirit of God vvil not haue vs to dreame of dominion and rule in the gouernment of the Church: But if (omitting the name) vve shall consider the thing it selfe, vve shall finde that these olde Byshops did not frame any other kinde of gouernment in the Church, frō that vvhich the Lorde hath prescribed in his vvorde. Caluine here mislyketh this name Hierarchia, but he alloweth the names and authoritie of Patriarches and Archbishops, and thinketh the gouernment of the Church then vsed, not to differ from that which God in his worde prescribeth.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 89. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 90. Sect. 1. 2.
                     M. Caluine first is cyted to proue those offices of Archbishop, Primate, Patriarch: The names whereof he cannot abyde, and as for him he approueth onely, that there should be some, which when difficult causes arise, which cannot be ended in the particular Churches might referre the matters to Synodes and prouinciall Councelles, and which might do the offices whiche I haue spoken of before of gathering voyces. &c.
                     But that he liketh not of those dominations and large iurisdictions, or at all of the Bishops or Archbishops, which we haue nowe, it may appeare plainly ynough both in that place, when as he will haue his wordes drawen to no other than the olde Bishops, shutting out thereby the Bishops that now are, as also in other places, and namely vpon the Philippians, where reasoning agaynstPhil. 1. this distinction betwene Pastor and Bishop, and shewing that giuing the name of Bishop, to one man onely in a church, was the occasion why he afterwarde vsurped do
                           〈1 line〉
                        ination ouer the rest, he sayth after this sort: In deede I graunt (sayth he) as the dispositions and maners of men are, order cannot stande amongst the ministers of the worde, vnlesse one be ouer the rest, I meane (saith he) of euerie seuerall and singular bodie, not of a whole prouince, much lesse of the whole worlde.
                     Now if you will needes haue M. Caluins Archbishop, you must not haue him neither ouer a Prouince nor Diocesse, but onely ouer one singular and particular congregation: how much better therefore were it for you to seeke some other shelter agaynst the storme than M. Caluins, which will not suffer you by any meanes to couer your selfe vnder his winges, but thrusteth you out alwayes as soone as you enter vpon him forceably.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        M. Caluine affirmeth directly, that euery prouince among their Bishops hadCaluine acknowledgeth the names, 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              nd the end of thē, and alloweth the kinde of gouernment. an Archbishop, and that the Councell of Nice did a ppoynt Patriarkes: he sayeth that these degrées were appoynted for the preseruation of discipline, and by calling of Synodes to ende controuersies that arise in particular Churches he well lyketh this kinde of gouernment: onely he mislyketh the name (Hierarchia) what can bée plainlyer spoken both of the name and office of the Archbishop? As for your fonde deuise that it shoulde be his office onely to gather voyces, &c. it is singular to your selfe, you haue not one learned wryter (that I can read) with you.
                        The Bishops that now are in this Church, neyther haue, nor chalenge to haue more iurisdiction than the olde Bishops had, nay they haue not so much, as it is euidently to be séene in the olde Canons: and therefore M. Caluine allowing of them, doth allow of ours also.
                        His place to the Philippians maketh agaynst you, for he alloweth one to be superiour amongst the ministers, and to rule the rest, and sayth. that as the nature and disposition of men nowe is, there coulde be no order except it were so: which doth vtterly ouerthrow the equalitie that you and the Admonition dreame of. He saith that he speaketh de singulis corporibus. which he cannot vnderstand of particular parishes, for euery particular parishe hath not many ministers: so that of necessitie he must haue manie senerall Churches to make the bodie he speaketh of: and therefore a Diocesse or a prouince. I thinke M. Caluine did thinke Geneua, and the townes therevnto adioyning and belonging to be but one bodie: so doe I thinke London and the Diocesse therevnto perteyning to be but one particular bodie. And likewyse the Prouince of Canterburie, distinguished into diuerse partes and members, to be but one bodie in like maner. Neyther do I thinke that master Caluine euer shewed his mislyking of these degrées in this Churche as they be nowe vsed: for (as I sayde before) the great abuse of them vnder the Pope, made him more to mislyke of them, than hée woulde haue done, but in these wordes that I haue repeated of his, he testifyeth asT. C. letteth that slip, that maketh against him. much as I desire, that is the antiquitie and the cause, and vse of those offices, and (that which you omit and skip ouer) that herein the olde Bishops did frame no kinde of gouernment in the Church, diuerse from that which the Lord hath prescribed in his word: which neyther you nor your adherents can abide to heare of.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 71. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 90. Sect. 3.
                     But here I cannot let passe M. Doctours ill dealing, whiche recyting so muche of master Caluine, Vniust accusation. cutteth him off in the waste, and leaueth quite oute that whiche made agaynst him, that is whiche M. Caluine sayeth in these woordes: Althoughe (sayeth he) in this disputation, it may not be passed ouer that this office of Archbyshop or Patriarke, was most rarely and seldome vsed, which dealing seemeth to proceede of a verie euill conscience.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I knowe not what perfection is in your booke, more than in mine, but I am sure that I haue followed mine owne booke faythfully and truely, neither haue I omitted one worde that maketh eyther with me or agaynst me: and therefore you haue vniustly charged mée. The booke that I follow was printed 
                              Anno. 1553. wherein there are no such wordes, that this office 
                              〈◊〉
                            Archbishop or Patriarke was most rarely and seldome vsed. Neither is there cause why. M. Caluine shoulde so say, for he could not but knowe that these offices haue had continuance in the Churche, at the least, since before the Councell of Nice, for there are these wordes, mos antiquus perduret, &c. and that they were continually affixed to the Bishoprikes of certaine Cities, as Rome, Antioch. &c.
                        
                           In déede in the last edition of his institutions, he hath these wordes, quanquam in hac disputatione praeteriri non potest, quod rarissimi erat vsus, which wordes he referreth toThe vse of the Patriarch rare, in what sense▪
                            the office of a Patriarch, whome he sayth the Nicene Councell did place in dignitie and order aboue Archbishops, for the preseruation of discipline, neither doth he say that the office of a Patriarke was moueable, or chosen at euery action, (for then shoulde he affirme that which is repugnant to all Hystoryes, Councelles▪ and auncient wryters that speake of Patriarkes) but his meaning is, that there was but seldome tymes occasion offered for Patriarkes, to exercise the authoritie they had ouer Archbishoppes, which is the occasion that the most authours doe confounde them, and thinke them to be all one: other meaning than this, his wordes neyther can nor doe admit.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 72. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 74. Sect. vlt.
                     
                        Hemingius in his Enchirid. sheweth, that these degrees in theHemingi
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ▪
                         Church be necessarie, & that discipline cannot be kept without them. And he addeth that their Church kepeth this forme, Necmouetur (saith he) 
                           Anabaptistarum ac Libertinorū effreni libidine, qui ecclesiam Christi barbaricum quendam bominū caetum, sine ordine fingunt, cū habeat nostra ecclesia non solū exemplū Apostolicae & purioris ecclesiae, verum etiam mandatum spiritus sancti omnia ordinaté & decenter ad aedificationem faciendi. Neyther is our Church moued vvith the licencious libertie of Anabaptists and Libertines, vvhich feine the Church of Christ to be a barbarous confused societie vvithout order, seeing that our Church hath not onely the example of the Apostolicall and most pure Church, but also the commaundement of the spirite of God, to do all things orderly and decently to edifie.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 90. Sect. 4.
                     Then followeth Hemingius, who you say approueth these degrees of Archbishop, Metropolitane, Bishop, Archdeacon, for so you must needes meane, when you say he approueth theseCap. 10. 3. class. lib. Enchirid. vvhere also among the popish orders he reckeneth the 
                              〈◊〉
                           . degrees, or else you say nothing, for therevpon is the question. Nowe howe vntruly you speake, let it be iudged by that which followeth. First he sayth that our Sauiour Christ in S. Luke distinguisheth, and putteth a difference betweene the office of a Prince, and the office of the Minister of the Church, leauing dominion to the Princes, and taking it altogither from the Ministers▪ here you see, not onely howe he is agaynst you, in your exposition in the place of S. Luke, which woulde haue it nothing else but a prohibition of ambition, but also howe at a worde, he cutteth the throte of your Archbishop, and Bishoppe as it is nowe vsed. And afterwarde speaking of the Churches of Denmarke, he sayeth they haue Christ for their heade, and for the outwarde discipline, they haue Magistrates to punishe with the sworde, and for to exercise the ecclesiasticall discipline, they haue Bishoppes, Pastours, Doctours, which may keepe men vnder with the worde, without vsing any corporall punishment. Here is no mention of Archbyshoppes, Primates, Metropolitanes. And althoughe he sheweth that they keepe the distinction betweene Bishoppes and Ministers, agaynst which there hath beene before spoken, yet he sayeth that the authoritie which they haue, is as the authoritie of a father, not as the power of a mayster, which is farre otherwise here. So is the condition of a good seruant vnder a good master, muche better than the condition of an vnruly sonne vnder a wise father. For the condition of many seruaunts vnder their maysters, is much more free than the condition of a Minister vnder his Bishop. And afterwarde he sheweth wherein that authoritie or dignitie of the Bishop ouer the Minister lyeth, that is in exhorting of him, in chyding of him▪ as he doth the lay people, and yet he will haue also the Minister, although not with suche authoritie, after a modest sort to do the same vnto the Bishop. And so he concludeth, that they reteyne these orders, notwithstanding the Anabaptistes. Nowe let the reader iudge whether Hemingius be truely or faythfully alledged or no, or whether Hemingius do say that they haue in their Church Archbishoppes, Primates; Metropolitanes, Archdeacons, or whether the Byshoppes in the Churches of Denmarke are any thing like ours. For I 
                           〈◊〉
                         omitte that he speaketh there agaynst all pompe in the Ministerie, all worldly superioritie or 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ghnesse, bycause I And therefore you cu
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            & 
                              〈◊〉
                            sentences. loue not to wryte out whole pages, as M. Doctor doth out of other mens wrytings, to helpe to make vp a booke.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Hemin. in that very place quoted in your margēt hath first these words: 
                              Praeterea cū hic c
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 tus, &c. Furthermore seing this society is ruled by the word of god, there are in it two sorts

of men, that is to say the preachers of the worde, and their hearers, which do reuerence andHemingius alloweth distinction of degrees in the ministerie. loue one another as fathers and children. But in the Ministers there is great diuersitie: for although the authoritie of all Ministers in respect of spirituall regiment is all one (for of externall discipline shall be spoken in the proper place) yet there are diuerse orders and degrees of honour and dignitie: and that partly by the worde of God, partly by the approbation and allowance of the Church. Where first he alloweth this distinction which you so greatly mislyke that all Ministers be equall touching spirituall iurisdiction, that is their ministerie, but not concerning externall discipline: then doth he allowe degrées of dignitie and superioritie among the Clergie: the which after that he hath prooued by the Scripture, as namely the. 4. to the Ephesians, and by the examples of Paule,Hemingius acknowledgeth Patriarches in the primitiue Churche. The office of Patriaches in the primatiue Church. Timothie, and Titus, he procéedeth and goeth on forwarde: and sayth, 
                              Ecclesia. &c. The Church, to whome the Lorde hath giuen power vnto edification, hath ordeyned an order of ministeries for hir profite, that all things might be rightly ordeyned for the reedifying of the bodie of Christ. Hereof the Primitiue Church following the tymes of the Apostles, did appoynt some Patriarkes, whose office it was to prouide that the Byshoppes of euerie 
                                 〈◊〉
                               shoulde be rightly ordeyned and elected: that the Bishops shoulde doe their duetie truely: and that the Clergie and people shoulde obey them in those things that perteyned to the Lorde: it appoynted also Chorepiscopos, (that is coadiutors of Bishoppes whome we nowe call Prouostes) some Pastors, and Catechistes. This was the ordination of the Primitiue Church. Wherein he plainly declareth these degrées that I speake of (for vnder the name of Patriarkes, it is euident that he comprehendeth Archbyshops or Metropolitanes) to haue bene in the Primitiue Church, immediately after the Apostles tyme, and in the purest time of the Church: than the which what can be spoken more directly for my purpose, whose chiefe intent is, to proue the antiquitie of these names and offices?
                        After this he sheweth the abuses of these offices in the corruption of doctrine vnder the Pope, and he doth not onely name Archbishops, but Bishops also, Curates, and other, and therefore the note in your margent, is but a note of a speciall spyte agaynst the Archbishops. In the end speaking of Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors, he sayth thus. 
                              Inter hos ministros, &c. Amongst these ministers also our Churche acknowledgeth degreesTo take away degrees is barbarousnes. and orders of dignitie, for the diuersitie of giftes, the greatnesse of labour, and the worthinesse of their calling: and iudgeth it to be barbarous, to will to take this order out of the Church: It iudgeth that other Ministers ought to obey their Bishops in all things that tendMinisters subiect to Bishops. to the edification of the Church, according to the worde of God, and the profitable order of the Church: It iudgeth that the Bishops haue authoritie ouer the other ministers of the Church, not such as is of masters, but of fathers. Wherby he acknowledgeth distinction of degrées and superioritie among Ministers, and the iurisdiction of Bishops ouer other Ministers: After all this he concludeth with these wordes conteyned in mine answere: Nowe let the reader iudge whether I haue otherwise reported of Himingius than he himselfe in that Chapter affirmeth: and whether he consent vnto me that woulde haue distinction of degrées among the Ministers, or to you that would haue an equalitie which he calleth an Anabaptisticall and barbarous confusion.
                        Touching your notes gathered out of him, I will briefly answere: first, in the exposition of the. 22. of Luke, he is not agaynst me, for I would not haue Archbishops or Bishops. &c. to take from Kings their rule and dominion as doth the Pope: neyther woulde I haue them to reigne ouer the people as Kings and Princes do. And I doe not thinke but that the authoritie and superioritie that they haue, is a ministerie for the quietnesse of the Church, and the commoditie of other, and yet a gouernment to: for the Apostle sayth, 
                              ad Hebr. 13. Obedite his qui praesunt vobis, Obey them thatHeb. 13. beare rule ouer you &c. Hemingius in that place especially dealeth agaynst the two swordes of the Bishop of Rome, and his excessiue pompe.
                        For the kinde of authoritie that the Bishop hath ouer the Ministers, that it shouldWhat kind of authoritie the Bishos exercise. be of a father, and not of a master, I agrée with him, and I knowe that all you speake to the contrarie in the gouernment of this Churche, is most vntrue: For vndoubtedly if they haue offended in any thing, it is in to much lenitie, whiche is a fault euen

in a father. The authoritie that Hemingius giueth to the ciuill Magistrate, we acknowledge with him to be moste due, and I would to God you also dyd in heart and mouthe confesse the same. Thus you sée that Hemingius and we agrée, and that there is nothing ascribed vnto him, whiche is not playnely to be founde in him.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 73. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 75. Lin. 11. & Sect. 1.
                     Wherefore thus I conclude with the very wordes of that worthyM. Foxe▪
                         man, (who hathe so well deserued of this Churche of Englande) Master Foxe: In the ecclesiasticall estate vve take not avvay the distinction of ordinarie degrees, suche as by the Scripture be appoynted, or by the Primitiue Churche allovved, as Patriarkes or Archebishops, Bishops, ministers, and deacons, for of these foure vve especially reade as chief: in vvhich foure degrees as vvegraunt diuersitie of office, so vve admit in the same also diuersitie of dignitie: neyther denying that vvhich is due to eache degree, neyther yet maynteyning the ambition of any singular person. For as vve giue to the minister place aboue the Deacon, to the Bishop aboue the minister, to the Archbishop aboue the Bishop, so vve see no cause of inequalitie, vvhy one minister should be aboue another minister, one Bishop in his degree aboue another Bishop to deale in his dioces: or an Archbishop aboue an other Archbishop: and this is to keepe an order duely and truely in the Church, according to the true nature and definitiō of order by the authoritie of Augustine, lib. de Ciui. Ordo est parium disparium
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               rerum sua cui
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               loca tribuens dispositio.
                         Hitherto M. Foxe.
                     Nowe let the indifferent Reader iudge whether these offices be straunge and vnheard of in the Church of Christ, or no.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 90. Sect. vlt.
                     M. Doctor closeth vp this matter with M. Foxe, but eyther for feare that the place shoulde be founde, that there might be answere, or for feare that M. Foxe shoulde giue me the solution which hath giuen you the obiecion, he would neyther quote the place of the booke, nor the booke it selfe, he hauing written diuers. You can not speake so muche good of M. Foxe, whiche I wyll not wyllingly subscribe vnto: and if it be any declaration of good wyll, and of honor, that one beareth to another, to reade that which he writeth, I thinke I maruel 
                              〈◊〉
                            place 
                              〈◊〉
                            cape so 
                              〈◊〉
                            a r
                              〈1 line〉
                           ader. I haue read more of him, than you. For I haue read ouer his booke of Martyrs, and so I think dyd neuer you: for if you had read so diligently in M. Foxe, as you haue beene hasty to snatche at this place, he woulde haue taughtePag. 78. of the booke of Actes. you the forgery of these Epistles, whereout you fetche your authorities, and woulde haue shewed you that the distinguishing of the orders of Metropolitanes, Bishops, and other degrees, whiche you say sometimes had their beginnings in the Apostles tymes, sometimes you can not tell when, were not in Higinus tyme, whyche was. 180. yeares after Christe. I A suspicious head. perceyue you feare M. Foxe is an enimie vnto your Archbishop and primate, and therfore it seemeth you went about to corrupte him with his prayse, and to seeke to drawe him, if it were possible, vnt
                           〈1 line〉
                         the Archbishop, and if not, yet at the least that he would be no enimie, if he woulde not, nor coulde not be his friend. You make me suspect that your prayse is not harty, but pretended, bicause you doe so often and so bitterly speake agaynst all those that wyll not receyue the cappe, and surplesse, and other ceremonies, whereof M. Foxe declareth his great misliking. For answere vnto the place, bicause I remember it not, nor meane not to reade ouer the whole booke to seeke it, I say first as I sayde before, that there may be somethyng before or after, whych may giue the solution to this plac
                           〈1 line〉
                        , especially seeing M. Foxe in another place page. 96. prouing the Epistles of Stephanus to be counterfeyt, he vseth this reason, because the fyft canon of the sayd Epistles, solemnly entreateth of the difference betweene, Primates, Metropolitanes, and Archbishops, which distinction (sayth he) of titles and degrees, sauour more of ambition than persecution. Moreouer I saye, that M. Foxe wryting a storie, dothe take greater payne, and looketh more diligently to declare what is done, and in what tyme, and by whome, than howe iustly or bniustly, howe conueniently or inconueniently it is done. Last of all, if any thing be spoken there to the hinderance of the sinceritie of the Gospell, I am well assured that M. Foxe, whyche hathe traueled so muche and so profitably to that ende, will not haue hys authoritie or name therein to bryng any preiudice. Nowe wyll I also ioyne wyth you, and leaue it to the iudgemente of the indifferent Reader, howe well out of the

Scriptures, Councels, wryters olde and newe, you haue proued eyther the lawfulnesse at all of the names of Archbishops, Patriarkes, Archdeacons, Primates, or of the lawfulnesse of the office of them, and of Bishops which be in our times.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you had so diligently read M. Foxe his booke of Martyrs, as you boast and brag that you haue done, then could not this place haue béene so straunge vnto you, for it is in the, 20. page of his first tome, where he hath an whole treatise touching the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome, and speaketh of this matter at large. The words be his own, and expresse his owne iudgement of these degrées & offices in this Church of Englande. It had béene some token of modestie, so to haue commended your selfe, and your owne reading, that you had not depraued any other mans: But to cōmend your selfe, and to detract from an other, is eyther arrogant foolishnesse, or foolishs arrogancie. I can bring foorth good testimonies of my reading of these bookes, thoughe I make no vragge thereof, or vayne comparisons.
                        I haue alleaged none of these Epistles other wyse than M. Foxe him selfe hathe alleaged them.
                        M. Foxe hathe shewed him selfe (in the place by me cited out of his booke) to be no 
                              〈◊〉
                            eyther to Archbishop, Priuate, or Bishop, for I am sure he speaketh as he thinketh. He is not a man like to be corrupted with prayse, and therefore in so saying, you doe vs bothe great iniurie.
                        You may not iudge my heart: I thinke of M. Foxe as of one that I loue and reuerence, I will not vtter all that I could, least I should séeme to flatter.
                        There is nothing that goeth eyther before that place, or followeth after it, that can procure any other sense to his wordes, than that in the which I haue set them down. I doe not alleage M. Foxe for the originall of these names and offices, but for the allowance of them. These words that I haue recited are not spoken in the waye of any hystorie, but of the order of gouernment of this Church, which he alloweth, and I dare saye for him, that he hathe héereinspoken nothing, whiche he thinketh maye hurte the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of the Gospell. And I am right well content to let the godly Reader iudge of bothe our proofes.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The defense of the answere of Master Iewell, concerning Archbishops. &c. agaynst the vnreuerende Replie of T. C.
               
                  Chap. 4. the first Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag▪ 91. Sect. 1.
                     And for as much as I haue purposed to answere in one place that which is scattered in diuers. I 
                           〈◊◊◊〉
                         halfe a sheete of 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ which is annexed of late vnto the booke, put foorth in the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ and vnder the credite of the Bishop of Sarisburie, wherein I will say nothing of those 
                           〈◊〉
                         & sharpe w
                           〈1 line〉
                        rds, which are gyuen partly in the beginning, when he calleth the propounders of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         why
                           〈1 line〉
                        h 
                           〈◊〉
                         archebishops and archedeacons nouices, partly in the ende when he 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         children, and the doctrine of A shameless
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            vn
                              〈1 line〉
                           kedlye. the Gospell wantonnesse. &c. If he had ly
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        , 
                           〈◊〉
                         learning and grauittie, and otherwyse good desertes of the Churche, in defending the 
                           〈◊〉
                         thereof agaynst the Papistes, we could haue easily borne it at his hands: nowe he is dead and 
                           〈◊〉
                         vp 
                           〈◊〉
                         peace, 
                           〈◊〉
                         were agaynst all humanitie to digge or to breake vp hys graue, onely I 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        t 
                           〈◊〉
                         the consideration of the Reader vpon those things whiche are alleaged, to iudge whether it or 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         or 
                           〈◊〉
                        , which is confirmed by so graue testimonies of the aun
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                         worke of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you doubt whether the Bishop of Sarisbury were the author of that half shéete of paper, or no, you may sée his owne hande writing. If you call the words which he vseth there 
                              〈◊〉
                            and sharpe, what shall we thinke of yours? we had néede terme them Serpentine or viperous: or if there can be any other name that better expresseth such

immodest, contemptuous and scoffing spéeches. Hypocrita quid vides fest
                                 〈…〉
                               in oculo fratris tui. &c? But what are these biting and sharpe wordes that he vseth? forsoothe that he calleth the propounders of the proposition whych concerneth Archbishops and Archedeacons,Why. T. C. scometh so muche at the words of the Bishop. nouices: and in the ende he calleth them children, and their doctrine wantonnesse. Oh these be byting and sharpe words: but wouldest thou knowe good Reader whye T. C. taketh these wordes so gréeuously: euen bicause they touche him selfe. For the man is of that humilitie and patience, that if there be neuer so little signification giuen of any vnskilfulnesse or lacke of learning in him selfe, he roareth like a lyon, & swelleth like the sea: for none of that faction can in any case abide to haue their learning touched:The malicious nature of that faction. and they will not sticke in commending them selues, to deface all other, yea euen that notable Iuell, whose bothe labour and learning they doe enuie, and among them selues depraue, as I haue heard with mine owne eares, and a number more besides. For further proofe wherof I doe but referre you to the reporte, that by this faction was spred of him after his laste Sermon at Paules crosse, bicause he did confirme the doctrine before preached by a famous and learned man, touching obedience to the Prince and lawes. It was then straunge to me to heare so notable a Bishop, so learned a man; so stoute a champion of true religion, so paynefull a Prelate, so vngratefully, and spitefully vsed, by a sorte of wauering, wicked, & wretched tongues. But it is their manner; except you please their humor in all things, be you neuer so well learned, neuer so paynfull, so zelous, so vertuons, all is nothing with them, but they will depraue you, rayle on you, backbite you, inuentlyes of you, and spred false rumors, as though you were the vilest persons in the whole earth.
                        And consider whether T. C. be not euen nowe in that vayne: for howe maliciouslyThe Bishop maliciously staundered by T. C. doth he slaunder that so Reuerend Bishop, saying, that he calleth ye doctrine of the Gospell wantonnesse, when he speaketh of their childishe and phantasticall deuises, excepte all were Gospell that they speake, or that commeth from them. Pardon me, thoughe I speake something earnestly: it is in the behalfe of a Iuell, that is contemned and defaced by contentious and vngratefull persons. If it had pleased God to haue suffered him to liue vnto this day, in answering this Replie, he should no doubt haue proued his byting and sharpe wordes, (as they be called) to be moste true. But séeing that he is at rest, and not héere to answere for him selfe, though in respecte of him I am farre vnméete to intermedle in his doings, yet in respecte of the cause and aduersarie, I will be bolde to iustifie his answers.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     ¶ The Iudgement of that Reuerende father Iohn late Bishop of Sarum, auouched by his ovvne hande.
                     
                        
                           Archiepiscoporum & Archidiaconorum nomina simul cum
                           Nouitiorum assertio. 
                           muneribus & officijs suis sunt abolenda.
                        
                     
                     
                        The first Reason.
                        
                           God so loued the Churche, that he lefte a perfect paterne orderly. &c. Eph
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . 4. but therePrima ratio. is named neyther Pope, nor Archbishop, nor Archdeacon.
                        
                        
                           The ansvvere of the Bishop of Sarisburie.
                           
                              Hovve knovve you that the fourth chapter ad Ephe. is a perfecte patterneEius solutio▪
                                  of all ecclesiasticall gouernment? vve haue novve neyther Apostles, norThe. 4. Eph▪ no perfect plat forme of all ecclesiasticall gouernment. Euangelistes, nor Prophetes, and yet are they the cheefe in that patterne, neyther haue vve there eyther Bishop, or Presbyter, or Diaconus or Catechista, or Lector, and yet are these necessarie partes in ecclesiasticall gouernment:

Therefore that patterne is not perfect to holde for euer, neyther vvere there then any publike Churches or Pulpits, or Scholes, or Vniuersities, &c. S. Paule nameth neyther Pope nor Archbishop I graunt, and the Church is not gouerned by names, but by offices. Euery Bishop then vvas called Papa: and Anacletus, that vvas nexte after Peter, (if there be any weight in his vvords) nameth Archbishops.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 91. Sect. 1.
                     Unto the place of the. 4. of the Ephesians before alleaged he answereth cleane contrarie to that which M. Doctor sayth, that we haue now neyther Apostles, nor Euangelists, nor prophets, wherupon he would conclude that that place is no perfect patterne of the ministerie in the Church. In deede it is true, we haue not, neyther is it needefull that we should. It was therfore sufficient that there were once, and for a tyme, so that the wante of those nowe, is no cause why the ministeryes there recyted be not sufficient, for the accomplishment and full finishing of the churche, nor cause why any other ministeries should be added, besydes those which are there recyted.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Not one worde contrarie to any thing that I haue spoken, for I tolde you beforeTract. 4. cap. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                               diuis. 1. in what respect it maye be sayde these offices to remayne, and in what respect they be ceased: there is nowe no planting of Churches, nor going throughe the wholeIn what respect Apostles &c. be ceased. worlde, there is no wryting of newe Gospels, no prophecying of thinges to come, but there is gouerning of Churches, visiting of them, reforming of Pastors, and dyrecting of them, whiche is a portion of the Apostolicall function: there is preaching of the Gospell, expounding & interpreting the Scriptures, which be incident to the Euangelist & Prophet. Agaynst this no learned man (as I thinke) speaketh.
                        But nowe to my Lorde of Sarisburie his argument, whiche is this: that, fromThe Bishops argument. the whiche somewhat muste be taken, and vnto the whiche somewhat muste be added, is no perfect patterne, but Apostles, Euangelistes, Prophets, are taken away from the fourth to the Ephesians, and Deacons & Elders as you your selfe say must be added, Ergo, it is no perfect patterne: neyther do you, neyther can you answere this argument. But I will come to your accustomed shiftes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 91. Sect. 2.
                     Afterwarde he sayth, that neyther Bishop nor Elder are reckoned in that place. The pastor is there reckoned vp, and I haue shewed, that the pastor and Bishop are all one, and are but dyuers names to signifie one thing. And as for those Elders whyche doe onely gouerne, they are made mention of in other places, and therefore the Bishop and Elder are there conteyned, whych thing also M. Doctor graunteth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If the Bishop be conteyned vnder the Pastor, why may not the Archbishop be so likewise: but if the Elders (which you say do only gouerne) be not there conteyned, and yet a necessarie function in the Church (as you thinke) howe can it then be a perfecte platforme? or why may not Archbishops & Archdeacons be also necessarie, thoughe they be not in that place named: but you say that those Elders be in other places mentioned. That is no answere to this place, but a reason rather to proue it no perfect patterne.
                        M. Doctor graunteth a Bishop to be conteyned vnder the name of a pastor. But he doth not graunt that your Elder is so, or euery Presbyter (to whome the ministerie of the worde of God and sacraments is committed) to be a Pastor.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 91. Sect. 3.
                     After that, he sayth there is no Catechista: if there be a pastor, there is one which bothe can, and ought to instruct the youth, neyther What say you to the Doctor. dothe it perteyne to any other in the church, and publikely to teache the youth in the rudiments of religion, than vnto the pastor, howsoeuer in some tymes and places they haue made a seuerall offyce of it.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If a pastor and a Catechiste maye be in one, why may not a Bishop and a gouernourCatechist and pastor distinguished. also be one, and so your Elders shut out of the doores? But you may learne in auncient writers, that the office of a Catechiste was necessarie in the Churche, and distincte from the Pastor. Origene was a Catechist in the Churche of Alexandria, as Eusebius in his sixte booke dothe in sundrie places declare, and yet he was not then a Pastor.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 92. Sect. 1.
                     And where he sayth that there is neyther Deacon nor Reader mentioned: for the Deacon I haue answered, that S. Paule speaketh there onely of those functions which are occupied both in teaching and gouerning the Churches, and therefore there was no place there to speake of a Deacon: and as for the Reader it is no suche office in the Churche whiche the minister maye not doe. Where haue you scri
                              〈1 line〉
                           ture for this geare. And if eyther he haue not leasure, or hys strength and voyce wyll not serue hym fyrst to reade some long tyme, and afterwarde to preache, it is an easy matter to appoynt some of the Elders, or Deacons, or some other graue man in the Church to that purpose, as it hath beene practised in the Churches in tymes past, & is in the Churches reformed in our dayes, without making any newe order or offyce of the ministerie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This distinction helpeth not héere: for if you saye the offices or names of Deacons be lefte out in this place bicause Sainct Paule speaketh not of suche offices, as be occupied onely in gouernment: first I answere, that the same maye be sayde of Archebisho
                              〈1 line〉
                           s and Archedeacons, who haue those names, onely in the respecte of gouernment. Secondly, I tell you that the office of a Deacon is also to preache, as isTract. 14. hereafter proued. And last of all, that the office of a Deacon (especially as you restrayne it) is neyther office nor name of gouernment, but of simple and absolute ministerie and seruice.
                        Your starting holes will not hyde you: and this argument of the Bishop will not he answered. You haue sayde nothing to proue this place to be a perfecte paterne of all ecclesiasticall functions: neyther doe you saye any thing for omitting the names of Bishop, Deacon, Presbyter. &c. but we may saye the same for the names of Archebishop, Archedeacon. &c.
                        
                        The Reader hath béene counted a necessarie office in the Churche, and is of great antiquitie, and I knowe that the Deacon, or any other graue person vpon occasion maye be admitted to reade. But I pray you, where do you finde any such thing in the scripture,T. C. taketh greater libertie to himselfe than he will allowe to whole churches. especially of those whiche you call Elders, which be in no degrée of the ministerie? for it is great presumption for you to appoynt any suche office in the Churche, not hauing your warrant in Gods worde, séeing you finde suche faulte with whole Churches for allowing offices vsed in the best time of the Churche, confirmed by the best Councels, and approued by all auncient writers, bicause their names be not expressed in the scripture: and séeing also that you your selfe a little before sayde, that onely the pastor ought publikely in the Churche to teache the youth, and not a Catechist, and I take publyke reading in the Churche to be as solemne a matter as Catechising the youthe. But you haue libertie to coyne what order you lyste, without eyther Scripture, or anye other approued wryter: we muste make you another Pythagoras.
                        
                        In times past it was a peculiar office, and he that had it was called Lector, and therefore you can not saye (as it hathe beene practised in times past) excepte you wyll confesse that name and office of Lector, and so also graunte some name and office profitable for the Churche, to be omitted in the fourthe Chapter to the Ephesians.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 4. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 92. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Where he sayth that by this reason we should haue no Churches, pulpits, scholes, nor vniuersities: it is first easily answered that S. Paule speaketh not in the. 4. to the Ephesians of all thinges necessarie for the Church, but only of all necessarie ecclesiasticall functions, which do both teache and gouerne in the Churche, and then I haue already shewed that there were both Churches and pulpits.
                     As for scholes and Uniuersities, it is sufficient I graunt, but not out of the. 4. to the Ephe. commaundement of them, in that it is commanded that both the Magistrates and pastours should be learned, for he that commaundeth that they should be learned, commaundeth those things & those meanes, wherby they may most conueniently come to that learning. And we haue also examples of them commended vnto vs in the oldIud. 51. Testament. As in the booke of the Iudges when Debora commendeth the Uniuersitie men, & those whiche handled the penne of the wryter, that they came out to helpe in the battayle agaynst the enemies of God. And in the first booke of Samuell: and in the seconde booke of the Kings:1. Sam. 19. when Naioth and Bethel, Iericho, and a place beyonde Iordan are specified places which were2. Rg. 2. scholes or Uniuersities, where the scholers of the Prophets were brought vp in the feare of God, and good learning: the continuance of whiche scholes and vniuersities amongst the people of God,Act. 6. may be easily gathered of that which S. Luke writeth in the Actes, where it may appeare, that in Ierusalem there were certayne Colleges appoynted for seuerall countrey men, so that there was one College to receyue the Iewes and Proselites, which came out of Cilicia, another for those that came out of Alexandria. &c. to studie at Ierusalem. And if any man be able to shewe suche euidence for Archbishops and Archedeacons, as these are for vniuersities and scholes, I will not denie but it is as lawfull to haue them as these.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Yet sayth he truely, for in those tymes in Christian congregations there were neyther publike Churches, or Pulpits, or scholes, or Vniuersities, &c. and yet these doe apperteyne to the gouernmente of the Churche. In déede S. Paule speaketh onely there of suche ecclesiasticall functions as doe teache and preache the worde, and not of suche as doe onely gouerne, and therefore it can not be a perfecte platfourme for euer, as I haue before declared: and yet dyuers of these thinges mentioned by the Bishop of Sarisburie, perteyne bothe to the office of teaching and gouerning.
                        That whiche you saye of Scholes, and Uniuersities, I minde not to examine, bicause I knowe they be necessary for the Churche, howe aptely soeuer you proue them. But this is the matter: they be necessarie in the Churche bothe for the officeThe Byshop is not answered. of gouerning and teaching, and yet they be not expressed in the fourthe to the Ephesians, therefore in that fourth to the Ephesians there is no perfecte paterne of all ecclesiasticall gouernment: for that is the thing that the Bishop of Sarisburie affirmeth, and therevnto you answere not one worde.
                        Not one of these places that you alleage, proueth that in this texte to the Ephesians, eyther Scholes or Vniuersities be mentioned: thoughe it be certayne, that they perteyne bothe to teaching and gouerning, and therefore all this spéeche of yours isIgnorantia Elenchi. to no purpose, but onely to dasle the eyes of the Reader, least he should perceyue how you offende in ignorantia Elenchi, in not answering ad idem.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 92. Sect. 3.
                     Furthermore he sayth, that the Churche is not gouerned by names, but by offices, so is it in deede. And if the office of an Archbishop or Archdeacon can be shewed, we wyll not stryue for the name, but for so much as all the needefull offices of the Church togither with theyr names are mentioned in the the Scripture, it is truely sayde that bothe the offices and names of Archebishop and Archedeacons, beeing not onely not conteyned in them (but also condemned) ought to be banished out of the Churche.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue before shewed, that the office of visiting Churches, of ouerséeing many PastorsThe office of archbyshops & archde
                                 〈1 line〉
                              cons contemed in scripture. and Bishops, of suppressing schismes. &c. was in the Apostles, and is in the scriptures: But in these things doth the office of an Archbyshop consist, and in part of them the office of an Archdeacon, therefore the offices of Archbyshops and Archdeacons be conteined in the scriptures, and were in the Apostles time. For although (as I then sayde) that this part of the Apostolicall office, which did consist in planting and founding Churches through the whole world, is ceased: yet the manner of gouernment by placing Byshops in euery Citie, by moderating and gouerning them, by visiting the Churches, by cutting of schismes and contentions, by ordering Ministers, remaineth still, and shall continue, and is in this Church in the Archbyshops and Byshops as most meete men to execute the same. Wherefore séeing the offices be in the scriptures, there is no cause why the names should be mislyked, much lesse banished and cast out of the churche.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T C. Pag. 92. Sect. 4.
                     Last of all he sayth that Anacletus (if there be any wayght in his wordes) nameth an Archbyshop. I haue before shewed what waight there is in his wordes, & I refuse not that he be weyghed by the Byshops owne weyghtes, whiche he giueth vs in the handling of the article of the supremacie, and in the. 223. and. 224. pages, by the which weyghtes appeareth that this Anacletus is not onely lighte, but a playne counterfeit.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Yet you sée that learned men are content to vse such authoritie as occasion serueth,Supra. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ap. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                              ▪ diuis. 13. as I haue also before shewed other learned men to doe the lyke. And if it be to greatly to be reproued, first smite at your selfe, as most guiltie in this poynt.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     The second Reason.Secunda ratio▪
                        
                     
                     The Synagogue of the Iewes was a figure of the Church of Christe. And God to the perfection of that Church omitted nothing.
                     
                        The Ansvvere of the Byshop.
                        
                           I see not vvhat you vvoulde conclude: perhaps you vvill saye they hadEius solutio. not the names of Pope or Archbyshop. So had they not this name Episcopus in all Moses lavve, yet vvere not all Priests of like aunciencie in gouernment. They had other names that vvere equiualent vvith Archbyshops: as Principes Synagogae: Principes sanctuarij: Principes familiarum Leuiticarum: Principes familiarum sacerdotalium: Principes Sacerdotum: Principes domus Dei: Pontifex: Summus Pontifex: Summus sacerdos. &c. Therefore this negatiue reason is but vveake. Agayne vvhereas it is sayde that to the perfection of the Synagogue there vvanted nothing, it may be ansvvered, that to the perfection thereof there vvanted many things, as it is knovvne and confessed. And as the Synagogue had not the names of Pope and Archbyshop, so had it not the name of Apostle, o
                                 〈1 line〉
                               Euangelist. &c.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 92. Sect. 5.
                     The second reason which saith that the churche of God vnder the lawe, had all all things needefu
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        ▪
                        
appointed by ye commaundement of God, the Bishop saith he knoweth not what could be concluded of it: I haue shewed before that there is nothing lesse ment, than that the Church vnder the Gospell should haue al those things that ye Church had, or should haue nothing which that had not. But this ther vpon is concluded, that the Lord which was so carefull for that, as not to omitte the least, would not be so carelesse for this Church vnder the Gospell, as to omit the greatest.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.Tract. 2. cap. 6 diuis. 3.
                        
                        I tolde you before, that this which you call the perfection of the Synagogue, was rather a burthen than a perfection: for God therfore prescribed vnto them a prescript forme of externall things, that it mighte be a meanes to kéepe them from further inconuenience, but to vs in such things he hath lefte a greater libertie: and the perfection of the Church doth not consist in outward appearance, but in spirituall giftes, and therin hath the Lorde muche more plentifully and gratiou
                              〈1 line〉
                           ly shewed his care for the Church vnder the Gospell, than he did for it vnder the lawe.
                        Touching externall orders both of ceremonies and gouernment he hath lefte the disposition therof to his Church in many things, as I haue proued in the beginning ofTract. 2. this booke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 92. Sect. 6.
                     And where he saith that there was then which was called high priest, and was ouer all the rest, he did well knowe that ye cause thereof was This was one cause, but not the only cause. bicause he was a figure of Christ, and did represent vnto the people, the chieftie and superioritie of our Sauiour Christ, which was to come: and that our 
                           〈1 line〉
                        amour Christ, being come, there is now no cause why there should be any suche preheminence giuen vnto one, and further that it is vnlawfull that there should be any such, A Popishe non sequitur. vnlesse it be lawfull to haue one head Byshop ouer all the Churche, for it is knowne, that that priest was the head priest ouer all the whole Church, which was during his time, vnto our Sauiour Christ.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The high priest was a figure of Christ, so was Dauid and Salomon: but yet was the high priest also appointed to gouerne other for order and pollicie, and so was Dauid and Salomon. The figure is taken a way and the kinde of Sacrifice: but the office of gouerning remaineth still, and is to be obserued as the state of the Church requireth. Christ being come, the office of sacrificing ceaseth but not the office of gouerning: for Christ by his comming did not take away gouernment, and pollicie, no notfrom the 
                              〈◊〉
                            state.
                        This reason of yours, that that priest was the head priest ouer all the Church, therefore if byA popish reason vsed by the Replyer. his example we will haue an Archbyshop he must be such a one as shall gouerne the whole church, is in déede a plaine confirmation of the Papistes reason for ye supremacie, who thinke that they may reason in lik
                              〈1 line〉
                            maner. But I answere you as M. Caluine answereth thē 
                           
                              Lib. inst. cap. 8. Sect. 87. There is no reason that compelleth to extende that vnto the wholeCaluine. worlde, which was profitable in one nation: nay rather there is a great diuersitie betwixt one nation and the whole world. Bicause the Iewes were compassed in on euerie side with Idolaters, least they should be withdrawen through the varietie of Religion, God did place the seat of his worship in the middest of the earth: there he appoynted ouer them one prelate, whom all should looke vpon, that they might the better be conteined in vnitie. Now when as true Religion is dispersed through out the whole worlde, who dothe not see it to be absurde, that the gouernment of both the East & VVest, should be giuen to one? it is like as if one would say, bycause one precincte of grounde hath not many gouernours, therefore the whole world ought to be ruled of one president or gouernour.
                        
                        I knowe that he maketh another answere likewise: euen the same that you haue borrowed of him, touching the figure, but his first answere is more direct in my opinion. And M. Nowell, against Dorman reasoning as you do, giueth him this answere,Nowell. 
                           It agreeth very wel with the estate of the Iewes, that as they beyng one natiō had one chiefeLib. 1. 63. Priest, so is it good likewise that euery Christian nation haue their chiefe Priest or Byshop.

It agreeth not that bicause the Iewes, one nation, had one high Priest to gouerne them in doubtes, therfore all nations through the world should haue one high priest ouer al other: for not only the vnlikelyhood betwene these two, but the impossibili
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ie of the latter is most euident. Other learned men also ther be, as Hyp
                                 〈1 line〉
                              rius Lib. 3 Method Theolog & d
                              〈1 line〉
                           uers others, who answering this same argument of the Papists, say, that by it we may well proue that one Archbishop or Metropolitane maye gouerne one Prouince, or one kyngdome, but that it is to weake to proue that one Pope may gouerne all t
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e world. Now be it you had rather giue strength to the aduersarie, than lacke argumentes to the defense of your cause.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 93. Line. 1.
                     And as for those titles chiefe of the Synagogue, chiefe of the s
                           〈1 line〉
                        nctuarie, chiefe of the house of God. I say that that maketh much against Archbishops & Archbeacons, for when as in steade of the Synagogue, & of the sanc
                           〈1 line〉
                        uarie, and of the house of God or tempee, are come part
                           〈1 line〉
                        cular churches and congregations, by this reason it foloweth, that there should be some ch
                           〈1 line〉
                        f, not in euery prouince or dioesse, but in euery congreg
                           〈1 line〉
                        tion, & in deed so ought there to be cer
                           〈1 line〉
                        ain chief in euer
                           〈1 line〉
                         congregation, which should gouerne and rule the rest. And as for the chief of the families of the Leuites, & chiefe of the families of the priests, the same was obserued in all other tribes of Israell, and by all these Princes ouer euery tribe 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nd fam
                           〈1 line〉
                        le, as by the Prince of the whole l
                           〈1 line〉
                        nde God did as it were by diuers liuely pictures imprint in their vnderstanding the chiet
                           〈1 line〉
                        ie and domination of our Sauiour Christe. Besides this the order which was appointed in this poynt, was obserued in all the tribes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These titles be as glorious as any that are now remaining in our church. And myThe Replye
                                 〈1 line〉
                               slippeth by the matter. L. of Sarum speaketh o
                              〈1 line〉
                            names, to the which you do not answere one word, but s
                              〈1 line〉
                           k out other matter to blind the Reader with▪ least he should beholde your follie. But I will follow you. You s
                              〈1 line〉
                           y that in steade of the Syn
                              〈1 line〉
                           gogues. &c. are come particular Churches and congregations. &c. and I say vnto you, that they had thē particular Synagogues as well as we haue now particular Ch
                              〈1 line〉
                           rches, the whiche you your sel
                              〈1 line〉
                           e in 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ffect haue confessed before. And yo
                              〈1 line〉
                            must vnderstand, that one Christian common weale is butPag. 22. line. 1. one Church, as it was among the I
                              〈1 line〉
                           wes, & th
                              〈1 line〉
                           rfore such offices of gouernment may be such in the Church, as was 
                              〈◊〉
                            the Iewes, and such superioritie among ministers, as was then amongst Priests and 
                              〈1 line〉
                           euites And I maruell that you wil denie this, especially seing that you would 
                              〈1 line〉
                           de vs to the ciu
                              〈1 line〉
                           ll law of Moses, wherof this is a portion.
                        You adde that by all these princes ouer euerye tribe and fainilie, as by the prince of the whole land, God did as it were. &c. all this maketh nothing against our 
                              〈◊〉
                           , 
                              〈1 line〉
                           xcept y
                              〈1 line〉
                           u will also take away the Prince of the whole land▪
                        
                        As this order among the Iewes was obserued in al tribes: so is it now in al Prouinces and Diocesse. This is but slender 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ou bring, and y
                              〈1 line〉
                           t not to the purpose, for the A
                              〈1 line〉
                           swere speaketh of na
                              〈1 line〉
                           es and you driue it to offices. Indeede you almost in no place reason ad Idem, which is a maniiest argumente, that you are but a shiftyng cauiller.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 93. Line 13.
                     Moreouer these orders and pollicies touching the distribution of the offices of the Leuites and priests, and touching the appoin
                           〈1 line〉
                        ment of their gouernours, were done of Dauid by the (*) aduise2. Chro. 19. of the Prophets, Gad and Nathan, which receiued of the Lord by commaundement; that whyche they deliuered vnto Dauid. And if so be that it can be shewed, that Archbishops and Archdeacons came into the church by any commaundement of the Lord, then this allegation hath some force, but now being not only not 
                           〈◊〉
                        , but also (as I haue shewed) forbydden, euery man doth see that this reason hath no place, but serueth to the vtter ouerthrow of the Archbyshop and Archdeacon. For if Dauid beyng suche a notable personage, and as it were an Angell of God, durste not take vpon him to bring into the Church, any orders or pollicies, not onely not againste the worde

of God, but not without a precise word and commaundement of God, who shal dare be so bold as to take vpon him the institution of the chiefe office of the Church, and to alter the pollicie that God hath appointed by his seruantes the Apostles?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You runne away with the matter, as though all were cleare when as it is not so. You affirme, yt Dauid did apoint these orders & pollicies touching ye distribution of the offices of the leuites & Priests. &c. by the eduise of Gad, and Nathan the prophets of God. And for proof hereof you quote in the margent. 2. Chron. 19. where there is not one word for your purpose, or signifying any suche thing. In déed in the 2. chro. 29. there is affirmed the lyke thing. But my L. of Sarisburie hath answered you, that such negatiue reasons are very weake. And if you wil denie it to be a negatiue reason from authoritie, yet can you not denie but that it is as féeble an argument as almost can be. For what if Dauid did appoynt these orders touching the distribution of the offices of the leuites & priests &c. doth it therfore follow that the church at no tyme may appointe suche offices as shall be thought méete for the gouernment of it, according to the tyme, places, and persons? where haue you learned of a singular example to make a generall rule, or to frame an argumente ex solis particularibus?
                        
                        In the. 2. Chro. 19. which you haue quoted in the margent, there is a not able placeScripture alleaged against himselfe. against you: for there expresse mention is made that Iehosaphat set in Ierusalem of the Leuites, and of the Priests. &c. for the iudgemente and cause of the Lorde, and made Amariah the Priest chiefe ouer them: neyther were they Iudges for the citie2. Chron. 19. of Ierusalem onely, but for the whole countrey. And yet we reade not of any commaundementvers. 8. that Iehosaphat had, so to do.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 93, Sect. 1.
                     And where the Bishop sayth, it is knowne and confessed that ther wanted many things to the persection of the Churche of the Iewes: truly I doe not knowe, nor can not consesse that that Churche wanted This is directly contrary to your selfe. any thing to the perfection of that estate, which the Lord would haue them be in, vntill the comming of our sauioure Christ. And if there were any thing wanting, it was not for wante of good lawes and pollicies, whereof the question is, but for wante of due execution of them, which we speake not of.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Conueniet nulli. &c. Nowe can he agrée with anye other man, that dothe not agree with him selfe? For before (after you haue recyted diuers thinges lefte to theT. C. contrarie to himself. order of that Churche of the Iewes, for the whiche they had no expresse worde) You saye, that you wyll offer for one that I bring that we haue lefte to the order of thePag. 22. Sec. 2. Churche, to shewe that they had twenty, whyche were vndecided by the expresse word of God. And heere you saye, that it wanted nothing to the perfection of that estate: how you wyll reconcile your selfe, I knowe not: or whether it be your pleasure not to respecte your owne credite, so that you may séeme to discredite that whyche that notable Byshop hathe spoken: but that whyche I haue alleadged of Iehosaphat, 2. Chro. 19. dothe manifestly iustifye my Lord of Sarisburies saying, and condemneth youres. For there it is to be séene that in matters of gouernment, orders were appoynted which neyther were commaunded by any expresse commaundemente of God, neyther yet expressed in the worde of God. But of thys matter I haue spoken before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 4 the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     The third Reason.
                     VVhere the substance of anything is most perfite, there the accidents be most perfite: butTertia ratio. the 
                           〈◊〉
                         of 
                           〈◊〉
                         Religion was most perfit in the primitiue Churche: and yet there was then 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         
                        Ergo.
                     
                     
                        The Ansvvere of the Byshop.
                        First, this 
                              〈◊〉
                            is not proued: for it may vvell be doubted, vvhether theEius solutio▪
                            
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            substance hath euermore most porfit accidentes. And againe the substance of Religion is the same novve that it vvas then: the difference if there be any, standeth in accidentes, and not in substance. Therefore thys 
                              〈◊〉
                            of substance and accidentes vvas not needefull. In the primitiue Church God raised vp Apostles, and Prophets, and gaue them povver ex
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           , as the gifte of tongues, the gift of healing, the gifte of gouernment, &c. In place vvher of he hath novv giuen Vniuersities, Scholes, Byshops, 
                              〈◊〉
                            shops, &c. But you say there vvas then no Archbyshop. So may you say that before king Saul there vvas no king in Israel. So may you say 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            of late times, there vvas neither Duke nor Earle in England. So may you say 
                              〈◊〉
                            the primitiue Church, there was neither Deane, nor person, 
                              〈◊〉
                            prebendarie. And yet novv both in Ecclesiasticall and ciuill go
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           , 
                              〈◊〉
                            these are thought necessarie. Last of all, vvhere you say there was no And by shop in the primitiue Church, it is vvritten by many that S. Paul made 
                              〈◊〉
                            Archbishop of Creta. Erasmus saith, Paulus Titū Archiepiscopū
                           
                           Eras. in arg. epi. ad Titum Chryso 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . cap. Tit. 
                           
                              
                                 〈◊◊〉
                              . And Lyra likevvise sayth Paulus instituit Titum Archiepiscopum 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            authorities like you not: Chrysostome sayth Paulus Tito mul
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               commisit. Novv hauing the gouernment of many Byshops, 
                              〈◊〉
                            may vve call him but an Archbyshop.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag 93. Sect. 2.
                     For the 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        ast reasons against the Archbyshop and Archdeacon, although I be well acquayn
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                         that fauour this cause, yet I did neuer heare them before in my life: and I beleue ther 
                           〈◊◊◊〉
                         is be his reasons, whose they are supposed to be, and which did set downe the 
                           〈◊◊◊◊〉
                         Byshop confuteth. Notwithstanding the former of these two seemeth to haue 
                           〈◊◊◊〉
                        , 
                           〈◊〉
                         to be grounded of that place of Logike, that sheweth, that according as the 
                           〈◊◊◊〉
                         of any thing is excellent, so are those things that are annexed and adioyned vnto 
                           〈◊◊◊〉
                         I would she simplest should vnderstande what is sayde or written, I will willing
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                         reasons, the termes whereof are not easily perceyued, but of those whyche be 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            you may dilclaime what you lyste, for you coulde neuer be brought beforeThe inconstancie of the Replyer & his companions. 
                           
                              〈◊◊◊〉
                            downe your reasons in writing: and there is no holde at your worde, 
                              〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉
                           , euen at your pleasure, and so wil diuerse of your com
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            as 
                              〈◊〉
                            hath taught. But yet you thinke that this former reason hath a 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           . &c. 
                              〈◊〉
                           , you answere not one word to my L. of Sarums solution, which 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            to be very fonde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 4. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 93. Sect. 3.
                     And as for the answere which the Bishop maketh, that in place of Apostles, Prophets, ye giftes of tongues, of healing, & of gouernmēt, are brought in vniuersities, scholes, Bishops & Archbishops: for scholes & vniuersities, I haue shewco they haue bin alwayes, & therfore cannot come in, to supply the roome of the Apostles & prophets. And whether a man consider the schollers that learne, or the scholemasters which teach, or the orders appoynted for the gouernment of ye scholes, they shal be founde to be rather ciuill than Ecclesiasticall, and therfore can not come in steade of any Ecclesiasticall ministerie. If the Bishop do meane that they come in place of the gift of the tongs, and knowledge of the Gospell that was first giuen miraculously, I graunt it, and then it maketh nothing to this question.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue not shewed that scholes & vniuersities were alwayes in the Church of Christ nor you cannot shew that there were any vniuersities or scholes of Christians in the Apostles time. I am not disposed to contrary any thing yt is alleaged for vniuersities or scholes: neither would I haue you to denie this truth affirmed by my L. of Sarum for it is certeine that God worketh now in the Churche by meanes of vniuersities & scholes, that which he wrought in the Apostles time myraculously, by his Apostles & prophets. And those gifts of tongs, healing, gouernment. &c. which he then inspired at once without teaching, doth he now giue by little & little vsing ye ministery of scholes, vniuersities, & such like: wherfore it is true that the Bishop hath said.
                        And wheras you say ye scholes whether a man consider ye schollers that learne, or the scholemasters which teach, or orders appointed for ye gouernment of ye scholes, they shall be founde rather ciuill than Ecclesiasticall: If you speake of scholes in a prophane or heathenishe common wealth, it is true. But if you speake of a Christian kingdome it is most vntrue. For in a Christian cōmon wealth, scholes are the first nurses, that bring vp childrē in ye true knowledge of God, & of his word, & prepare many of thē to the ministerie, both which are Ecclesiasticall. Moreouer if you talke of vniuersities, such especially as be in thys Realme of England, then whether you consider either ye masters, fellowes, or schollers, or rules or orders appointed for ye gouernment of them, they be for ye most parte Ecclesiasticall, and therfore those things make greatly for the purpose, and you haue said nothing that can ouerthrow them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 93. Sect. 4.
                     As for Bishops they can not come in place of Apostles or prophets, for as much as they were when the Apostles, Euangelists & prophets were, & are one of those ministeries, which S. Paule mentioneth in the. 4. to the Ephesians, being the same that is the pastor.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I tolde you before, that ye part of the Apostles office which consisted in gouernment, is now remaining in Archbishops and Bishops, as to visite Churches, to reforme disorders, to suppresse contentions and such like: which also they practised in the Apostles time, in such places as were committed vnto them by the Apostles, as it is euident in Timothie and Titus.
                        That Bishops do succeede the Apostles in this function of gouernment it may appeareBishops succeed Apostles in gouernmēt. Cyprian.
                            by sundry learned writers Cyprian Lib. 3. Epist. 9.
                            writeth thus. But Deacons must remember that the Lord hath chosen Apostles, that is to say Bishops and chief gouernours, but the Apostles after the Ascention of the Lord into heauen did appoint vnto themselues Deacons, Ministers, of their Bishopricke, and of the Churche. And Ambrose in. 4. ad Ephe.
                           Ambrose. Zuinglius. saith, 
                              Apostoli Episcopi sunt: Apostles are Byshops. Zuinglius also in his Ecclesiastes saith that the Apostles when they left of goyng from place to place, and remayned in one Churche, were no more called Apostles but Byshops, as Iames at Ierusalem, and Iohn at Ephesus. Wherby it may appeare that it séemeth straunge neither to the olde wryters, nor to to the new, to say that Byshops succéede the Apostles and come in place of the
                              〈1 line〉
                           .
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 4. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 93. Sect. vlt.
                     There remayneth therfore the Archebishoppe, whyche if he came in place of the Prophetes and Apostles (as the Bishoppe sayth) how commeth it to passe, that the bishop sayth by and by out of the authoritie of Erasmus that Titus was an archebishoppe: for at that tyme there was bothe Apostles, Prophetes, and Euangelistes. If it bee so therefore, that the Archbyshoppe muste supplye the wante of Apostles. &c. howe commeth it to passe, hee wayteth not his tyme whylest they were dead, but commeth in lyke vnto one which is borne out of tyme, and lyke the vntymely and hastye fruite, whyche is seldome or neuer holesom. And for one to come into the Apostles or Prophetes place, requirerh the authoritie of hym whych ordeyned the Apostles. &c. whyche is the Lorde, and his institution in his worde, whiche is that whiche we desire to be shewed. But hereof I haue spoken before at large.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is not vnknowne to suche as be willing to learne, that where the Apostles coulde not be presente themselues, there they appoynted some other to gouerne the Churches for them: as the Apostle Paule did Titus at Creta. Therefore this reason of yours is sóone answered. And in that that the Apostles dyd appoynt Byshoppes in Churches whyche they had planted, and gaue vnto them suche authoritie, it is euident that therin they made them theyr successours, which they did not withoute sufficient testimonie and warrant of the spirite of God: and therfore you do but talke, you proue nothing.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 94. Lin. 9. & Sect. 1. 2.
                     The necessitie of Deanes I do not acknowledge, & I haue already spoken of them. Touching Prebendaties I shall haue occasion to speake a worde hereafter. For Earles and Dukes and suche lyke titles of honour they are ciuill, neyther dothe it followe, that bycause there may newe titles or newe offices be broughte into the ciuill gouernment, that therefore the same maye be attempted in the Church. For God hath left a greater libertie in instituting things in the common wealth than in the Churche.
                     For, for so muche as there be diuers Common wealthes, and dyuers formes of common wealthes, and all good, it falleth out, that the offices and dignities whyche are good in one common wealthe, are not good in an other: as those whych are good in a Monarchie, are not good in Aristocratie: and those whiche are good in Aristocratie: are not good in a popular state: But that can not be sayde of the Churche whyche is but one and vniforme, and hathe the same lawes, and forme of gouernment thorough out the worlde.
                     In common wealthes also, there are conuersions, one forme beeing chaunged into an other whiche can not be in the true Churche of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your acknowledging or not acknowledgyng the necessitie of Deanes. &c. is not greatly materiall: they depende not vpon you. To the example of king Saule the first king of Israell, you say nothing, and yet it is materiall. There is no suche difference betwixte the ciuill gouernment of the common wealth, and the externall gouernment of the Churche, but that the one in many thinges may be vsed as an example for the other. And it is vntrue yt the external forme of gouernment in the Church ought to be one, and the selfe same thorough out the worlde in all tymes and places, as it shall hereafter more fully appeare. But still I woulde haue the Reader to noteTract. 17. what kynde of gouernmente of the Churche you doe allowe: and ioyne the same wyth that assertion of yours, that the gouernment of the common wealth muste bée framed according to the gouernmente of the Churche, as the hangyngs to the house.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 94. Sect. 2.
                     As for Erasmus authoritie which saith that Titus was an archbishop, I haue answered to it.

And where as Chrysostome sayeth, that the iudgemente of many Bishoppes was committed to Titus, vntrue, for you haue not as yet spoken one worde of it. I haue declared in what sorte it is to be vnderstanded, and yet vppon these wordes the Bishoppe can hardly conclude, that whyche he dothe: that Titus hadde the gouernmente of many Bishoppes. For it is one thyng to saye, the iudgement of many was committed vnto Titus, and an other thing to say, that he had the gouernment of many.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And shall the same answere serue for Lyra too? Well I haue answered your answere to Erasmus. And I truste that these authorities wyth the Godlie Reader shall haue the more credite, bycause this Reuerende Father dothe herein confirme their opinions: whose iudgement for his singular vertue and learning, ought to be more estemed, than a number suche as you are.
                        You neyther haue answered, nor doe answere, nor can answere these wordes of Chrysostome, and it is but a verie poore shifte, to make suche a distinction betwixte iudgemente and gouernment. For what is it else to haue the iudgemente of manye Byshoppes commytted vnto hym, but to haue the gouernment? shewe a difference if you can: No doubte you woulde haue doone it, if you coulde. Wherefore this authoritie of Chrysostome remayneth vntouched: and it confirmeth my answere to the Gréeke Scholiast, who borrowed his wordes of him. Neyther would you haue thus dalyed in this place, if you had looked vppon Chrysostomes wordes, who there affirmeth, that Paule didde commytte to Titus, the whole yle of Creta.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 20. Diuision.
                  
                     The fourth Reason.
                     
                        The Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill gouernment maye not be confounded, or be togetherQuarta ratio. in one person. But to be a chiefe or a ruler is a ciuil power Ergo it can not be exercised by any Ecclesiasticall person.
                     
                     
                        The ansvvere of the Bishop.
                        
                           Bothe these gouernmentes vvere confounded in Moyses: ThereforeEius solutio. they may be confounded. And the priestes of Israell had the iudgemente and gouernment of the people. And Sainct Augustine was troubled vvith hearing and determining of causes, as it appeareth by Possidonius.
                        
                        
                           And vvhere you saye to be a chiefe or a ruler is a ciuil gouernment, nay in Ecclesiasticall causes it is ecclesiasticall gouernment and not ciuil. And these differences of gouernment may not so vnaduisedly be confounded. This is the key of ecclesiasticall correction, and belongeth only to the ecclesiastical officer, and to none other. Hereof S. Paule sayth, Seniorem ne corripueris nisi sub. &c. Tradidi illum Satanae. &c. This iurisdiction is not ciuill but ecclesiasticall, and therefore may be exercised by any ecclesiasticall person.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 94. Sect. 3.
                     The answere of the Bishoppe vnto the fourthe supposed reason, perteyneth vnto an other question, that is, whether Ecclesiastical persons oughte to exercise ciuill iurisdiction, wherevnto I will answere by Gods grace when I come to speake vppon occasion of M. Doctors booke of that question. In the meane tyme I will desire the reader to consyder what weake groundes the Archebishoppe and Archedeacon stande vppon, seeyng that the Bishoppe of Sarum, being so learned a man, and of so greate readyng, coulde say no more in their defense, whiche notwithstandyng in the controuersies agaynst Doctor Harding is so pythie and so plentyfull.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Bishop of Sarum hathe sayde muche more than you haue answered vnto:

and in the respecte of the reasons he hath sayde fully inough. You may not thinke but that if he had bin disposed to haue delt of purpose in this cause, he coulde haue sayde muche more. But your secrete and priuie nippes, whereby y
                              〈1 line〉
                           u 
                              〈◊〉
                            to the Reader, that he would willingly defende a false cause, shall neuer be able to deface so worthie a Prelate. You maye perceiue by this his conclusion (
                              〈◊〉
                            toucheth you so néere) that he tooke no great care or tyme for answering these weake reasons: for thus he concludeth, I beseeche you to take these sodaine answeres in good parte: As for these reasons, in my iudgement they are not made to buylde vp, and they are to vveake to pull downe. Stultitia nata est in corde pueri, & virga disciplinae fugabit illam. Prouerb. 22. It is but vvantonnesse, correction will helpe it.
                        
                        Thus haue I answered in his behalfe, who bothe in this and other lyke controuersies, might haue bene a greate stay to this Churche of Englande, if we hadde bene worthie of him. But whilest he liued, and especially after his notable and most profitable trauailes, he receiued the same reward of wicked and vngrateful tongues, that other men be exercised with, and all must looke for, that will doe their duetie. But nowe agayne to T. C.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The causes of Archbishops and of their prerogatiues, and the estate of the olde Bishops, (assigned by T. C.) examined.
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 94. Sect 4.
                     Now I haue shewed howe little those things which M. Doctor bringeth, make for proofe of that wherfore he alleageth them, I will for the better vnderstanding of the reader se
                           〈1 line〉
                        e downe what were the causes why the Archbishops were fyrst ordeyned▪ and what were their prerogatiues and preheminences before other Bishops, and the estate also of the olde Bishoppes, which lyued in those tymes, wherein although there were great corruptions, yet the Churche was 
                           〈◊〉
                         some tollerable estate, to the intent it may appeare, partly how 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         we haue of them now, & partly also howe great difference there is betwene oures and them. O
                           〈1 line〉
                         the names of Metropolitanes it hath bene spoken, howe that he shoulde not be called the chiefe o
                           〈1 line〉
                         priests, or the high priest, or Bishop of Bishops: Now I will set downe their office and power, whiche they hadde more than the Bishoppes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you haue no more truthe in your words folowing, than y
                              〈1 line〉
                           u vtter in the beginning of these: or if you deale no soundlyer in them, than you haue done in the other, M. Doctors proofes shall serue the turne. But it is in vayne to answere wordes, I will therfore come to your matter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 94. Sect. 5.
                     In the Councel of Antioche it appeareth that the Bishop of the Metropolitane seat, called An vnt
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            there is no suche thing in that much cano
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ▪
                         
                        Chap. 9. Synodes, & propounded the matters which were to be handled, &c. The archbishop doth not 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ew call Synodes, but the Prince doth, forasmuche as there is no conuocation without a parliament, and he dothe not propounde the matters, and gather the voyces, but an other chosen, whiche is called prolocutor: therefore in the respecte that an Archbishop, and Metropolitane was tyrst ordeyned, we haue no neede of an Archebishop or Metropolitane. Agayne, an other cause also appeareth there An 
                              〈◊〉
                            truthe. whiche was to see that the Bishops kepte them selues within their owne di
                           〈1 line〉
                         cesse, and brake not into an others Diocesse, but fyrste this maye be doone withoute an Archebishoppe, and then it is not doone of the Archebishop himselfe, giuing licences vnto the wandering ministers to goe thoroughout not so fewe as a dosen diocesse: therefore the office of an archbishop is not necessarie in this respecte, and if it were, yet it muste be other than it is nowe.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is no Councell more flatte agaynst you, than is that Councell of Antioche, nor any Canon that ouerthroweth your assertion more directely than that ninth Canon, the woordes whereof I haue repeated before, but youre vntrue allegation in a manner compelleth me to repeate them agayne, that the Reader may see before his eyes, what truthe there is in your doings. And although it do perteyne to the office of the Metropolitane or Archebishoppe to call Synodes, yet is there not one woorde thereof in this Cannon, nor yet of propounding any matters in Synodes, or of seyng Bishoppes keepe themselues within theyr owne diocesse, as you doe here auouche without all truthe: and notwithstanding as I sayde before, those things doe perteine to the office of the Archebishoppe: yet if they were also comprehended in that Canon, it were rather a confirmation of that office, than otherwyse.
                        The contentes of that Canon be onely these: firste it sayeth, that it behoueth the Bishoppes of euery countrey or prouince to knowe theyr Metropolitane Bishoppe to haue the care and ouersighte, or gouernment ouer the whole Prouince. By the whiche woordes, the authoritie and name of a Metropolitane or Archebishoppe is moste pl
                              〈1 line〉
                           ynely confirmed, and proued to be a permanent off
                              〈1 line〉
                           ce: Secondly, this Canon willeth all those that haue any businesse to doe, to resorte to the Metropolitane citie. Whereby also is giuen to the Metropolitane Bishop greate preheminence: and therefore it followeth immediatly, that he shoulde excell all the reste in honour: and that the other Bishoppes shoulde doe nothing of importance without him: according to the olde rule made by their forefathers, but onely those thyngs whiche perteyne to theyr owne diocesse: and those places and possessions that perteine vnto the same. In whiche wordes who séeth not what preheminence is giuen to the Metropolitane ouer all the Bishoppes in hys Prouince: and what iurisdiction to the Bishop in his owne diocesse and places perteyning vnto it? where also it is to be noted that the Councell sayeth, 
                              secundiòn antiquam à patribus nostris regulam constitutam: according to the auncient rule appointed of oure forefathers. Whyche argueth a greate antiquitie of this office. Then it followeth: for euery Bishop hath authoritie ouer his owne Diocesse, to rule and gouerne it, iuxta reuerentiam singulis competentem, accordyng to the reuerence due vnto euerie one of them, and that he hathe especiall care of that whole region that i
                                 〈1 line〉
                               subiecte to his Citie, so that he maye ordeyne Priestes and Deaeons, & singulasuo iuditio comprehendat. But he may not attempt any other thyng without the Metropolitane Bishop, nor the Metropolitane do any thing without the counsel of the other Priests.
                        
                        What can bée more playne, eyther for the authoritie of the Arche bishoppe, or iurisdiction of the Bishop? and what one worde of this Canon haue you truely alleadged? and yet it is quoted in your margent.
                        But if we imagine those thinges to be true, whiche you saye, howe will you conclude? forsooth, that the Metropolitane did then call Synodes, and propounded the matters, but nowe he dothe not call Synodes, and propounde the matters: Therefore there is nowe no neede of a Metropolitane. Firste it is vntrue, that Metropolitanes did then call eyther all Synodes, or that they called them of theyr owne authoritie without the consente of the Prince, and Ciuill Magistrate: whiche thing is euident when the Magistrates were christened.
                        The Councell of Nice was summoned by the commaundement of Constantine
                           Co
                                 〈1 line〉
                              cels sum moned by Princes. Euse de vita Constan lib. 3.
                            the Emperoure, 
                              Eusebius de vita Constanti. lib. 3. Constantius called the Councell whyche was in Sardica ciuitate. The Bishoppes in the Councell of Constanti. confesse, that they came together by the Emperoures wrytte. Ambrose in the Councell of Aquileia, speaking of him 
                              〈◊〉
                            and of other Byshoppes sayeth, that they were assembled oute at Aquileia, by the commaundemente of the Emperoure: The same dothe Hierome testifye concernyng a Councell holden at Rome, In Epita. Pauli. Pope Iulio Epist. 9. ad Theodos. desyreth the Emperoure, that by his authoritie there myghte be a Councell in Italye. Zozomen. libr. 6. cap. 7.
                           
sheweth howe certayne Catholyke Bishoppes intreated the Emperoure, that they myght haue leaue to gather together for the redressing of certaine erroures. But 
                              〈1 line〉
                           hat shall I neede to labour in a matter moste manifest? No man can be ignorant that readeth Ecclesiasticall stories, but that the Emperoures authoritie was r
                              〈1 line〉
                           quired in summoning Councels and Synodes, not only generall, but prouinciall also. Secondly, it is vntrue that the Metropolitane in this Churche dothe not call Synodes, or propoundeth not the matters in them. &c. For he dothe bothe, althoughe he calleth no Prouinciall Synode, withoute the commaund
                              〈1 line〉
                           ment of the Prince, no more than other Metropolitanes haue 
                              〈1 line〉
                           oone in the beste tyme of the Churche vnder christ
                              〈1 line〉
                           an Princes. Laste of all, thoughe all thys were true, that is 
                              〈1 line〉
                           éere vntruely affirmed, yet were the office of an Archebishoppe necessarie, for it dothe not onely consiste in calling Synodes, but in sundrye thinges besyde, as I haue shewed before, and this councell of Antioche manyfestly declareth. And surely yf you would proue any thyng hereof directely, it s
                              〈1 line〉
                           ould bée thys, that eyth
                              〈1 line〉
                           r the Archebishoppe dothe not exercyse that iurisdiction whyche he oughte to doe, or else can not doe that whiche perteyneth to his office, and so shoulde you speake for the amendement of the Archbishops iurisdiction.
                        Agayne, you saye an other cause appeareth there, whyche was to see that the Bishops kepte themselues within theyr owne diocesse. &c. but fyrst thys may be doone without an Archbishoppe. &c. I tell you there is no suche thyng in that nynthe Canon: I say further, that it maye beste an
                              〈1 line〉
                            mos
                              〈1 line〉
                           e orderly bée doone by an Archebis
                              〈1 line〉
                           oppe. Thirdely, I answere as before, that it is but one parte of his office. Fourthely, I saye vnto you, that this is a symple Argumente, the Archebishoppe dothe not kéepe suche olde Canons as bée not in vse in thys Churche, therefore there is no neede of his office. Laste of all, you oughte to knowe, that th
                              〈1 line〉
                           se whom
                              〈1 line〉
                            y
                              〈1 line〉
                           u call wandering ministers, be fai
                              〈1 line〉
                           hefull Preachers a number of them: And suche as laboure diligentely in preachyng the woorde, and haue not a little profyted the flocke of Chryste, so that youre conclusion is not woor
                              〈1 line〉
                           h a strawe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 95. Sect. 1.
                     Agayne the cause why the Metropolitane differed from the reste, and why the callyng of the Synode was gyuen to him, as it appeareth in the same Councell, was for that theChap. 9. greatest concour
                           〈1 line〉
                        e was to that place, and moste assemblie of menne, wherevnto also may be added, for that there was the best commoditie of lodgyng and of vittayling, and for that as it appeareth in other Councells, it was the place and feare of the Empire. But with vs neyther the greatest conc
                           〈1 line〉
                        urse nor assemblie of men, nor the greatest commoditie of lodgyng and vittayi
                           〈1 line〉
                        g, neyther yet the seate of the kingdome is in the Metropolitane citie, therefore with vs there is no suche cause of a Metropolitane or Archebishop.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is not alleadged as a cause why there shoulde be a Metropolitane, or why he differed from ye rest, or why the calling of the Synode was giuen vnto hym, but rather why he was placed in the chiefe citie: so that these wordes touche not the Metropolitane or his office, but the aptnesse of the place where he shoulde continue. And yet if credite be to be giuen 
                              〈1 line〉
                           yther to interpreters, or to the glosse in Gratian, caus. 9. quae. 3. per singulas, the wordes be not as you interprete them, for thus they be set downe in the booke of Councels, 
                              Tom. 1. Pr
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 pter quod ad Metropolim omnes vndi
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  qui negoti
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  videntur habere concurrant, For the which let all that haue any businesse haue recourse from all places into the Metropolitane citie. An other 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ranslation is thus: Propter quod ad Metropolitanam ciuitatem ab his qui causas habent con
                                 〈1 line〉
                              urratur. And this last interpretation

the authors of the Centuries do vse. 
                              Cent. 4. Of whiche wordes there can be no suche thing gathered, as you doe imagine, but farre otherwise. And the meaning of the Councell is, that suche as haue causes to be heard, may resort to the Metropolitane citie where the Metropolitane is.
                        And you must vnderstand that it was in the power of the Emperour, and other Princes, to appoint the seat of the Metropolitan, where it pleased them, as it appereth in the. 12. cap. of the Councel of Chalcedon, and in the. 17. Hom. of Chrysostome, Ad populum Antiochenum.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 95. Sect. 2.
                     In the Councel of Carthage holden in Cyprians tyme, it appeareth that no Bishoppe had authoritie ouer an other, to compell an other, or to condemne an other, but euery Bishop was left at his owne libertie to answere vnto God, and to make his accounte vnto Christe, and if anye thing were doone against any Bishoppe, it was done by the consent of all the bishoppes in the prouince, or as many as coulde conuemently assemble. Therefore Cyprian whiche was the Metropolitane bishop, had then no authoritie ouer the rest, and yet then there being no christian magistrateT C con
                              〈1 line〉
                           esseth Cyprian to be a Metropolitane. whych would punishe the disorders whiche were committed of the christian bishops, there was greatest, neede that there shoulde haue bene some one, which myght haue had the correction of the reste. If therefore when there was most nede of this absolute authoritie, there neither was nor might be any suche, it foloweth that nowe we haue a Christian magistrate, which may and ought to punyshe the disorders of the Ecclesiasticall persons, and may and ought to call them to account for their faultes, that there shoulde be no suche nede of an Archbishop.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You here fall into the same faulte that a little before you ascribed to me, for you come backe from the Councell of Antioche, whiche was 
                              Anno. 360. to the Councell of Carthage, being 
                              Anno. 260. I omitte to tell you, that that Councell concluded an heresie for the whiche only it was assembled. And therefore though it be in the booke of the Councells, yet is it not reckened among the Councels: Only I demaund the woordes of that Councell that doe signifie one Bishoppe not to haue had authoritie ouer an other. I tolde you before out of Cyprian himselfe, and out of Gregorie Nazianzene, that he had ample and large iurisdiction. The wordes of Cyprian in that Councell, whiche séeme to touche the matter you talke of, I haue expounded and answered before, they make not for your purpose.
                        It is no reason to proue that a Bishop muste not be subiecte to anye, bycause he is lefte at his owne libertie to answere to God, and to make his accompte vnto Christe, For by the same reason he myghte be exempled from the authoritie of the Ciuill Magistrate, and from all Lawes and orders touching Churche matters, and so myghte euery priuate man in lyke manner. But you muste remember that a Bishoppe is so lefte to his owne libertie, to answere vnto God, and make accompte vnto Chryste, that hée muste also acknowledge his duetie towardes man: and be subiecte to orders and lawes.
                        What do you saye for the fréedome of a Bishop from obedience vnto the Archebishop, but it may be sayde lykewyse of his fréedome from subiection to his Prince in lyke matters: and of euery Anabaptist, for his deliuerance from subiection to all superiours▪ Wherfore you wring Cyprians wordes to an euill sense.
                        You haue bin oft tolde that no Archbyshop hath such power ouer either Byshop or inferioure minister, that of his owne authoritie he can do any thing againste them. The lawes of the realme will not suffer it, no the Canon law dothe by no meanes permit it: And therefore you do but dreame of an authoritie that is not.
                        
                           Cyprian being a Metropolitane had authoritie ouer the rest.
                        The ciuill Magistrate doth gouerne the ecclesiasticall state, punisheth disorders among them, calleth them to accompt for their faults by Archbyshops, Byshops, and

other officers, as he doth the same in the ciuil state, by ciuill magistrates. Your meaning is not (I dare say) to haue the Prince heare al matters hir selfe: You wil giue hir leaue to appoint vnder officers, as Moses, Dauid, Solomon, Iehosaphat, & other good kings haue done. If you will not allow the Magistrate so to do, let vs vnderstand your reasons, for surely I beléeue there is some such toy in your head.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 95. Sect. 3.
                     The moderation of their authoritie in the aunciēt times may appeare first, by a canon which is falsely giuen to the Apostles, being as it is like a canon of the councell of Antioch This canon is 
                              〈◊〉
                            both by adding, and 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         whe
                           〈1 line〉
                         in although34. Canon. it ordeyneth one Primate in euery nation ouer the rest, and will not suffer any great matter to be done without him, as also will not suffer him to do any thing without the rest, yet euery Byshop might do that which apperteyned vnto his owne parrish, without him, This you add vnto the canon. and he nothing to do with him in it. But as it seemeth the meaning of the canon was, that if there were any waightie matter to be cōcluded for all the Churches in the nation, then the byshops of euery parish should not enterprise any thing without calling him to councell. Now we see that the Archbyshop medleth with that which euery Byshop doth in his owne dioces, and hath his visitations for that purpose, and will take any matter out of their hands, concludeth also of diuers matters, neuer making the Byshops once priuie to his doings.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If it be a false canon or falsely gyuen to the Apostles, why do you vse it as a proofe? I might 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ay vnto you, as you said before vnto me: haue you such penurie of proofes, that you are constrayned to alleadge false canons? if it be a canon of the Councell of Antioch, shew what canon it is: if it be within that Councel, vndoutedly it is the. 9. canon before by you alledged, and how muche that proues your cause the very ignorant reader may iudge.
                        But let vs heare this canon be it true or false, and consider your collections of it:The canon alledged against himselfe. the wordes I haue recited before, but I will set them downe againe, that your pythy reasons (reasoning altogyther against your selfe) may appeare. The Byshops of euery nation or countrie must know who amongst them is chiefe, whome they ought to esteemeCan. Apost. 34. as their head, and do nothing without his councell, besides those things only, which belong vnto their owne parish, and the places which are vnder it: neyther ought he to do any thing without the aduise of them all: for so shal there be concord, and God shall be glorifyed by Christ Iesus in the holy Ghost. &c. Here first ther must be a Primate or chiefe Byshop (that is Archbyshop) of euery nation or countrie, whome the rest of the byshops must acknowledge as it were for their head. Secondly, the Byshops must do nothing vnaccustomed without him. Thirdly, that the other Byshops may do those things only 
                              quae ad parochiam eius, & regiones ei subditas pertinent: VVhich perteine vnto his parish, and places subiect vnto it which last words you leaue out. Last of all, that thys Primate must do nothing without their consents: what hath the Archbishop lost by this canon? surely not one iote: I think verily he doth not require so much▪ Euery byshop may do as much in his owne dioces now, (the authoritie of the Prince and hir lawes reserued) as he might do by that canon, for the Archbyshop dothe not rule by will, but by law, not of himselfe, but vnder the Prince, to whome both he and all other byshops be subiect.
                        You hit nothing lesse than the meaning of the canon: nay vndoutedly you imagine a sense contrary to the expresse words of the canon.
                        When the Archbyshop dothe visite, it is not to make newe lawes, or appointe newe orders (excepte he be commaunded so to doe by greater authoritie) but to see those orders and lawes kepte, that all Bishoppes and other are bounde vnto, and therefore he doth nothing in their diocesse contrary to that which they are bound to do, neyther doth he cōclude any thing without them, which by their consent and authoritie of the law and Prince is not giuen vnto him.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 5. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 95. Sect. 4.
                     Higinus or as some thinke Pelagius (I speake here as Platina reporteth, not thinking thatPlatina cap Higin. in Higinus time, ther was any Metropolitane) ordeyned that no Metropolitane should cōdemne any Byshop, vnlesse the matter wer first both heard, and discussed by the byshops of that prouince, at what time, and after a greate while, a byshop was the A grosse petitio of the principle, or rather an vntruth. same we call a minister. Nowe the Archbyshop will without any further assistance or discussion by others suspend him, and in the end also throw him out of his charge, and if he haue the same authoritie ouer a byshop, as a byshop ouer the minister, (as it is said) he may do the like vnto him also.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is another forged witnesse (such sound proofes the man hath that reprooues other men for the like) and yet God knoweth his witnesse maketh nothing for him. For who giueth authoritie to the Archbyshop to depriue eyther Byshop or inferiour minister, without due proofe and examination of the cause? touching consente of other, if he deale with him according to law, then dealeth he with the consent, not of the other Byshops only, but of all the realme: bycause that which is done by law: is done by the consent of all that consented either to the confirming or making of that law. Your glaunces by the way, (that there was then no Metropolitane: that then the same were byshops which we now cal ministers) bycause they be but barely affirmed, it shal be sufficient as flatly to denie them, and for proofe thereof to referre the Reader vnto that which hath bin spoken before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 95. Sect. 5.
                     The councell of Antioch ordeyned, that if the voyces of the byshops were euen, and that ifCan. 17. 
                        No such thing in the. 17. canon. halfe did condemne him, and halfe cleare him, that then the Metropolitane byshop should call of the next prouince some other byshops, which should make an end of the controuersie: whereby appeareth that the Metropolitane had so small authoritie and power ouer and aboue the rest, that he had not so much as the casting voyce, when both sides were euen. And therefore it appeareth that besides the names of Metropolitane, there was little or no resemblance betweene those that were then, and those which be now.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue written in the margent the. 17. canon of that councell, in the which ther are no suche words, nor any thing tending to that purpose: it is the. 14. canon, that I think you meane, for in that canō it is thus determined: that if a Byshop be iudged forCon. Antio. ca. 14. certaine crimes and it happen that the other byshops of the same prouince varie in iudgement, some thinking him to be innocent, some guiltie, for the resoluing of all doubte, it pleased the holy Synode, that the Metropolitane byshop shal call for other iudges out of the next prouince, to end the cōtrouersie, who togyther with the Byshops of the same prouince, shall approue that which is iust and right. Here is no mention of equalitie in voyces, but only of disagréeing in iudgemēt among the Byshops of the same prouince. Likewise in this canon it appeareth that a Metropolitane had authoritie ouer moe prouinces than one, for he might cal the Byshops of another prouince to decide the matter, if the Byshops of the same prouince could not agrée.
                        I sée not how this canon can any thing help you: for now neyther the Metropolitane,The authoritie of Archbyshops and byshops, lesse, than in times past. nor all the Byshops in the prouince can depriue any Byshop without the consent of ye Prince: so that in that poynt the authoritie of the Metropolitane is nothing encreased, nor yet the authoritie of the Byshops. For then as it appeareth in the▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            canon of that councell, if a Priest or a Deacon had bin condemned of his owne byshop, o
                                 〈1 line〉
                               a byshop of a Synode, it was not lawfull for them to complaine to the Emperoure: if theyCan. 12. had complayned, it was determined in the same canon, that they should neuer be pardoned, nor haue any place of satisfaction, nor hope of restitution. But now it is farre otherwise. The. 11. canon of the same councell is much to the same effect. Wherefore theCan. 11. authoritie of the Metropolitane & other Byshops is not encreased as you presēd, but both the Metropolitane and other Byshops had asmuch authoritie then ouer other priests, ministers, and deacons, as they haue now, as appeareth by sundry canons of

the same councell.
                        In the. 4. canon it is decréede, that if a Byshop condemned by a Synode, or a priest, orCanon. 4. a Deacon condemned by his owne Byshop, shal take vpon him to exercise any mini
                                 〈1 line〉
                              terie, he shall be without all hope of restitution, and who soeuer doth communicate with hym, shall be excommunicated. In the. 5 canon it is thus determined: If any priest or deaconCanon. 5. contemning his proper Bishop, hath separated himselfe from the Churche, and gathering people apart, hath erected an altar, and hathe not obeyed the admonition of his Bishop, neyther hath consented and agreed vnto him calling him backe diuers times, let this man be condemned, and deposed by all meanes, and let him not obteyne any remedie afterward, bycause he cannot receiue againe his dignitie. But if he persist to trouble the Churche, let him be corrected by the outward power as a seditious person. By these canons it is euident that the Bishop of euery seuerall diocesse had authoritie by himselfe to excommunicate, to depriue, and to seclude from the ministerie any priest, deacon, or any other of the cleargie in more ample and large manner, than he hath at this day. The which thing also may be séene in the. 6. &. 12. canons of the same Councell: so that you haue sought for help at the Councell, whiche is one of the greatest enimies to thys your assertion, and doth flatly condemne it. Diuers canons of the which Councell, if they were practised, woulde soone remedie the sects and schismes whiche you haue stirred.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 95. Sect. vlt.
                     Now, to consider how the Byshops which are now, differ from the Byshops, which were in times past, I must cal to thy remembrance (gentle reader) that which I haue spokē before, which was that then there was, as appeareth out of Cyprian, and Ierome and others, one Byshop in eueryMany vntruthes heaped togither parish or congregation: now one is ouer a thousand, then euery Byshop had a seueral Church where he preached and ministred the sacraments: now he hath none, then he ruled that one Church (as I shewed out of Ierome) in cōmon with the elders of the same: nowe he ruleth a thousand by himselfe, shutting out the ministers, to whome the rule and gouernment belongeth: then he ordeyned not any minister of the Church, except he were first chosen by the presbyterie, and approued by the people of that place wherevnto he was ordeyned: now he ordeyneth where there is no place voyde, and of his priuate authoritie, without eyther choyse or approbation of presbyterie or people. Then he excommunicated not, nor receyued the excommunicated, but by sentences of the eldership, and consent of the people, as shall appeare afterward: now he doth both. And thus you see that contrary to the word of God, he hath gotten into his owne hand, and pulled to himselfe both the preheminēce of the other ministers, and the liberties of the Church, which God by his word had giuen.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is scarse one worde of all this true, and surely I muche maruell that you dare be so bolde so manifestlie to speake against your owne conscience & knowledge. I haue before sufficiently proued all that is here by you auouched, to be cleane contrary for the most part. It shall be therefore sufficient, as briefly now to answer, as you do propound. Demetrius was Byshop of all the dioces in Egypt and Alexandria.Euse. li. 6. cap. 1 Cypr. li. 4. ep. 8 Chrisostome. 
                           
                              Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 1. Cyprian was Byshop of Carthage, 
                              Numidia, Mauritania, Cyprian lib. 4. epist. 8. Timothie being Byshop had the gouernment almost of the whole countrie of Asia, as Chrysostome declareth vpon the. 1. Tim. 5. and. 2. Tim. 4. Titus was Byshop of ye whole Ile of Creta, as the same Chrysost. testifyeth 
                              ad Tit. 1. I
                              〈1 line〉
                            aue before by sundryIdem. examples and testimonies, by diuers councels, and especially the councell of Nice, 
                              〈◊〉
                            the vanitie & vntruth of this that is here affirmed, that is, that there was one Byshop in euery parish and congregation: and the words of Cyprian and Ierome be cleane 
                              〈1 line〉
                           rary: for they both make a difference betwene a Byshop, to whome the gouernment of many pastors is committed, and a pastor that hath but one seuerall flocke or charge. For further vnderstanding whereof, I referre ye Reader to that, which is spoken before.
                        The byshops haue now as seuerall churches to preache and minister the sacraments in, as they had then. They haue no more authoritie in gouernment now, than they had at that time, nor so much: and yet if they had more authoritie than they eyther haue now, or had then, I thinke it were more for the commoditie of the Church,

the state of the time, and conditions of men considered.
                        As for ruling euery seuerall churche by those, whiche you call Elders, you haue shewed no such thing out of Ierome, neyther can you. For Ierome in that place you meane, by presbyteri meaneth Priests, as he dothe in all other places that I remember. Neyther doth he there speake of particular parishes.
                        Touching the electing and ordeyning of ministers, sufficient hath bin spoken before.Tract. 3. The Byshop doth nothing therein, but that which he may iustly by the word of God, and testimonie of the best and most worthy writers.
                        Of excommunication we shall speake hereafter, you do glance at it now out ofTract. 18. place. And thus he that is an indifferēt Reader may vnderstand that the Byshops in these days in this Church of England haue no other authoritie, than the word of God doth giue vnto them: The Byshops of the primitiue Church haue pract
                              〈1 line〉
                           sed: ye libertie of the Church wel beareth: and the state of the time, and condition of men requireth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 96. Lin. 7.
                     And as for the offices wherein there is any laboure or trauayle, those they haue turned vnto the other ministers, as for example in tunes past A worthy councell. it was not lawfull for him that was then anHispal. con. ca. elder, to preach or minister the sacraments in the presence of the Byshop, bycause the Byshop himselfe should do it, and now those which they call elders, may preach and minister the sacraments by the Byshops good licence, although he be present.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is no iust cause of complaint for most of the Byshops in that behalfe. For I thinke the time hath not bin, wherein there were moe preaching Byshops, than are at this day, in this Church. But do you thinke that a minister may not preach or minister the sacraments in the presence of the Byshop? Or do you so well allow ofA corrupt councell alledged. that Councell and canon quoted in your margent? It was the second councell called Hispalense concilium, it was not generall, but prouinciall, celebrated Anno. Dom. 659. the contents of the canon by you alledged are these. That a Priest may not cōsecrate alters, but only the Byshop: that a Priest and Chorepiscopi may not consecrate virgines, erect altars,Hisp. Con. 2. Can. 7. blesse and anoynt them, hallow churches, make holy oyle, and such like, but only the Byshop. Likewise that no priest may baptise, say Masse▪ teach the people, or blesse them in the presence of the Byshop. Surely this is a worthy Councel, and a notable canon, especially for you to alledge, that haue so depraued other worthy writers for some imperfections founde in them.
                        But what doth it make for your purpose? They might both preach and ministerThe councell alledged against himself the sacraments in the presence of the Byshop, if he willed them, and so is the canon. This law was made for the encreasing of the Byshops pompe and dignitie: for no man might presume to speake or do any thing in their presence, without their leaue and licence: so were they estéemed thē, and such authoritie had they. But if our Byshops should clayme the like, you would say that it were an vntollerable arrogancie and pride.
                        I would to God all those that be deluded by you, would consider your allegations, and the grounds of your proofes. Surely I woulde be loth to alledge any Councell of that time to proue any thing in controuersie. Much more loth would I be to 
                              〈◊〉
                            so corrupt a canon: but lothest of all to alledge that, which should be so flat against 
                              〈◊〉
                            cause, & proue the cleane cōtrary to that, which I affirme, as this doth in your 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪
                        
                        And here I haue one thing to tell you, yt diuers of those things, wherin you 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           T. C. chargeth the office with the fault of the men. make this difference betwixt our Byshops and those of the primitiue church, if t
                              〈1 line〉
                           ey were true, yet wer they no saults in the office, but in the men: as for example, thys which you here set downe. Will you make a differēce in the offices of our Byshops and those of olde time, bycause some of them do not preach? This compareth the mē togither, not the offices, except you proue that it is forbidden or vnlawfull for one of our Byshops to preach. There are other such like, which I omitte.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 5. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 96. Sect. 1.
                     Now if you wil also consider how much the Lord ship, pompe, and statelinesse of the Byshops in our days, differ from the simplicitie of them in times past▪ I will giue you also a taste therof, if first of all I shew the beginning, or as it were the fountaine where vpon the pompe grew, whichMarke how this is proued. was when in stead of hauing a Byshop in euery parishe and congregation, they began to make a Byshop of a whole dioces, and of a thousand congregations.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If the pompe began as you say, then began it in the Apostles time, for then began they to make one Byshop ouer a whole diocesse, as Timothie almost ouer all Asia, and Titus ouer all Creta, as I haue declared. Which order hath bin from that day to this obserued throughout all Christendome, as it may appeare by that, which is already said.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 96. Sect. 2.
                     In an epistle of Zacharie vnto It is an epistle o
                              〈1 line〉
                            Pope Zacharie to Boniface, not of Zacharie to Pope Boniface. Pope Boniface, it is thus written, it hath bin oftētimes decreede,Concil. to. 3 epist. Zacha Papae ad Bonifac. yt there should not be a Bishop apointed in euery village▪ or little citie, least they should waxe vile An vntruth as will appeare. through the multitude: wherby it both appeareth that ther was wont to be a Byshop in euery parish, and vpon how corrupt and euill consideration one Byshop was set ouer a whole diocesse. No doubt, those that were authors of this, had learned to well our olde prouerb, the fewer the better cheare, but the more Byshops, the merier it had bin with Gods people.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This epistle was writtē by Pope Zacharie to one Boniface which was Byshop in France, and not to Pope Boniface: moreouer it is in the. 2. tome of Councels, and you haue quoted in your margent the third. But to the matter.
                        You haue not one word in that epistle to proue that there was wont at any timeThe Epistle of Pope Zacharie falsified to be in euery parish a Byshop. And you haue falsely alleadged the words of the epistle: for these words (least they should waxe vile through the multitude) are not ther to be found. The words of the Epistle be there. For you must remember what we are commaunded by the olde canons to obserue, that we ought not to ordein Bishops in villages, and smal cities, least the name of a Byshop should waxe vile. What one word is there here of placing Byshops in euery parish? Zacharie telleth Boniface, that it is according to the olde canons that Byshops should not be placed in such smal cities, but in more ample and large cities, bycause the contemptiblenesse of the place, dothe oftentimes bring contempt to the person, and a Byshop ought to be estéemed and reuerenced. If you had red the epistle, you should haue perceiued that this Boniface had lately conuerted to christianitie interiorem Germaniam, and that he had ordeyned amōg them certaine Byshops to gouerne them, whome he desired Pope Zacharie by his authoritie to confirme, to whome Pope Zacharie answering, willeth him to consider whether the places be so conuenient, or the number of the people so great, vt Episcopos habere mereantur. Meminerimus enim (saith he) quid in sacris canonibus. &c. as I haue rehearsed them befor
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ▪ And a little after he nameth the places, where he will haue the byshops seates 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            that there is nothing lesse ment, than that there was in euery parish a Bishop, 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            much as there was there before no Byshop in any parish: but this is all that may be gathered, that the seates of Byshops were by the olde canons apointed to be in the best cities, and most famous places: which to be true you may soone perceiue in those canons themselues, mētioned here by Zacharie: they are to be found. dist. 80.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 96. Sect. 2.
                     And they might with as good reason hinder the sunne from shining in all places, and the raine 
                           〈◊〉
                         falling vpon al grounds, for feare they should not be set by, being common, as to bring in such

a wicked decree, whereby vnder pretēce of deliuering the Byshop from contempt, they sought nothing else but an ambitious and stately Lordship ouer those, whiche had not that title of Byshop that they had, although they did the office of a Byshop better than they did. And what intollerable presumptiō is this, to chaunge the institution of God, as though he When, or where did God ordeyne this? which ordeyned not one only, but some number more or lesse of Byshops in euery Church, did not sufficiently foresee, that the multitude and plentie of Byshops could breede no contempt of the office. And it may be as well ordeyned that the children of poore men shoulde not call them that begar them, fathers and mothers, but only the children of the rich, and of the noble, least that if euery man that hath children, shoulde be called a father, fathers should be set nothing by.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is a maruellous matter that you delight to runne so fast vpon a false string: I tell you once agayne, that you neuer red that Epistle, neyther yet those canons that it speaketh of. If you had red them, you would neuer haue affirmed (if there be any modestie left in you) that the multitude of Byshops is alledged there as a cause of contempte, no such thing being mentioned. The canons haue a very good consideration, and be not wicked, but wise and godly. This superioritie of Byshops is Gods owne institution, and it hath a necessary vse in the Church of God, as is shewed before. It hathe bin, and may be abused: and it is, and may be well vsed. All these glorious words of yours, are but very wordes, and therefore as words, I will committe them to the winde.
                        This one thing I cannot let passe that you say, God ordeyned not one onely, but someBut one Bishop in a citie number moe or lesse of Byshops in euery Church. What scripture haue you to proue that there should be more Byshops than one in one Church? What one example in al the primitiue Church haue you to warrant this your assertion? Nay you haue the whole practise of the Church to the contrary, euen from the beginning. Iames alone was Byshop of Ierusalem, Timothie of Ephesus, Titus of Creta, Clemens of Rome. &c. and it hath bin always compted as monstrous to haue two Byshops of one citie, as to haue two heads of one body But such bolde assertions without proofe, are méete principles for such a ruinous and totering platforme, as you dreame of.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 96. Sect. 2.
                     And here let vs obserue by what degrees and stayers, Sathan lifted the child of perdition vnto that proud title of vniuersall Byshop. First In what place of scripture▪
                         where the Lord did ordeyne that there shoulde be diuers pastors, elders, or Byshops in euery congregation, Is not this soundly proued▪
                         Sathan wrought first, that there should be but one in euery Church: this was no doubt the first steppe. Afterwards he pushed further, and stirred vp diuers not to content themselues to be Byshops of one Church, but to desire to be Byshops of a dioces, wherevnto although it seemeth that ther was resistance (in that it is sayd, that it was decreede often) yet in the end this wicked attempt preuayled, and this was another steppe: then were there Archbyshops of whole prouinces, whiche was the thirde stayer vnto the seate of Antichrist. Afterwards they were patriarches of one of the fower corners of the whole world, the whole Church being assigned to the iurisdiction of fower, that is to say of the Romaine, Constantinopolitane, Antiochene, and Alexandrine Byshops, and these fower stayers being layde of Sathan, there was but an easie stride for the Byshop of Rome into that chaire of pestilence, wherein he now sitteth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        All this is as coldely proued, as it is boldely affirmed, for here is neyther scripture, doctor, story, Councell, or any thing else, but ipse dixit. How proue you that the Lorde ordeyned that there should be in euery congregation diuers pastors, elders, or Byshops? The place of scripture (if there be any) had bin soone quoted. Or howe proue you that Sathan wrought first that there should be but one in euery Church? Is it Sathās workeSathan not the cause of one Byshop in one church. that one Church should haue but one pastor? This is straunge doctrine, and far from an Apostolicall spirite: contrary to the practise of the Apostles, and of the Church euen from the beginning. But séeing you haue so barely set it downe without any kynde of proofe, I will passe it ouer, by putting you to your proofe. But yet tell me, dyd Sathan stirre vp Timothie and Titus, who were Byshops of one whole diocesse?

Did he stirre vp the other auncient fathers and godly Bishops of whome I haue spoken? Whither will this slaunderous mouth reache? whome will this venemous tongue spare, if it speake so spitefully of such worthie Pastors?
                        Your collection of resistance that hath béene to such superioritie (béeing grounded of the place, that you neuer sawe nor red) is rashe and vnaduised. For if you had séene eyther that Epystle, or those Canons, you woulde (or at the least you might) haue learned another lesson.
                        Archbishops, Patriarches, &c. were allowed by the Councell of Nice, the godlyest, and the most perfect Councell (since the Apostles time) that euer was. And did Sathan rule there also and preuayle? O that Arius were aliue to heare it. These steppes whereof you make Sathan the authour, and whereby you say, the Bishop of Rome hath ascended into the Chayre of pestilence, &c. haue béene the best, and most conuenient kinde of gouernment, that euer was in the Church since the Apostles time: approued and allowed by the best Councels, and the next meanes to haue kept Antichrist out of his seate, if in all places they had remayned in theyr full force and authoritie.
                        But this I may not passe ouer, that you in effect confesse your kinde of gouernment by elders to haue ceased before the Councell of Nice, and also one Bishop to haue béene ouer one whole Diocesse before that time, in that you say that the childe of perdition was lifted vp by these degrées, the last whereof was allowed in the Nicene Councell.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 96. Sect. 2.
                     Hauing nowe shewed howe this Lordly estate of the Bishop began, and vppon what a rotten grounde it is builded, I come to shewe howe farre the Bishops in our tyme are for theyr pompe and outwarde statelinesse degenerated from the Bishops of elder tymes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        A man woulde haue thought that you being so great an enimie to those degrées, woulde not haue thus concluded vpon so small proofe, and the same vtterly vntrue: vsing onely for your grounde the Epistle of Pope Zacharie, which maketh nothing for your purpose. Now let vs sée, how farre the Bishops of our tyme are for theyr pompe. &c. degenerated from the Bishops of elder tymes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 96. Sect. 3.
                     And here I call to remembrance, that which was spoken of the poore estate of Basill, and Theodorete: and if M. Doctour will say (as he doth indeede in a certaine place) that then was a time of persecution, and this is a time of peace, it is easily answered, that although Basill were vnder persecution, yet Theodorete liued vnder good Emperours. But that shall appeare better by the Canons which were rules giuen for the Bishops to frame themselues by.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is for lacke of other examples, that you are constreyned to repeate these: To the poorenesse of Theodorete I haue answered: there may be as poore Bishops now, as there was then, and there might be as riche Bishops then, as there are nowe. It is not one or two examples that can proue the contrarie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 5. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 97. Sect. 1.
                     In the 4. Councell of Carthage it is degreed that the Bishops shoulde haue a little house14. Canon▪ it calleth it hospitiolū
                           ▪ 15. Canon. neare vnto the Church, what is this compared with so many fayre large houses, and with the princely Palace of a Bishop? And in the same Councell it is decreed that he shoulde haue the furniture and stuffe of his house after the common sort, and that his table and dyet shoulde be poore, and that he should get him estimation by faythfulnesse and good conuersation.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In the. 52. and. 53. Canons of the same Councell, Clearkes, how learned so euer they be in Gods woorde, are willed to get their liuing by some occupation, or by husbandrie, but I thinke you will not haue them so to do now at this time. Wherefore you must cōsider the diuersitie of the time and state of the Church. If God hath dealt now more bountifully with his Church in externall benefites, if he hath put into the hearts of Christian Princes thus to deale with the ministers of the woorde: and if this state and condition be necessary for this time, and people, why should you enuie it? Ritches and fayre houses be no hinderances, but helpes, if they be vsed accordingly: and commonly hypocrisie and pryde, lieth hidde vnder the name of pouertie and simplicitie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 97. Sect. 1.
                     And in another Councell, that the Bishops should No suche thing in that place. not giue themselues to feastes, but be5. Canon concil. Tyronen
                              〈1 line〉
                           . content with a litle meate. Let these Bishops be compared with oures, whose chambers shine with gilte, whose walles are hanged with clothes of Auris, whose cupbordes are loden with plate, whose tables and diets, are furnished with multitude and diuersitie of dishes, whose dayly dinners are feastes, let them I say be compared together, and they shall be founde so vnlike, that if those old Bishops were aliue, they would not know eche other. For they would thinke that oures were Princes, and ours would thinke that they were some hedge Priests, not worthie of their acquaintaunce or fellowship.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you meane the first Tyronense Concilium, there is no such thing to be found in the 5. Canon of it, nor in the whole Councell. The fifth Canon conteyneth a profitable admonition for you and such as you are, for it forbiddeth vnder the payne of excōmunication, that any beyng a Clearke should leaue of his calling, and become a lay man. If you meane the seconde Tyronense Concilium. I make you the like answere. Belike your collector hath deceyued you, but what if it were so? This onely might be gathered, that vnlesse Bishops then had bene welthie, there should not haue néeded a decrée against feasting. If our Bishops should make the like now, it would be thought they did it for sparing. And I thinke that, and such like Canons méete not onely for Bishops, but for all states and degrées of men.
                        Riches and costly furniture bée no impediment to a godly man for doingRiches no impediment to godly men. Wherein our Bishops may be compared with the olde Bishops. his duetie. And in suche externall thinges the condition of the time, and state of the Countrie is to be obserued. Lette our Bishoppes be compared with them in truthe of doctrine, in honestie of life, in diligent walking in theyr vocation, and in knowledge (I speake of the moste in bothe ages) and I thinke the difference will not be so greate, but that they maye bothe knowe one another, and very well

agrée among themselues: this onely excepted, that the doctrine of the Gospell is now much more purely professed by our Bishops, than it was at that tyme by them, for both the Councels are in sundrie poynts very corrupt.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 97. Sect. 2.
                     In the same councell of Carthage, it was decreed that no Bishop sitting in any place shoulde suffer any Minister or Elder to stande. Nowe I will report me to themselues howe this is kept,Can. 34. and to the poore ministers which haue to do with them, and come before them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        A poore quarell: though this humilitie is to be required in all Bishops, yet is it to be vsed with discretion: for thus to deale with a proude and hawtie stomacke, were but to giue nourishment to arrogancie and contempt. It is méete that euerie man haue that honour and reuerence giuen vnto him, which his place, his office, and his person requireth. And as it is humilitie in him to remitte any part of it: euen so it is an intollerable contempt and pryde for those that be inferiours, so to looke for suche equalitie, that in the meane tyme they refuse to doe that, whiche ciuilitie, good maners, and duetie requyreth. But let all men consider those notes and tokens of your hawtie stomackes, and perswade themselues, that it woulde not bée long before you woulde chalenge the same equalitie, wyth other states and degrées in like maner.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 97. Sect. 3.
                     The Bishoppes in tymes past had no tayle nor trayne of men after them, and thought it a slaunder to the Gospell to haue a number of men before and behinde them. And therefore is He was reproued for vsing himselfe like a capitaine, being accompanied with a garde of souldiours. 
                        Paulus Samosatenus noted as one that brought Religion into hatred, and as one that feemed toEuseb. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 7. cap. 30. take delight rather to be a Capitaine of two hundred, than a Bishop, bycaus
                           〈1 line〉
                         he had gotten hym a sorte of seruing men to waight on him, An other example not vnlyke and lykewyse reprehended is in Ruffine of one Gregorie for George. Gregorie a Bishop. Nowe in our dayes it is thought a commendation toRuf. lib. 1. cap. 23. the Bishop, a credite to the Gospell, if a Bishop haue. 30. 40. 60. or mo wayting of him, some before, some behinde, whereof three partes of them (set a part the carying of a dishe vnto the table) haue no honest or profitable calling to occupie themselues in two houres of the day, to the filling of the Churche and common wealth also with all kinde of disorders, and greater incommodities, than I minde to speake of, bicause it is not my purpose.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In Eusebius it is sayde that Paulus Samosatenus vsed to walke publikely in the market places reading letters and boasting himselfe, being accompanied with a number
                                 
                                    〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                 , that is accompanied with spearemen, and halbardes. The example of P. Samo▪ vniustly applied to our Bishops. of Souldiours some before him and some behinde him, more like to a Capitaine than a Bishop. If any of our Bishops walke in the stréetes to be séene, or stande in the market places, or other open and publike assemblies reading of letters, accompanied with Souldiours and men of warre, then may it be truly sayde of them, that is here truly spoken of Paulus Samosatenus. But if they being farre from such vanitie, kéepe that countenance and retinue of men, which their place, the maner of their Countrey, the honour of the Prince, the state of the Church requireth, then doe you vncharitably and vniustly applie this example agaynst them. But vnlesse Paulus Samosatenus had béene riche and wealthie, howe coulde this pompe of his haue béene mainteyned? Wherefore this example is rather agaynst you, than for you: neyther doth it condemne wealth and ryches in Bishops, but pride, vainglorie, and lightnesse. For they accuse him of spoyling the Church, and thereby enriching himselfe.
                        
                           In the example of George, whom you 
                              〈1 line〉
                           all Gregorie, mentioned in 
                              〈1 line〉
                           uffine, there is no worde spoken of any seruing men, or souldiours: onely he is there reproued, because he got his Bishoprike by violence, and thought that the office of iudgement inRufsin. lib. 1. cap. 23. ciuill causes was rather committed vnto him, than the Priesthoode. &c. If any Bishop offende in the like with vs, it is the fault of the man, not of the office. By this example also it may appeare, that Bishoppes in those dayes had ryches and authoritie: For this abusing of their wealth and authoritie, doth argue that they had both, which they might haue vsed rightly and well.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 20. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 97. Sect. 4.
                     And here I will note another cause which brought in this pompe, and princely estate of Byshops, wherein although I will say more in a worde for the pompous estate, than M. doctour hath done in all his treatise: yet I will shewe that although it were more tollerable at the fyrst, nowe it is by no meanes to be borne wyth. Theo. li. 
                              〈1 line〉
                            cap. 8. In the Ecclesiasticall Storie we reade that the inscriptions of diuers Epistles sent vnto Byshops were 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Li. eodem cap. 18. We reade also of 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         house of salutations, which Ambrose Bishop of Millayn had. As for the tytle of (moste honourable Lordes) it was not so great, nor so stately, as the name of a Lorde or knight in oure Countrey, for all those that knowe the maner of the speach of the Grecians doe well vnderstande, howe they vsed to call euerie one of any meane countenance in the common wealth where he lyued 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ; that is Lorde, so we see also the Euangelists turne Rabbi which signifyeth master by the Gre
                           〈1 line〉
                        ke worde 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Lorde, as lykewyse in Fraunce they call euery one that is a Gentleman, or hath any honest place Monseur, and so they wyll say also, sauing your honour. Nowe we know this worde (Lorde) in our Countrey is vsed otherwise, to note some great personage, eyther by reason of birth, or by reason of some high dignitie in the common wealth, which he occupieth, and therefore those tytles although they were somewhat excessiue, yet were they nothing so swelling and stately as ours are.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The wise man sayth, Let not thine owne mouth prayse thee: but you for lacke ofPro. 27. good neighbours, or else for tootoo much selfe loue, oftentymes forget this lesson, as in this place.
                        Howsoeuer the Grecians vsed to call euery one of any meane countenance in the commonThe tytle of most honourable Lorde. wealth, where he lyued 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , Lorde, yet did they not vse to call him 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            most honourable Lorde, for that tytle was onely giuen to such as were of great dignitie and authoritie: as it is in the place of Theodorete (by you quoted) giuen to Bishops: and therefore you haue made an obiection, which you cannot answere. This worde Lorde, doth signifie preheminence and superioritie, and hauing this title (most honourable,) ioyned with it, it cannot but signifie some greate state and degrée of authoritie.
                        The same I answere to that, which followeth. And yet Rabbi was a name gyuen 
                              primarijs hominibus, & honore aliquo praeditis: to the chiefe men, and those, which wereRabbi. indued with some honour: and in that the Euangelistes do translate it Lorde, it is manifest that this name, Lorde, signified then a degrée of superioritie: but hauing (as I sayde) this tytle (most honourable) added vnto it, as it is in that place of Theodorete, it cannot but signifie some especiall preheminence, and therefore equiualent with the titles now vsed. Master Caluine vpon the. 20. of Iohn. verse. 16, sayth that (Rabboni)Caluine. which is there interpreted (master) is 
                              nomen non modò 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 onorificum: not onely an honouble name, but also, 
                              quod professionem continet obedientiae, such as conteyneth a profession of obedience.
                        
                        But doe the tytles of honour, and degrée giuen vnto Bishops so much trouble your hawtie stomacke? Surely you are not then of that spirit, that the olde auncientUerie honourable titles giuē to bishops. fathers were, who disdeyned not to call Bishoppes by as honourable tytles as wée

doe: looke in Atha. his. 2. Apol you shall there find the Synode gathered at Ierusalem, writing to the Priestes of Alexand call Athanasius sundrie tymes Dominum, not as byAtban. Apol 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            a common tytle, but a tytle of dignitie, 
                              quum vobis restituet pastorem vestrum & dominum comministrum nostrum Ath
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 nasium: VVhen he shall restore vnto you your Pastor and Lorde our fellow minister Athanasius. In the same Apol. Bishops are called 
                              domini preciosissimi, most excellent or worthie Lordes. And it is euident in the same booke, that there was no other tytle gyuen to the Emperoure himselfe, for there hée is onely called (Lorde) and so were other of his Nobles in like maner. So that in those dayes it was not grudged at, to giue vnto Bishoppes the same ty
                              〈1 line〉
                           les of honour, that was giuen to the Emperour & other Nobles. The name of (most reuerend) is as much as the name of most honourable, and yet was that name also giuen vnto Bishops in Athanasius tyme, as appeareth in the same booke in sundrie places. For Athanasius him selfe is called by his Priestes and Deacons reuerendissimus Episcopus.
                        
                        
                           Eusebius Nicomed. wryting to Paulinus Bishop of Tyrus vseth this style, 
                              Domino meo Paulino, &c. To my Lorde Paulinus to. 1. con. But what shoulde I labour to proue the antiquitie of such tytles, which cannot be vnknowne to such as be learned? I had more neede to declayme agaynst the pryde and hautinesse of such, as do disdaine to vse them: but I will not spende paper in wordes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 21. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 97. Sect. 5. 6.
                     And as touching Ambrose house, albeit the worde doth not employ so great gorgeou
                           〈1 line〉
                        nesse nor maginfycence of a house, as the Palaces and o
                           〈1 line〉
                        her magnificall buildings of our Bishops, yet the cause where vpon this rose, doth more excuse Ambrose, who being taken from great wealth and gouernment in the common wealth, giuing ouer his office, did reteyneIt was the house belonging to the Bishop. his house and that which he had gotten.
                     But our BishopsA heape of slaunders. do mainteyne this pompe and excesse, of the charges of the Church, with whose goodes a great number of ydle loytering seruing men are mainteyned, which ought to be bestowed vpon the Ministers, which want necessarie finding for theyr familyes, and vpon the poore and maintenance of the Uniuersityes. As for these ryotous expences of the Church goodes, when many other Ministers want, and of making great dinners, and interteyning great Lordes and magistrates, and of the answere to them that say they do helpe the Church by this meanes, I will referre the reader to that, which Ierome wryteth in an Epistle ad Nepotianum monachum, where this is handled more at large.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your answere for Ambrose his house hath no probabilitie in it, for the wordesAmbrose house within the bounds of the Church. of Theodorete in that place, do plainly declare that it was neare vnto the Churche, yea 
                              infra sept
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  Ecclesiae: within the bondes or close of the Church, and therefore most like to be the house perteyning to the Bishoprike, and not any part of Ambrose his former 
                              〈◊〉
                           . For if you remember, you sayde a little before, that it was decréed in the. 4. Councell of Carthage. Can. 14. that a Bishop shoulde haue his house neare vnto the Church. But wise men can consider from whence such vnlikely assertions without any shew of proofe do come.
                        Bishops buylde not these great houses of the Churches goodes, but receyue themBishops defended against the slaunderous replie. as left vnto them by such as were farre from séeking a spoyle: they vso them according to the lawes of the lande: and their number of men can in no respect be discommended, tending to the defense and strength of the realme, the honour of the Prince, and their owne honest and góod education. Our Bishops therefore vse the goodes of the Church according to the first institution and foundation, and I doubt not but they vse them to more profite both of the Church and common wealth, than they should be vsed, if your phansies might take place.
                        Your complaint for ministers, for the poore. &c. may be otherwise satisfyed than byProuision 
                                 〈◊〉
                               ministers. a spoyle: For if benefices were rightly vsed, the Ministers of thys Kealme

are better prouided for, than in any rountrey or age: yea there are mo sufficient lyuings for them besydes the Bishoprikes, than can be supplyed with able ministers. The poore also are well prouided for (God be thanked,) by sundrie meanes, if lawes
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ròuision for the poore. made for the same were duely executed, and Hospitalles with suche other prouisions delyuered from vnreasonable Leases, and bestowed vppon the poore according to their fyrst ordinaunces. Wherefore this clamour of yours is nothing but theWhere vnto the Repliers clamour tendeth. The same axe is lifted against Uniuersities, that hacketh at byshops landes. voyce of an enuious spirite proclayming the spoyle of the Churche, to the decay of learning, and bringing in of barbarisme, if it be not in time preuented.
                        The Uniuersityes are much beholding to you for your care ouer them: but what reasons haue you vsed agaynst the lyuings and houses of Byshoppes, that may not also be vsed agaynst their landes and Colledges: for in tymes past, when that Councell of Carthage (before by you alledged) was holden, there were nosuche Colledges indued with such possessions, as there are nowe. Neyther are there (as I haue hearde) in Christendome the like Colledges, and the like liuings for Studie
                              〈1 line〉
                           es, as are in this Realme of Englande. Wherefore if such examples and conditions of Countries, tymes, and persons bée sufficient to ouerthrowe Bishoppes houses and landes, I sée not howe Colledges can stande long after them, and therefore we pray you speake for your selfe, we require not the helpe of so euill a Proctour. Woulde you séeke to mainteyne learning with the spoyle of the Churche, and the diminishing of the rewarde of learning? An non vides, quàm pugnanti
                                 〈1 line〉
                               loqueris?
                        
                        By that Epistle of Ierome ad Nepotianum, it appeareth that the state of the Clergie was not then so poore, as you woulde séeme to make it. Ierome reproueth the abusesThe thing must not be condemned for the abuse. of his time, as couetousnesse, gluttonie, gorgeous and costly apparell with such lyke which at all tymes are in lyke maner to be condemned. But doth he that reproueth the abuse, condemne the thing? It is a fault by couetous or vniust dealing to waxe riche: but yet it is no fault to be riche. Pride in apparell is to be condemned: but yet euerie man may lawfully weare that apparell, that is méete for his degrée. No man alloweth gluttonie or immoderate seasting: neyther doth any wise man condenme a plentifull table, and good house kéeping. It is not good dealing to applie that which is spoken agaynst the abuse of a thing, to the condemning and quite euer throw of the thing it selfe, as you d
                              〈1 line〉
                            the wordes of Ierome in that Epistle.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 22. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 98. Lin. 2.
                     By this which I haue cyted it appeareth, what was one cause of this excesse and stately 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ompe of the Byshoppes, namely that certaine noble and riche men, beyng chosen to the ministerie, and liuing somewhat like vnto the former estates, wherein they were before, others also assayed to be like vnto them, as we see in that poynt the nature of man is to readie to followe, if they see any example before theyr eyes. But there is no reason bicause Ambrose and such like did so, therefore our Bishops shoulde do it This is before answered. of the Churches costes. Nor bicause Ambrose and such lyke did tarie in their trim houses, which they had built them selues of their owne charge before they were Bishops, that therfore they should come out of their chambers or narrow houses into courts and pallaces, builded of the Churches costes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Where haue you shewed any such thing by Ambrose his example? or how doth it appeare that by such meanes the pompe of the Bishops (as you cal it) was brought in? That which you speake of Ambrose house is most vntrue: it was perteyning to the Byshop, and no part of Ambrose his proper possessions, as it is euident by this, that it was neare vnto the Churche, euen within the limits, of the Church, as I haue sayde before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 5. the. 23. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C Pag. 98. Sect. 1.
                     Another reason of this pompe and statelinesse of the Bishops was, that which almost brought in all poyson and popish corruption into the church, and that is a foolish emulation of the manners and fashions of the idolatrous nations. For as this was the crafte of Sathan to drawe away the Israelites from the true seruice of God, by theyr fonde desyre they had to conforme themselues to the fashions of the Gentiles, so to punish vnthankefull receyuing of the Gospell, and to fulfill the Prophecies touching the man of sinne; the Lord suffred those that professed Christ to corrupt thei
                           〈1 line〉
                         wayes, by the same sleyght of the Diuell.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If it be inough to say without any kinde of proofe, then you haue sayd some thing:
                              T. C. still offende
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 h 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 
                               petitione princip
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . but if woordes without proofes be but light, then are these woordes so to be estéemed, & not otherwise. I know the Papistes through foolish imitation of the Gentiles, haue brought in sundrie superstitions of the Gentiles. But I speake of the matter we haue in hande, that is inequalitie of degrées; and authoritie among the ministers of the Churche, and the names and offices of Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon, &c. which you neyther haue shewed, nor can shew to be brought into the Churche, by any imitation of the Gentiles, and therefore you do still Petere principium.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 24. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 98. Sect. 2.
                     
                        Galerianus Maximinus the Emperour to the ende that he might promote the idolatrie, andEuseb. 8. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 15. superstition where vnto he was addicted, chose o
                           〈1 line〉
                         the choysest magistrates to be priestes, and that they might be in great estimation gaue eche of them a trayne of men to followe them: A 
                              〈◊〉
                            collection. and now the Christians and Christian Emperours thinking that that would promote the Christian religion, that promoted superstition, and not remembring that it is often tymes abhominable before God, which is esteemed in the eies of men▪ endeuoured to make their Bishops encoūter and match with those idolatrous priestes, and to cause that they should not be inferiour to them in wealth and outwarde pompe. And therefore I conclude, that seing the causes and fountaynes, from whence this pompe and statelinesse of Bishops haue come, are so corrupt and naught, the thing it self which hath rysen of such causes can not be good.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is no such thing in that place of Eusebius quoted in your margent: for in that booke and chapter of Eusebius, he onely sheweth that Inchaunters and Sorcerers were greatly estéemed of Maximinus, and that he buylded Churches of Idols in euery Citie, and appoynted idolatrous Priestes in euery place, also that he placed in euery prouince one to be chiefe ouer the rest, & furnished him with souldiers and seruants: but there is not one woorde, that any Christian Prince toke any example of him to do the like in Christianitie. It rather appeareth that Maximinus did in this point imitate the Christians, who had theyr Metropolitanes, and one chiefe Bishop in euery prouince long before this time, as I haue declared before. And I sée no cause why you should say that Christians did follow the Gentiles rather in prouiding for the ministers of the Gospell sufficiently, than in buylding of Churches in euery Citie, and placing ministers in them, for Maximinus did this aswell as he did the other. This I am well assured of, that there is no such signification in that place of Eusebius, that any Christian Prince should follow this example. And therefore your conclusion beyng collected and gathered of such false and vntrue coniectures, must néedes be lyke vnto them.
                        I do not speake to mayntayne any excessiue or outrageous pompe, but I speake of the 
                              〈1 line〉
                           egrees in the Ecclesiasticall state, and of the manners and conditions of the persons, as they be now according to the lawes and customes allowed in this Church of England.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 5. the. 25. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 98. Sect. 3.
                     And thus will I make an end
                           〈1 line〉
                        , leauing to the consideration and indifferent waying of the indifferent reader, how true it is that I haue before propounded, that our Archbishops, Metropolitanes, Archdeacons, Bishops, haue besides the names almoste nothing common 
                           〈◊〉
                         those, which haue bene in 
                           〈1 line〉
                        lder tymes, before the sunne of the Gospell beganne to be maruelously darkened, by the stinking mistes which the Diuell sent forth out of the bottomlesse pit, to blynde the eyes of men, that they should not see the shame and nakednesse of that purpled whoore, which in the person of the Cleargie, long before she gatte into hir seate, prepared hir selfe by payntyng hi
                           〈1 line〉
                         writhen face, with the colours of these gorgeous titles, and with the shewe of magnificall and worldly pompe. For the Diuell knewe well inough, that if he should haue set vp one onely Byshop in that seate of perdition, and lefte all the reste in that simplicitie, wherein God had appoynted them, that his eldest sonne shoulde neyther haue had any way to get into that, and when he had gotten it, yet beyng as it were an owle amongst a sorte of byrdes, should haue bene quickly discouered.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And I also leaue it to the iudgement of the learned and indifferent Reader, 
                              〈◊〉
                            consider by that, which I haue sayde before, how vntrue all this is, that you here affirme, (I speake of these degrées and offices as they be nowe vsed in this Churche of England) if there be any difference, it is bycause they haue not so large and ample iurisdiction and authoritie now, as they had then.
                        Sathan worketh by sundrie meanes, and spareth no fetches to bring to passe hisThe subtiltie of Sathan in counterfeyte godlinesse must not preiudice that which is true. purpose. Under the pretence of zeale, he hath ingendred sectes and schismes: vnder the title of puritie & perfection, he hath brought in heresie: vnder the cloake of simplicitie, he hath spread abrode many kindes of idolatrie and superstition: vnder the shadow of humilitie, he hath couered vntollerable ambition, and marueylous arrogancie: and what soeuer he bringeth to passe, commonly he doth it vnder the colour of vertue, and of that which is good: and therefore I thinke that euen vnder the names and titles of lawfull degrees and calling, he hath established vnlawfull authoritie: but neyther is true zeale, puritie, perfection, simplicitie, humilitie, nor yet lawfull degrées and callings therefore to be condemned. Viti
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            (as Cyprian sayeth) 
                              vicin
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  sunt virtutibus: VicesDiscretion is very necessary. be very nigh vnto vertues: and the one laboureth to imitate the other, but we must not therefore the lesse estéeme of vertue, but rather learne prudently to discerne what is the difference betwixt the one and the other. If we haue not learned this lesson, what state in the common wealth, what office, what degrée of person, nay what kinde of gouernment shall we allowe? it is the greatest folly in the worlde to condemne the thing it selfe, bycause of the abuse.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 26. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C Pag. 98. Sect. 3.
                     But I haue done, only this I admonish the reader that I do not allowe of all those thinges,A proper ca
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           eat. which I before alleaged in the comparison betwene our Archbishops and the Archbishops of olde tyme, or our Bishops & theyrs. Onely my intent is to shew that although there were corruptions, yet in respect of ours they be much more tollerable: and that it might appeare how small cause there is, that they should alleage their examples, to confirme the Archbishops and Bishops that nowe are.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You do well to worke surely, for now shall no man take any great aduauntage of your woordes, how be it, it had bene curteously done to haue let vs vnderstand what you allowe of this you haue wrytten, and what you allowe not. For in leauing the matter so rawly, you will make vs suspect, that you haue spoken you know not what.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Other things concerning the offices and authoritie of our Cleargie, of inequalitie of degrees amongst ministers, &c. dispersed in other places of the Answere.
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 75. Sect. vlt.
                     Concerning the offices of an high commissioner & iustice of peace, how necessarily they be committed to some of the best & wisest of the Cleargie, what vice by them is bridled, what inconuenience mette with, what necessarie discipline vsed, those know that be wise, & haue experience in publike affaires and gouernment. There is no worde of God to proue why these offices may not concurre in one man. But it is the commission that troubleth these men, as for peace they are at defiance with it.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 98. Sect. 4.
                     Concerning the offices of cōmissionership, and how vnmeete it is that ministers of the worde should exercise them, and how that the worde of God doth not permitte any such confusion of offices, there shall be by Gods grace spoken of it afterwarde.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And vntill that (afterward) be performed, will I also differre that, which is further to be sayd in this matter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 76. Sect. 1. 2. 3. & Pag. 77. Sect. 1.
                     To be shorte, they say that all these offices be plainely in Gods worde forbidden, and they alleage Math. 23. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 4. 1. Pet. 5. The places of Mathew & Luke be answered before. Christ beatethTract. 1. downe ambition and pryde, and desire of bearing rule, as he did before, when he sayde, be ye not called Rabbi, and call no man father, be not called Doctors, he doth not condemne the names, but the ambition of the minde.
                     In the. 1. Cor. 4. it is thus written, Let a man thus thinke of vs, as of the ministers of Christ, &c. The ministers of the worde in deede are not to be estemed as Gods, but as the ministers of God. Some among the Corinthians gloried in their ministers, and attributed to much vnto them. Here of came these factiōs, I holde of Paule, I of Apollo, &c. This teacheth your adherentes and disciples, not to attribute to much to you, & such as you are, or any other minister of Gods word. It maketh nothing agaynst the names or authorities eyther of Archbishop, Lordbishop, or any other that you haue named, who be the ministers of Christ, and ought so to be esteemed.
                     The place of S. Peter cap. 5. is this, Feede the flocke of God, &c. not as though you vvere Lordes ouer the flocke, &c. Peter here condemneth hautinesse, contempt, and tyrannie of pastors towards theyr flockes, he doth not take away lawfull gouernment. The Pastor hath rule and superioritie ouer his flocke, but it must not be tyrannicall.
                     These be but very slender proofes that the names and offices of

Archbyshops, Lordbysh. &c. be plainly forbiddē by the word of God.
                     Surely you had thought that no man would haue euer taken paynes to examine your margent.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 98. Sect. vlt.
                     To your answere also vnto the places of S. Mathew & Luke the replie is made before. The place of the fourth of the first to the Corinthians is well alleaged, for it teacheth a moderate estimation of the ministers, and a meane betweene the contempt & excessiue estimation: neyther can there be any readier way to breed that disorder, which was amongst the Corinthians, as to say I holde of such a one, and I of such a one, & I of such another, than to set vp certayne ministers in so highe titles, & great shew of worldly honour: for so commeth it to passe that the people will saye, I will beleue my Lorde, and my Lorde Archbishop, what soeuer our persone say, for they be wise men and learned, as we 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ee it came to passe amongst the Corinthians. For the false Apostles because they had a shew & outward pompe of speach, they caried away the people. For although S. Paule sayth that some sayd I holde of Paule, I holde of Apollo, I of Cephas, yet as it appeareth in his fourth chapter, they helde one of this braue eloquent teacher, and another of that. For he translated these speaches vnto him & his fellowes by a figure. All that rule is tyrannicall which is not lawfull, and is more than it ought to be. And therefore the place of S. Peter is fitly alleaged, whereof also I haue spoken some thing before.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Corinthians did not brust out into these factions & partes taking, in respect of any title or office cōmitted to any of their preachers: but it was a partiall affection that they had towardes theyr teachers in preferring them (for theyr supposed vertue & learning) before other of whom they had not conceyued so good an opinion. A more liuely example whereof can not be, than the dissentiō that is at this day, wherein some of your fautors forgetting all modestie, do so greatly 
                              〈◊〉
                            you, and your companions, that nothing may be heard, that is spoken to the contrary: nay in comparison, all other men be flatterers, worldlinges, vnlearned, doltes, & asses. So do some sorte of men extoll you, and contemne other: so did the Corinthians extoll & magniffe their false Prophets, & depraue the true preachers. Wherefore to take away this partiall affection & iudgement, the Apostle sayeth, 
                              Sic nos aestimet homo, &c. Let a man so esteeme1. Cor. 4. of vs, as of the ministers of Christ, &c. You will not (I am sure) acknowledge that at this time among the Corinthians there was any such difference of titles, or degrées of superioritie. Wherfore you cannot (speaking as you thinke) say that the Apostle in this place meaneth any such matter. But wel you wotte that these affectiōs (which I haue spoken of) were rife among them, and therefore it is most certeyne that the Apostle laboreth for the suppression of them. So that the interpretation, that I haue giuen of this place in myne Answere, is true, neyther haue you refelled it.
                        The rule that a Bishop hath ouer other ministers in his diocesse is lawfull: neither is it such tyrannicall rule as the woorde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            (vsed by S. Peter, and spoken of before) doth signifie, that is to rule with oppression: and therefore the place is vnaptly alleaged.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 77. Sect. 1.
                     I am of Hemingius opinion in this poynt, that I thinke this your assertion smelleth of playne Anabaptisme.
                  
                  
                     T. C Pag. 99. Sect. 1.
                     You are you say of Hemingius minde, & thinke that this opinion smelleth of Anabaptisme. I haue shewed how you haue depraued & corrupted Hemingius, and desire you to shewe some better reason of your opinion. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         will not suftice vs.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And I haue shewed how vntruly you haue reported of me. Hemingius alloweth superioritie, & degrées of dignitie among the ministers: he condemneth your confused equalitie, & calleth it Anabaptisticall. Moreouer if you well marke the beginninges & procedings of the Anabaptistes, you shall perceyue that they first began with the ministerie, in the selfe same manner and forme that you now do.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 6. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 77. Sect 1.
                     And surely if you had once made an equalitie (such as you phansie)Anabaptisme feared. among the Cleargie, it would not be long or you attempted the same among the laitie. Let them take heede: Tunc tua res agitur, &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 99. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                     You say that if we had once obteyned equalitie amongst the Cleargie, we would attempt it in the Laitie.Deut. 18.
                     
                     In what starre do you see that M. Doctor? Moyses sayeth, that if a man speake of a thing to come, and it come not to passe as he hath spoken, that that man is a false Prophet, i
                           〈1 line〉
                         your prophecie come not to passe, you know your iudgement already out of Moyses.
                     The Pharesies when our sauiour Christ inueighed against their ambiti
                           〈1 line〉
                        , accused him that he was no friende to Cesar, and went about to discredite him with the ciuill magistrate, you shall applie it your selfe, you will needes make the Archbyshop, &c. neyghbours vnto the ciuill magistrates, and yet they almost dwell as farre a sunder as Rome and Ierusalem, and as Sion and S. Peters Church there, so that the house of the Archbishop may be burnte sticke and stone, when not so much as the smoke shall approche the house of the ciuill magistrate.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In the starre that is in your forehead, in the accustomed practises of the Anabaptists,Equalitie of ministers wil pull on the equalitie of other estates. Pag. 144. Sect. 1. in the places of scripture alleaged by the Admonition for the equalitie of all ministers, which very same the Anabaptists do also vse against the ciuil magistrate. To be short, I sée it in your owne wordes, where you say that the gouernment of the common wealth must be framed according to the gouernment of the church, & what kinde of gouernmēt you would haue in the Church, who knoweth not? I do not take vpon me to prophecie, but 
                              ex antecedentibus colligo consequentia, I gather that we shall haue stormes, by the blacke clowdes. You are not Christ, neyther is your cause like vnto his, and therefore you make a very vnequall comparison. To whom the name of Pharisie doth most aptly agrée, is shewed in my Answere to the Admonition.
                        The selfe same reasons ouerthrow the ciuill magistrate, that ouerthroweth the Ecclesiasticall. And therefore the fire kindled against the one, muste néedes be very daungerous for the other.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     In steade of the Seniors in Rom. 12. 8. euery Church the Pope hath brought in, and yet we mainteyne the Lordship of one man ouer sundry Churches, yea ouer many shyres.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 116. Sect. 1. 2.
                        I haue proued before in my answere to your. 13. & 14. reason, that this lordship of one man (as you terme it) but in deede lawfull iurisdiction ouer sundry churches, was not the inuentiō of any Pope, but of great antiquitie in the church of Christ, allowed by that famous Councell of Nice, & practised since of most godly and learned fathers.
                        
                           In the. 9. Canon. Concil. Antioch it is thus written: Per singulas regiones Episcopos conuenit nosse Metropolitanum Episcopum solicitudinem totius prouinciae gerere, propter quod ad Metropolim omnes vndi
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  qui negotia videntur habere, concurrant, vndè placuit 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 um & bonore praecellere, & nibil amplius praeter eum caeteros Episcopos agere, secundùm antiquam à patribus nostris regulam constitutam, nisi ea tantùm, quae ad suam Dioecesim pertinent, &c.
                            It behoueth the Bishops in euery countrie to knovve their Metropolitane Bishop to haue care ouer the vvhole prouince, and therfore all such as haue any businesse muste come to theyr Metropolitane Citie: vvherefore it pleaseth this Councell, that he also excell in honour, and that the other

Bishops do nothing vvithout him, according to the auncient rule prescribed by our forefathers, but those things onely vvhich perteyne to his ovvne diocesse, &c. This Councell was about the yeare of our Lord. 345.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 99. Sect. 4. 5.
                     In the. 116. page, for the authoritie of the Archbishop, is alleaged the. 9. Canon of the councell of Antioche, which I haue before alleaged to proue how farre different the authoritie of the Metropolitane in those tymes, was from that which is now. For there the Coūcel sheweth that euery Bishop in his diocesse hath the ordering of all the matters within the circuite thereof, & therefore the meaning of the Councell to be, that if there be any affayres that touch the whole Church in any lande, that the Bishops should do nothing without making the Metropolitane priuie, as also the Metropolitane might do nothing without making the other Bishops a Counsell of that, which he attempted, which M. Doctor doth cleane leaue out.
                     And if this authoritie which the Councell giueth to the Metropolitane being nothing so excessiue, as the authoritie of our Metropolitanes now, had not bene ouer much, or had bene iustifiable, what needed men father this Canon (which was ordeyned in this Councell) of the Apostles, for the seeking falsely of the name of the Apostles, to giue credite vnto this Canon, doth carie with it a note of euill and of shame, which they would haue couered as it were with the garment of the Apostles authoritie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is no Canon that maketh more directly against you than this doth, all the shifts that you haue to auoyde it, I haue answered before. There is as great authoritie giuen to the Metropolitane in that Canon, as now he eyther vseth or requireth. For euery Bishop obseruing the lawes of the realme, and of the Church, hath the ordering of al matters within his diocesse: and the Metropolitane in this Church may attempt no newe thing, or any matter of great importance, not already by lawe established, though he haue the consent of all the Bishops, so farre is he from hauing authoritie to do any such thing without theyr consent.
                        That Canon of the Apostles is repeated & confirmed in this Councell, as diuerse Canons of the Councell of Nice are in like maner repeated and confirmed by diuerse Councels following. This is so farre from discrediting that Canon with wise men, that it rather addeth great authoritie vnto it: but you kéepe your olde wonte, in discrediting the authoritie, which you cannot answere.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Now then, if you will restore the Church to his auncient officers, this you must do. In stead of an Archbishop, or Lorde byshop, you must make 2. Cor. 1
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 7. Colos. 1. 1. equalitie of ministers.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 123.
                        
                           I haue proued before that aswell the name as office of an Archbishop is both most auncient, and also most necessarie in the Church of Christ: & that this equalitie of ministers, which you require, is both flatly against the scriptures, & al auncient authoritie of councels and learned men, & the example of all Churches, euen frō Christes time, as more plainly appeareth by these wordes of M. Bucer in his booke De 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 egno Christi. Iam ex perpetua Ecclesiarum obseruatione, ab ipsis iam Apostolis videmus, visum
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ucer. 
                           & hoc esse spiritui sancto, vt inter Presbyteros, quibus Ecclesiarum procuratio potissimùm est commissa, vnus Ecclesiarum, & totius sacri ministerij curam gerat singularem: ea
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               cura & solicitudine cunctis praeeat alijs. Qua de causa Episcopi nomen huiusmodi summis Ecclesiarum curatoribus est peculiariter attributum. &c. Novve vve see by the perpetuall obseruation of the Churches, euen from the Apostles themselues, that it hath pleased the holy ghost, that amongst the ministers to vvhom the gouernment of the Church especially is cōmitted, one should haue the chiefe care both of the Churches, and of the vvhole ministerie, and that he should go before all other in that care and diligence, for the vvhich cause the name of a Bishop is peculiarly giuen to such chiefe gouernours of Churches, &c. Furthermore I haue
                           
                           declared that it engendreth schismes, factions, & contentions in the Churche, and bringeth in a meere confusion, and is a branche of Anabaptisme.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 99. Sect. 6. 7.
                     
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        nd in the 
                           〈◊〉
                         twētie & three page, to that which M. Bucer sayth, yt in the Churches there hath bene one, which hath bene 
                           〈◊〉
                         ouer the rest of the Ministers, if he meane one chiefe in euery particular Church, 
                           〈◊〉
                         one chiefe ouer the Ministers of diuerse Churches meeting at one Synode, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         for the 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and for suche respectes as I haue before shewed, then I am of that mynde which he is: and if he meane any other chiefe, or after any other sorte, I denie that any such chiefe
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                         was from the Apostles times, or that any such 
                           〈◊〉
                         pleaseth the holy Ghost, wherof I haue before shewed the 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     And whereas M. Bucer seenieth to allowe, that the name of a Bishop, whiche the holy Ghost
                           〈1 line〉
                         expressely gyueth to all the Ministers of the worde indifferently, was appropriated to certayne chiefe gouernors of the Church, I haue before shewed by diuerse reasons, howe that was not done without great presumption and manifest daunger, and in the ende great hurt to the Church.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           M. Bucers wordes are plaine, there is no cause why you shoulde make such (I
                              〈1 line〉
                           s) but onely that you may be thought able to say some thing, howe contrary to truth and reason soeuer it be. Your owne bare deniall of M. Bucers iudgement, will weigh little with any wyse or learned man, considering what difference there is betwixte your knowledge and his: the triall that hath bene of him, and the triall that hath bene of you: his experience, and yours. But what shoulde I compare together things so vnlike? That M. Bucer is directly against you in this assertion of yours, it dothe not appeare onely in these words of his, but in others also, which he speaketh to the like effect, as in the. 4. to the Eph. as I haue before declared. And again vpon the same chapterBucer. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              n. 4. Ephe. he saith, The third part of discipline is obedience, which is first to be rendred of al to the Bishop and Minister, then of euery clearke, to those that be in degree aboue him, & to suche as may helpe him to the well executing of his ministerie. Last of all of Bishops to synodes, and to their Metropolitane Byshops, and to all other, to whom a more ample charge of the churches is committed. And in the same commentaries after that he hath proued by sundry examples & apt reasons, yt this superioritie among Ecclesiasticall persons is conuenient and profitable, and shewed that these degrées in the Church, Bishop, Archbyshop, Metropolitane, Primate, Patria
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ke, be not onely most auncient, but also necessarie, he concludeth on this sort. Bicause it is necessarie that euery one of the cleargie shouldIdem. haue their rulers and gouernours, the authoritie, power, vigilancie, and seueritie of Bishops, Archdeacons, and all other, by what name soeuer they be called (to whome any portion of keping and gouernin
                                 〈1 line〉
                               the cleargie is committed) should or ought to be restored, least there be any in thys order out of rule, and without gouernment. Howe thinke you nowe of M. Bucers iudgement? Is it not directly against you? be not his wordes plaine?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 124. Sect. 1.
                     Your places quoted in the margent to proue that there ought toScriptures wreasted to proue equalitie of Ministers. be an equalitie of Ministers, sounde nothing that waye. 2. Cor. 10. vers. 7. these be the wordes of the Apostle. Looke ye on things after the appearance? If any truste in him felfe that he is Christes, let him consider this againe of himselfe, that as he is Christes, euen so are vve Christes. Howe conclude you of these wordes your equalitie? I promyse you it passeth my cunning to wring out of them any suche sense: rather the contrary may be gathered oute of the wordes following, whiche be these: For though I shoulde boast somevvhat more of our authoritie,
                        
                        vvhich the Lord. &c. I should haue no shame. M. Caluine expoundingCaluine. these wordes sayth on this sort, It vvas for modestie that he ioyned him selfe to their number, vvhome he did farre excell: and yet he vvould not be so modest, but that he vvould kepe his authoritie safe: therefore he addeth that he spake lesse than of right he might haue done. For he vvas not of the common sorte of ministers, but one of the chiefe among the Apostles▪ andDegrees of honour in the ministerie. therefore he saith, if I boaste more, I nede not be ashamed, for I haue good cause. And a litle after: 
                           Quamuis enim commune sit omnibus verbi ministris idem
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               officium, sunt tamen bonoris gradus: Although the selfsame office be common to all the Ministers of the vvorde, yet there is degrees of honour.
                     
                     Thus you see Caluine farre otherwise to gather of this place than you doe.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 100. Sect. 1.
                     And if M. Doctor delight thus to oppose mens authoritie to the authoritie of the holie ghoste, & to the reasons which are grounded out of the scripture, M. Caluine doth openly mislike of the making of that name proper and peculiar to certaine, which the holy ghost maketh common to mo. And where as of M. Caluines wordes, which sayth that there be degrees of honoure in the ministerie,Here he defendeth not the admonition, but shifteth it or by 
                              〈1 line〉
                           auilling. M. Doctour would gather an Archbishop, if he had vnderstanded that an Apostle is aboue an Euange
                           〈1 line〉
                        ste, an Euangeliste aboue a Pastor, a Pastor aboue a Doctor, and he aboue an Elder that ruleth onely, he neded neuer haue gone to the popishe Hierarchie to seke his diuersiti
                           〈1 line〉
                        s of degrees▪ which he might haue founde in S. Paule. And whereas vpon M. Caluines wordes, which sayth that Paule was one of the chiefe amongest the Apostles, he would seeme to conclude an Archbishop amongst the bishops, he should haue remembred that S. Paules chiefetie amōgst the Apostles, consisted not in hauing any authoriti
                           〈1 line〉
                         or dominion ouer the rest, but in labouring and suffering more than the rest, and in giftes more excellent than the rest.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I do not oppose mens authoritie to ye authoritie of ye holy ghost, & to the reasons, which ar grounded out of the scripture, but I oppose them to your authoritie, and to your reasons, who spurne against that order, whiche the holie ghoste hath placed in the Churche, & most shamefully abuse the scripture to mainteine your errours: an example wherof is this present text alledged by the Admonition. which you passe ouer in silence, condemning therby their leudenesse in abusing the same. It is you and yours that abuse the name and authoritie of the holie ghoste: it is you that wring and wreste the Scriptures vntollerably: it is you that falsifie authorities of learned men, & corruptly alledge them: It is you I say, that depraue and discredit such writers as haue bene, and be notable instrumentes in the churche of Christe, and all this you do to maintaine your erroneous opinions and false doctrine, wherewith you endeuour to subuerte this churche of Englande.
                        M. Caluines wordes be playne, and they directly ouerthrowe your equalitie of ministers, and shewe the fondnes of the Admonition in alledging that place of scripture to proue any such equalitie. M. Caluines wordes be these: 
                              Qu
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 muis commune sit omnibu
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  verbi ministris, idem
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  officium, sunt tamen bonoris gradus: Although the selfe same office be common to all the ministers of the worde, yet there are degrees of honor. Which wordes disproue the equalitie of ministers by the admonition affirmed, & confirmed with this portion of scripture by M. Caluine here interpreted, that is. 2. Cor. 10. verse. 7.
                        
                        If there were degrees of honour in the Apostles tyme among those which had 
                              idem 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 , the selfe same office, as M. Caluine affirmeth, why should there not be so nowT. C. contra
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ie to himselfe likewise? But will you sée howe vnlike you are vnto your selfe, euen in these fewe lynes? first you saye that M. Caluines meaning is that an Apostle is aboue an Euangeliste, an Euangelist is aboue a Pastor. &c. and by and by after you confesse that there was chieftie euen among the Apostles, but it consisted in labouring and suffering more than the rest, and in giftes more excellent than the rest.
                        
                           To omitte these contrarieties of yours, into the whiche the plainenesse of Master Caluin
                                 〈1 line〉
                              s wordes hath driuen you: this inequalitie that you confesse to haue bene in these offices (which notwithstanding you speake of your owne head without any warrant of Gods worde) argueth that there maye be superioritie among the ministers of the Churche. And the degrées of honour that you acknowledge to haue bene among the Apostles, quite cast
                              〈1 line〉
                           th downe your confused 
                              〈1 line〉
                           qualitie. As for your saluing the matter in saying, that this chiefetie among the Apostles consisted not in hauing anye superioritie aboue the reste, but in laboring. &c. it may please vnskilfull persons, but it will not satisfie men of discr
                              〈1 line〉
                           tion and wisdome. For it is to be thought that euery one of ye Apostles laboured in their calling to the vttermost of their powers, that they suffered whatsoeuer God laide vpon them, that they had all giftes most aboundantly necessarie for their functions. Wherfore in all these things there was summa aequalitas, and no m
                              〈1 line〉
                           n sought such preheminence, or receyued it being offered vnto him, but according to their owne doctrine euery one thought of another better than of 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Wherfore it could not be for this respect, but it was for order & pollici
                              〈1 line〉
                            to a
                              〈1 line〉
                           oyde confusion.
                        I haue tolde you before why you labour so muche to haue honour and dignitie distributed according to the excellencie of gifts, for then you perswade your selfe, that the chiefetie would light on your owne necke, but you may peraduenture be deceiued.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 123. tovvards the ende.
                     And nowe I adde, that you desire this equalitie, not bycause youWhy ye Admonitors desire equalitie. would not rule (for it is manifest that you seke it most ambitiously in your maner) but bycause you contemne and disdaine to be ruled, and to be in subiectiō. In deede your meaning is (as I said before) to rule and not to be ruled, to do what you list in your seueral cures, without controlement of Prince, Bishop, or any other. And therefore pretending equalitie, most disorderly you seeke dominion. I speake that I know by experience in some of you.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 100. Sect. 2. 3.
                     Now whereas he saith that we desire to pull the rule from others, that the rule might be in our handes, and we might doe what we list, and that we seeke to withdrawe our selues from controlement of Prince and Byshop; and all: first he maye learne, if he will, that we desire no o
                           〈1 line〉
                        r authoritie, than that which is to the edifying of the Churche, and whiche is grounded of the wo
                           〈1 line〉
                        e of God: which if any Minister shall abuse to his 
                           〈◊〉
                         or ambition, then he ought to abyde not 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ely the controlment of ye other Ministers, yea of the brethren, but also further the punishment of the Magistrates according to the quantitie of the fault.
                     And seyng you charge the brethren so sore, you must be put in remembrance, that thys vnreasonable authoritie ouer the rest of the ministers and cleargie, An vntruth
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ▪ for the lawfull authoritie o
                              〈1 line〉
                            Bishops and Archbyshops was long be
                              〈1 line〉
                           ore. came to the Bishops and Archbyshops, when as the Pope did exempte his 
                           〈1 line〉
                        hauelings from the obedience, subiec
                           〈1 line〉
                        on, and iurisdiction of Princes. Nowe therefore that we be readie to giue that subiection vnto the prince, and offer our selues to the princes correction in things wherein we shall doe amisse, doe you thinke it an vnreasonable thing that we desire to be disburdened of the Bishops and Archbishops yoke, which the Pope hath layde vpon our neckes?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your answere maketh the matter more suspicious: for this authoritie you speake ofExcessiue authoritie is sought vnder pretence of equalitie, which you say▪ is to the edifying of the Church, and grounded of the word of God, is as it pleaseth you to interprete it. For what so euer you phansie, and whatsoeuer authoritie you vsurpe, shall haue the same pretence: and if the Prince seeke to restraine you, or to breake your will, you and your Seniors will excommunicate hir if she be of your parishe. Fu
                              〈1 line〉
                           thermore the greatest preeminence she can haue, is to be one of your seigniorie, and then must M. Pastor be the chiefe, and so in authoritie aboue ye Prince and consequently a Pope, but of this more in due place shal be spoken.
                        
                           This authoritie, which the Bishops and Archbishops now exercise, came first from
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               authoritie of Byshops & Archbishops came not from the 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . the Apostolicall Church, then from the example of the primitiue Churche for ye space of fiue hundred yeares after the Apostles time. Thirdly, from the Councels of Nyce, Antioche, Constantinople, and all the beste and purest Councels that euer were. And last of all from the authoritie of the Prince, and by the consent of this whole Churche and Realme of England, & therefore not from the Pope, who hath rather diminished it (by taking all to himselfe) than in any respect encreased it. Wherfore you also in exempting your self, from the authoritie and iurisdiction of the Archbishop and Bishop, resist God in his Ministers, the Prince in hir officers, and the lawes of the Church & Realme in their executors. And as for your protested obedience, it is so enwrapped with conditions and prouisoes (as in other places of your booke more plainely appeareth) that when it should come to the triall (if your platforme were builded) it woulde proue as little, as 
                              〈1 line〉
                           uer the Popishe Byshops was, in their greatest pride.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 124. Sect. 2.
                     The place in the first to the Coloss. vers. 1. is this, Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ by the vvill of God, & Timotheus our brother. Surely your minde was not of equalitie (I thinke) when you quoted these places to proue it. But it is your vsuall maner without al discretiō & iudgement to dally & play with the scriptures. For what sequele is there in this reason, Paule calleth Timothie brother, Ergo in all respectes there must be equalitie? As though there were not distinction of degrees euen among brethren.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Magis mutus, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               piscis, and by his silence the ouersight confessed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     And Lu. 22. 25. 26. 1. P
                              〈1 line〉
                           t. 5. 3. 4. 5. Math. 20. 25. 26. Math. 23. 8 11. 12. Gala. 2. 6. Hebr. 5. 4. Lu. 16. 25. Eze. 34. 4. 2. Cor. 1. 24. as the names of Archbishops, Archdeacons, Lord bishops, Chancelours, &c. are drawen out of the Popes shop, togither with their offices: So the gouernment which they vse by the life of the Pope, which is the Canon law, is Antichristian and diuelishe, and contrarie to the scriptures.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 208. Sect. 1.
                        Both of the names, and also of the offices of Archbyshops, Archdeacons,Scriptures wreasted. Lorde Byshops. &c. I haue spoken before sufficiently, and fully answered those places quoted in this margent, sauyng the. 2. to the Galat. the. 5. to the Hebrues. Ezech. 34. 2. Cor. 1. for these places haue bene founde out since, and thoughte meete now to be alleaged, but howe discretely, by examination it will appeare. The words of the Apostle to the Galat. 2. verse. 6. be these. And of them vvhich seemed to be great I vvas not taughte (vvhat they vvere in tyme passed, it maketh no matter to me, God accepteth no mans person) neuerthelesse they
                           
                           that are the chiefe, dyd communicate nothing vvith me. The Apostle in these wordes doth declare, that he receyued not the Gospell, which he preached, of men, no not of the Apostles, but of Iesus Christ, and that the Gospell preached by him oughte to be no lesse credited, than the Gospell preached by them. So that in those wordes he declareth that the truthe of the doctrine dothe not depende of any mans person. He speaketh nothyng agaynst superioritie 
                              quoad ordinem, conc
                                 •
                              rning order, but dothe rather acknowledge it, for he sayth, they that are the chiefe, &c. But it is true that Master Caluine noteth on thys place. 
                              Hic non est certamen ambitionis, quia nequaquam de personis agitur. The contention is not for ambition, for it is not vnderstanded of the persons. Nowe I praye you consider this argument, Paule receyued the Gospell that he preached, not of the Apostles, but of Christ: or the Gospell preached by Paule, is equiualent with the Gospell preached by other of the Apostles: therefore the names of Archbyshops, Archdeacons, &c. are drawne out of the Popes shop together wyth their offices, or this. Paule sayth that they that were the chiefe did cōmunicate nothing with him: 
                              Ergo, the names and offices of Archbyshops be taken out of the Popes shop.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag 100. Sect. 4.
                     And in the. 207. page vnto the middest of the. 214. page this matter is agayne handled, where firste M. Doctor woulde drawe the place of Galatians the seconde; This is an vntruth, for it is only proued that the place is not against the Archbishop. &c to proue an Archbyshop and that by a Here you rashely accuse the translation of the Bible printed at Geneua, and others: false translation, for 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , which is they that seemed, or appeared, he hath translated they that are the chiefe, and although the place of the Galatians maye be thought of some not so pregnant, nor so full against the Archbyshop, yet all must needes confesse, that it maketh more agaynst hym, than for him. For Saynt Paules purpose is to proue there, that he was not inferior to any of the Apostles, and bringeth one argument thereof, that he had not his Gospell from them, but from Christe immediately, and therefore if the Apostles that were esteemed moste of, and supposed by the Galatians and others to be the chiefe, had no superioritie ouer S. Paule, but were equall wyth him, it followeth that there was none that had rule ouer the reste. And if there needed no one of the Apostles to be ruler ouer the reste, there seemeth to be no neede that one Byshop shoulde rule ouer the rest.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           I haue set downe the words of the Apostle as they be translated in the English Bible printed at Geneua, not altering one title, and therefore if there be any falsehood in the translation, it is in that Bible not in me. How truely you haue translated 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              ,
                                 
                                    〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                  translated. Beza.
                               saying it signifieth, they that seemed or appeared, let the Reader iudge after he hath considered these wordes of M. Beza vpon the same worde ad Galat.
                            2. verse. 2. with those that are of reputation, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            (that is) 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            (those which are well estemed of) the contrarie whereof are, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            (they which are without renowne or estimatiō) the cōmon translatiō hath, which semed to be some thing, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , which is cō
                           trarie to al our bokes, & vnto Ieromes interpretatiō also. For thus he writeth, which thing Erasmus also dothe well note. I did very carefully search (saith he) what that should be that he said (qui videbātur) they which semed: but he hath takē away al doubt, in that he addeth, Qui
                           
                           videbātur esse colunmae, they which were accoūted to be pillers. Hetherto Hierom: wherby he doth euidently declare, that he had not read in this place 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : But in such sort notwithstanding, that he seemeth not to haue knowne 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            to haue bene called of the Grecians absolutely 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            that is, those, who are of great estimation with all men. And this ignorance of the Greke tong, as I thinke, was the cause that the olde interpreter (being more bolder than Hierom) did adde, aliquid esse. And Erasmus in his annotationsErasmus. vpon the same place agréeth with M. Beza herein 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           absolut
                                 〈1 line〉
                               dicuntur Graecis, qui magnae sunt aut
                                 〈1 line〉
                              oritatis: they which are of great authoritie, are of the Grecians absolutely called 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Budeus also saith, that the Apostle in this place taketh thys woorde
                           Bude
                                 〈1 line〉
                              s. 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , for 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . And both M. Beza himselfe and Erasmus translate it, as it is in the Geneua Bible. Wherefore here your cunning faileth you, and you had not well considered the matter before you entred this accusation of falsifying.
                        
                        The true sense and meaning of this place to the Galat. I haue set downe in my Answere: and it is according to the interpretation of the best writers, iustified by the words of M. Caluine there alleaged, and not confuted by you. Wherfore the conclusion remaineth as it did.
                        That there was superioritie among the Apostles, ordinis & politiae causa, I haue shewed before.
                        This place to the Galatians is not brought in by me to proue the authoritie of the Archbyshop (although it might well be alleaged to proue degrées of honour in the ministerie) but it is quoted in the Admonition fondly and foolishely, to proue that the names of Archbishops, Archdeacons, Lordbishops. &c. are drawne out of the Popes shoppe together with their offices. And of this dalying with the Scriptures, you speake not one worde, for you care not howe they be profaned, so it be for the maintenance of your owne cause.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 208. Sect. vlt.
                     The wordes in the. 5. to the Hebrues verse. 4. be these. And no man taketh this honor to himself, but he that is called of God as Aarō vvas. The Apostle here sheweth that Christe was a lawfull Priest, bycause he was therevnto called by God as Aaron was. What is this to Archbishops. &c? This place teacheth that no man ought to intrude hymselfeWeake argument
                              〈1 line〉
                           s. to any function, except he be there vnto called by God. But what maketh this against any lawfull function or authoritie? or what conclusion call you this? Christ did not take vnto him that office, whervnto he was not called, or no man muste take vpon him that, whervnto he is not called: Ergo Archbishops. &c. and their offices came out of the Popes shop. you shoulde first proue that which ought to be your Minor.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 100. Sect. 4.
                     But that I runne not backe to that I haue hādled before, I will not here so much 
                           〈1 line〉
                        rge y• place,A cleanly shifte. as I will not doe also yt of the Hebrues which followeth, & yet the argument is stronger than that M. Doctor could answere. For if the writer to the Hebrues do proue our Sauiour Christs vocation to be iust and lawfull, Vntrue. bicause his calling was conteined in the scriptures, as appeareth in ye 5. and. 6. verse, then it followeth, that ye calling of the Archbishop, which is not comprehended there, is neither iust nor lawfull. For that no man (sayth the Apostle) taketh the honour vnto himself, but he that is called of God. &c. But I say, hauing before sufficiently spoken of the reasons, which ouerthrow the Archbishop, I wil let passe these and other places, answering onely that which M. Doctor bringeth for the establishment of them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is a cleanly & handsome shift to auoide ye defense of these grosse & vnapt allegationsThe 
                                 〈◊〉
                               proueth not yt which is deuyed. of scriptures. I haue answered the argument grounded vpō the. 5. to ye Hebrues,

and required the proofe of the minor, whiche is this, that Archbishops, Lordbishops. &c. intrude them selfes into their offices without any lawfull calling, whiche bothe they and you haue omitted: and therefore I haue answered sufficiently, vntill you haue proued that which is by me denied.
                        It is not true, that the Apostle to the Hebrues proueth the vocation of our sauiour Iesus Christ to be iust and lawfull, bicause his callyng was conteyned in the scriptures: he onely sheweth by euident testimonies of the Scriptures, that Christ dyd not intrude hym selfe, but was called of God. And if you will haue no man to execute any function in the Churche, but him that hath suche speciall and personall testimonies of the scriptures to shewe for him selfe, I sée not howe any man can iustifie his calling. It is therefore sufficient if his calling be generally conteyned in the Scripture, as al lawfull and ordinary functions are, euen the offices of Archebishops, and Lordebishops, &c.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 209. Sect. 1. 2. 3. & Pag. 210. Sect. 1.
                     In the. 16. of Luke verse. 25. it is thus written: But Abraham sayd,Scriptures wrested. sonne remember that thou in thy life time receyuedst thy pleasures, & likevvise Lazarus paynes: novve therfore is he comforted, and thou arte tormented. The riche glutton in his lyfe receyued pleasure, and therefore was after in hell tormented: Lazarus receyued paynes, and after was comforted: Therefore Archbishops. &c. and their offyces come oute of the Popes shoppe. These fellowes neyther care for maior, minor, nor conclusion, so they saye something, and vaynely paynt their margent, with shamefully abusing the scriptures.
                     The words of Ezech. Chap. 34. verse. 4. be these. The vveake haue ye not strengthned, the sicke haue ye not healed, neyther haue you bound vp the broken, &c. In the which place the Prophet speaketh agaynst suche Kinges, Magistrates, and rulers, as despise the people ofAbuse of offices condemned, not the offi
                              〈1 line〉
                           es. God, & vse them selues cruelly towards them. This dothe aswell condemne Kings & Magistrates, as it doth Archbishops: although in deede it condemneth no office or superioritie, but the abuse of the same, that is, the man abusing the office, and not the office it selfe.
                     In the. 2. Cor. 1. verse. 24. the Apostle speaketh thus vnto them: Not that vve haue dominion ouer your fayth, but vve are helpers of your ioy, for by fayth you stande. S. Paule heere sayth, that he hathe no authoritie to alter true religion, or to rule ouer their consciences, but how proueth this, that Archbishops. &c. came out of the Popes shoppe? Paule sayth that he had no power ouer the consciences of the Corinthians, therfore Archbishops. &c and their offices were drawne out of the Popes shop. If you had beene more studious when you were a Sophister (if euer you were any) you would haue learned better to frame an argument, and haue had better iudgement in the sequele of the same. If you had not troubled your margent with these quotations, you had lesse vttered your folly.
                     So muche of the Canon lawe as is contrarie to the Scriptures,Canon lawes not altog
                              〈1 line〉
                           ther condemned. is Antichristian and diuelishe: But there be diuers Canons in it very good and profitable, whiche may well be reteyned. Good lawes

may be borrowed euen of Turkes, and heat henishe Idolaters: and why not of Papists also? I haue tolde you before, that the thing it selfe is to be considered, not the inuentor: if it be good and profitable, it may be vsed whosoeuer dyd inuent it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Not one worde answered to all this.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     And as safely may we by the warrant of Gods worde subscribe to allowe the dominion of the pope, vniuersally to reygne ouer the Church of God, as of an archebishop ouer a whole prouince, or a Lorde bishop ouer a Dioces, whych conteyneth many shires and parishes. For the dominion that they exercise, the Archebishop aboue them, and they aboue the rest of their brethren, is vnlawfull, and expresly forbydden by the worde of God.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 210. Sect. 2.
                        In that you say, that you may as safely by the warrante of Gods worde subscribe to allowe the dominion of the Pope vniuersally to reygne ouer the Church of God, as of an Archbishop ouer an whole Prouince. &c. You expresse but your heate, I suppose you thinke not so: can the Pope aswell gouerne the whole Churche, as the Archbishop one Prouince, and a Lord bishop one Dioces? Is one king aswell able to gouerne the whole worlde, as he may be to gouerne one kingdome? Or bicause you can rule one parishe well, can you therefore in lyke manner well gouerne twentie parishes? Surely an Archbishop may well gouerne one Prouince,An archebyshop may gouerne one pro uince, but the Pope not all the worlde. but the Pope can neuer well gouerne the whole Churche. And yet an Archbishop hath not the charge of gouernment ouer the whole Prouince generally, but onely in cases exempted, and therfore may do it more easily.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 100. Sect. 4.
                     He sayth therefore afterwarde that although one man be not able to be Bishop ouer all the Churche, yet he may be Bishop ouer a whole Dioces, or of a prouince. Nowe if I woulde saye the one is as impossible as the other, and for proofe thereof alleage that whiche the philosophers say, that as there are no degrees in that whych is infinite, so that of thinges whiche are infinite, one thyng can not be more infinite than another, so there are no degrees in impossibilitie, that of thyngs whych are impossible, one thyng should be more impossible than another. If I shoulde thus reason, I thynke I should put you to some payne. But I wyll not drawe the reader to suche thorny and subtyll questions, it is inough for vs that the one and the other be impossible, although one should be more impossible than the other. And that it is impossible for one man to be Bishop ouer a whole prouince, or ouer a whole Dioces, I leaue it to be considered of that whych is before sayde in the description of the offyce of a Byshop, pastor, or minister, where I speake of the necessitie of the residence of the Bishop in hys Churche.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In so saying I say but as other learned men haue sayd, and especially M. Caluine, in the place afterwarde alleaged in my answere: and as the practise of the Churche hath béene in the best state, and vnder the best Bishops, as it may appeare by that which hath béene hitherto spoken. Your Philosophicall argument is sone answered without any great payne. For to gouerne one Prouince in that maner and forme that is required of an Archbishop, is neyther infinite, nor impossible. But it is great lack of iudgement to thinke that bicause one man can not well gouerne the whole world, therfore he can not well gouerne a prouince or dioces. I haue shewed the practise of the Churche to be contrarie in the Apostles tyme, and since their time.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 6. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 101. Sect. 1.
                     As a Prince may rule a whole Realme, suche as Fraunce or Englande, This is absurdissimum, a
                              〈1 line〉
                            M. Caluine 
                              〈◊〉
                            Instit. cap. 8. sect. 92. so may he rule the whole worlde by officers and Magistrates appoynted vnderneathe him. And there haue beene diu
                           〈1 line〉
                        rs Princes, which haue had as many landes vnder their power, as the Pope hath had Churches, and althoughe it be somewhat inconuenient, yet I knowe not why they mighte not so haue, comming lawfully by them. Nowe I woulde gladly heare, whether you would say the same of a Bishop, and if you dare not, then why doe you bring the similitude of the gouernment of a prince ouer a lande, to proue that a
                           〈1 line〉
                         Archbishop may be ouer an whole prouince? M. Doctor dare boldly say, that there may be one Bishop ouer a whole prouince, but he dare not saye that there may be a bishop ouer the whole Churche. But what better warrant for the one than for the other? Agayne If the skye fall. &c. if the whole Churche be in one prouince, or in one realme, whiche hathe beene, and is Yes surely, as the state is nowe. not impossible to be agayne, if there may be nowe one bishop ouer a realme or prouince: then there may be one bishop ouer all the Churche, so that in trauelling with an Archbishop, he hathe brought foorth a Pope.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The selfe same reason you had before, and I answere it nowe as I did then. TheSupra, cap. 3. diuis. 31. 32. 33. causes by me there alleaged be sufficient to proue the difference betwixt the gouernment of a Prince, and the gouernment of a Bishop. And yet no man will denie but that one Prince shall better be able to gouerne one kingdome, than the whole world. And to affirme that the whole worlde may be conteyned in one Monarchie, learned men saye is 
                              multis modis absurdissimum, In diuers respectes moste absurde. I bring theCal. Inst. cap. 8. Sect. 92. example of a King, bicause other writers vse the like examples in the like matter to confute suche vnlikely reasons, and namely M. Caluine in the words following.
                        That which M. Doctor affirmeth of one bishop ouer one whole prouince, and of one Byshop ouer the whole worlde, no man will denie. A warrant for the one are the examples of Timothie and Titus, and the continuall practise of the Churche without contradiction in the best tymes: but there is no warrant for the other of any credite or sufficience, béeing onely in the moste corrupt tyme of the Churche, and contrarie to all former examples and Canons.
                        You say, if the whole Churche be in one prouince. &c. I say, that if the skie fall you may catche larkes, as the common prruerbe is. Moreouer, if it were possible so to be (as nowe it is not) then it were no absurditie the Bishop of that Prouince still to remayne Bishop of the same. But what moueth you to suche straunge suppositions?The replyers (if) turned vpon him self. I might aswell say, if the whole Churche were in one Citie, or Towne, or Parishe, as it was in Ierusalem after Christes ascention, and one Bishop or Pastor might be ouer that citie, or towne, or parishe, then one Bishop or Pastor shoulde be ouer theThe Church cannot be shut vp in one prouince nowe. whole Churche: and so you likewise in trauelling with a pastor to be in one Churche, at the length bring foorth a Pope. But doe you not knowe that the Churche of Christ is dispersed throughout the whole worlde, and can not nowe be shut vp in one kingdome? muche lesse in one prouince, excepte you will become Donatistes. He that is not wilfully blinde may sée into what streights you are driuen, when you are constreyned to vtter suche impossibilities for reasons.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 101. Sect. 2.
                     But he sayth that an Archbishop hath not the charge of gouernment ouer the whole pro
                           〈1 line〉
                        ince generally, but in cases exempted, and so may doe it more easily. But he shoulde haue remembred, that he assigned before the offices of Archbishop and bishop, to be in all those things whiche other ministers are, and that beside those offices, he giueth them particular charges. So that where the office of the minister, is but to preache, pray, and minister the sacraments in his parishe, the office of archebishop and bishop, is to doe the same, and more too in the whole prouince or dioces: And so it followeth that it is easier for a minister to discharge his duetie in his parishe, than for an archebyshop or bishop to discharge their dueties in any one parish of their prouince or dioces: for they haue in euery parishe more to doe, and greater charge, than the minister of the parishe hath, then much
                           〈1 line〉
                         lesse are they able to doe their dueties in all the parishes of their prouinces or dioces.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I speake of the office of gouernment, and so be my words. Euery particular parish hath a particular pastor to preache, pray, and mynister the sacraments. The Bishop hath to procure (so much as lyeth in him) that all things be done in his Dioces, according to the lawes & orders of the Church. The Archbishop hath not only to sée that ye Bishops do their duties, but to helpe thē in reforming that, which by thēselues they cannot do. The office of preaching they exercise, where & when they sée it most conuenient. The whole charge of preaching & of gouerning resteth neyther vpon the Archbishop, neyther vpō the Bish
                              〈1 line〉
                           p: but the one is a helpe vnto the other, & they togither with the pastors teach the flocke of Christ faithfully & truely, and gouerne them according to the lawes prescribed And therfore the whole gouernment of the prouince dothe not rest in the Archbishop, for the whiche cause he may with lesse difficultie execute that, that dothe apperteyne vnto him.
                        Whatsoeuer any other minister may do, the same may ye Archbishop do also, but it doth not therfore follow, that he is bound to ye same particular parish. The pastor may preach, so may the Archbishop, but the pastors charge is particular, the Archbishops more generall. And this is a very euill consequent, the Archbishop may minister the sacraments, and preache the worde, therfore he muste doe it in euery particular congregation.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 211. Sect. 1. 2.
                     You borrowed these arguments from the very Papistes, who byArgumentes borrowed of the papists. the selfe same reasons goe about to proue the Popes supremacie, for thus they argue
                     
                        Among the Israclites there was one highe Priest, which had authoritie ouer the rest, therefore there must be one high Priest (which is the Pope) ouer the whole Church of Christ. Master Caluine in his Institutions, chap. 8. dothe answere this reason on this sorte:
                        Caluine. 
                        Quod in vna natione fuit vtile, id in vniuersum 
                              〈◊〉
                            ext
                              〈1 line〉
                           dere nulla ratio cogit: imò gentis vnius & totius orbis longè diuersa erit ratio. That vvhiche is profitable to one nation, can not by any reason be extended to the vvhole vvorld, for there is great difference betvvixt the vvhole vvorld and one nation. And a little after: Perinde enim est acsi quis contendat, totum mundum à praefecto vno debere regi, quia ager vnus non plures praefectos habeat:
                         It is euen as thoughe a man shoulde affyrme, that the vvhole vvorld may be gouerned of one King, bicause one fielde or tovvne hath but one ruler or master.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page 101. Sect. 3. & Pag. 102. Sect. 1.
                     After M. Doctor translateth out of M. Caluine the Papistes reasons for the supremacie of the Pope, and M. Caluines solutions. For what purpose he knoweth, I can not tell, vnlesse it be to blotte paper, I know not what he should meane, and the quarell also whyche 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           e is not pieked, but offered he picketh, to translate thys place, is yet more straūge. For he sayth, that the authors of the Admonition borrowed their arguments from the Papists, when the contrarie is true, that they vse the reasons whyche they of the Gospell vse agaynst the supremacie of the pope, to ouerthrowe the archebishop: And M. Doctor dothe vse reasons to defende the archebishop,Beeing truly alleaged. whiche the Papistes vse to maynteyne ye popeIn ali
                              〈1 line〉
                           aging them falsly.. For M. Doctor would proueV
                              〈1 line〉
                           true, for he neuer vsed that for a rea
                              〈1 line〉
                           ō. that for bycause there is one king ouer a realme, therefore there may be one Bishop ouer a prouince, and the Papistes vse the same reason to proue the Pope to be a Bishop of the whole Church. Shew now one reason that the authors of the Admonition brought of the papistes, to proue that there shoulde be no archebishop. But nowe I perceyue his meaning, and that is, that he thought to get some comfort for the archebishop in M. Caluines solutions made vnto the papists reasons for the supremacie. And therefore he hath haled and pulled in as it were by the shoulders, this disputation betweene the protestantes and the papistes touching the supremacie. And what is it, that M. Caluine sayth for the archbishop? It hath been before shewed, what his iudgement was touching hauing one minister ouer all the ministers of a prouince, & that he doth simply condemne it in his cōmentarie vpon the fyrst chapter of the Philip. Now let it be considered, whether in these sentences he hath sayd any thyng agaynst himselfe. The

Papistes obiect that for so muche as there was one highe priest in Iury ouer all the Church, therefore there should be one Bishop ouer all. To whom M. Caluine answereth that the reason followeth not: for sayth he, there is no reason to extende that to all the world, which was profitable in one nation. Here vpon M. Doctor would cōclude, that M. Caluine alloweth one Archbishop ouer a whole prouince.
                     If one going about to proue that he may haue as many wiues as he list, would alleage Iacob for an example, which had two wiues, and M. Doctor should answere and say, that althoughe he might haue two wyues, yet it followeth not that he may haue as many as he list, woulde not M. Doctor thinke that he had great iniurie, if a man should conclude of these words, that his opinion is, that a man may haue two wiaes? I thinke that he would suppose that he had great wrōg, & yet thus would he conclude of M. Caluines words in this first sentence, where as in deede M. Calinne declareth a little after, a speciall reason why there was but one highe Priest in the whole lande of Iewry, whych is bicause he was a figure of Christ, and that thereby shoulde be shadowed out his sole mediation betweene God and hys Churche. And therefore 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            for he 
                              〈1 line〉
                           heweth no such thing. sheweth that for so muche as there is none to represent or figure our sauiour Christ, that his iudgement is, that as there should be no one ouer all the churches, so should there be no one ouer any nation.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The authors of the Admonition say, that they may as sa
                              〈1 line〉
                           ely by the warrāt of Gods word subscribe to allow the dominion of the Pope, vniuersally to reigne ouer the Church of God, as of an Archbishop ouer an whole prouince, or a Lord bishop ouer a dioces, which conteineth many shires 
                              〈1 line〉
                            parishes. This I confute by M. Caluines answere to the arguments of the Papistes, wherin it appeareth euidently how far frō reason this & such like assertions are, that there may aswel be one pope ouer ye whole Church, as one Bishop ouer one prouince or dioces.
                        Nowe therefore you may sée if you liste, that I haue translated these reasons and solutions out of M. Caluine to some purpose. And althoughe I might haue had the same solutions out of other learned writers, yet I thought it best to vse M. Caluine, as one of whome you haue conceyued a better opinion.
                        I may truly say, that the authors of the Admonitiō, borrowed this of the Papists, that there may be as wel one Pope ouer ye whole world, as one bishop ouer one prouince or dioces.The reasons for the Archbishop are solutiōs agains
                                 〈1 line〉
                               the Pope.
                        
                        The reasons that I vse for the defense of the Archbishop, are the solutions of the arguments vsed from the Pope: & such solutions as are vsed by al learned men that write agaynst the Pope (as the solution of the places of Cyprian before mentioned, and now these that follow) to the strongest arguments of the Papists. Wherfore I confesse that I vse some of the same arguments, but not to the same ende, nor in like maner. For they vse them vntruely, agaynst reason, & the true meaning of the Author: I vse them truely, according to reason, and their proper sense. And my vsing of them to the purpose that I doe, is the direct answere & playne ouerthrow of all the arguments of the Papists. It is not therfore good dealing, to make the simple beléeue that the same arguments confirme the Pope, that confirme the Archbishop, when as the application of them to the one, is the quite ouerthrowe of the other.
                        M. Doctor neuer wēt about to proue that bicause there is one king ouer a realine, therfore there may be one Bishop ouer aprouince: and in vttering these and suche like vntruthes willingly & wittingly as you do, you declare of what spirite you are. But M. Doctor hath reasoned cleane c
                              〈1 line〉
                           ntrarie, that it is no good argument to saye, that bicause one king may well rule one kingdome, therefore he may also well rule the whole world, or bicause one Bishop may be ouer one prouince, therfore one Pope may be ouer all Christendome. These be papisticall reasons, these M. Doctor dissolueth & con
                              〈1 line〉
                           uteth: neythrr can you be ignorant of it, but malice is blinde. God forgiue you: for your whole drift is to bring M. Doctor into hatred & contempt, by such lying meanes, but God that séeth the hearts of al, will one day detect your déepe dissembled hypocrisie, & reueale that lūpe of arrogancie & ambition, which is nowe cloaked with a counterfeit desire of reformation.
                        I haue tolde you for what purpose I haue vsed these solutions of M. Caluines, whose opinion also I haue shewed before concerning those names and offices.Caluine alloweth one to rule ouer the test of ministers,
                        
                        In the place to the Philippians now agayne repeated (and yet this Replier can abide no repetitions in others, though he vse almost nothing else him selfe) M. Caluine ouerthroweth your equalitie, for thus he sayth: Truely I graunt, that (as the manners and conditiōs of men are) there can no order remaine amōg the ministers of the word,
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              xcept one do rule ouer the rest. And he addeth that he speaketh 
                              de singulis corporibus, non de totis prouincijs, multò autem minùs de orbe vniuerso: of seueral bodies, not of whole prouinces, much lesse of the whole worlde, meaning, as I suppose, suche prouinces as be vnderWhat is mēte by a body in Caluine. diuers gouernours: for one prouince in one particular Church, in one kingdome, vnder one Prince, is but one body, and therfore M. Caluin sayth nothing to the cōtrary, but that one may praeesse reliquis ministris, rule ouer the rest of the ministers in such a prouince. Undoubtedly he can not meane that in euery seuerall parishe or towne there should be one, qui praesit reliquis, bicause the most parishes & townes, haue but one minister, and he that ruleth must haue some to rule ouer. If you will say that M. Caluin meaneth of suche ministers as be in cities where there be many, and not of the Countrey, where there is in euery seuerall towne but one: then I answere, that it were agaynst reason to bring the ministers of the citie vnder the gouernment of one, and to suffer the ministers of the countrey to liue as they list. The same causes that require a ruler or gouernour for the one, requireth the same also for ye other, except you would haue vniformitie in the citie, and confusion in the countrey. Wherfore M. Caluines meaning is, as I haue sayde. But you haue subtilly kept in his wordes, bothe héere and before, bicause you know that they made much more against your equalitie, than they doe agaynst the Archbishop. It had béene vprighter dealing to haue set downe his words, but you wil neyther vse that playnnesse your self, nor allow of it in other men.
                        M. Caluine vseth two answeres to that obiection of the Papists, the first whereof is this, that I haue reported in my Answere. And surely he would neuer haue vsed y• solution, & caused it to be printed, if he had not allowed it, & thought well of it. And not he alone, but other of singular religiō & zeale, haue vsed the same, as Hyperius in the place before by me alleaged: so doth M. Nowell agaynst Dorman in his first booke, Fol. 50. whose words (bicause they be wholy to my purpose, & an euident declaration that such testimonies may lawfully be vsed for the authoritie of the Bishops, that areSupra cap. 3. the. 15. diuis. vnlawfully abused for the authoritie of the Pope) I haue set downe before. Wherby also the Reader may vnderstand how we agrée both amōg onr selues, & to our selues, which are desirous to kéepe the peace of the Churche, and that these places now vsed in the defense of the Archbishops and Bishops authoritie, are no otherwyse applied by vs, than they were before any suche controuersie beganne.
                        M. Caluine maketh no doubt of the matter, but setteth it downe as an apt answer, and by him allowed. And therfore your obiection of Iacobs two wiues maye serue for a iest, but little to the purpose.
                        It followeth not that if a man make two answers to one argument he disaloweth the one: for they may both be true. Touching M. Caluines second answere: I haue spoken before, and declared wherin that high Priest was a figure of Christ. M. Caluine in that place hath not these words, that his iudgement is, that as there should be no one ouer all Churches, so should there be no one ouer any nation. And therefore you kéepe your accustomed maner of falsifying.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 211. Sect. 3.
                     Another of their reasons is this: Peter was the chiefe among theCaluin. Inst. cap. 8. Apostles, therfore there ought to be one chiefe ouer the whole Churche. The same M. Caluine in the booke and chapter before rehearsed, maketh his owne answere to that argument: 
                           Vnus inter Apostolos summus fuit, nempè quia pauci erant numero. Si vnus duodecim hominibus praefuit, an proptere
                                 〈1 line〉
                               sequetur, vnum debere centum millibus, hominum praefici? There vvas one chiefe among the Apostles, bicause they vvere but fevve in number, but if one man rule ouer tvvelue, shall it therefore follovve that one man maye rule ouer an hundreth thousande? And a little after: 
                           Quod inter paucos valet, non protenu
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                           
                           
                           tr
                                 〈1 line〉
                              bendum est ad vniuersum terrarū orb
                                 〈1 line〉
                              m, ad quem regendum nemo vnus sufficit, That which is offorce among fewe, may not by and by be drawne to the whole world, the which no one man can gouern. Euery hiue of Bees hath one chief maister Bee, euery companie of Cranes hath one principall guide, muste ther be therfore but one Bee, & one Crane to direct all the Bees & the Cranes that be in the world? You see therfore how weake this reason is. The rest of this reason I haue answered before.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 102. Sect. 1.
                     To the Papists obiecting for the supremacie ye S. Peter was the prince & chief of the Apostles M. Caluin answereth, first by denying yt Peter was so, & bringeth many places to proue yt he was equal to ye other Apostles, afterward he saith, although it be graunted, yt Peter was chiefe, yet foloweth it not bicause one may bear rule ouer twelue, being but a few in number, that therfore one may rule ouer an hundreth thousand, & that it followeth not, that that which is good amongst a few, is foorthwith good in 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ll the worlde, Nowe let all men iudge, with what conscience and truste, M. Doctor citcth M. Calnine for to proue the office of the Archbishop.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        M. Caluine in the same place hathe these wordes, It is not to be maruelled thatCal. inst. ca. 8. the twelue had one amongst them, that might gouerne the rest. For this thing doth nature allow, & the disposition of man require, that in euery societie, though all be equal in power, yet som should be as it were moderator of the rest, vpon whō the other might depend. Ther is no court without a Consull, no session of iudges without a Pretor or iustice, no Colledge without a gouernour, no societie without a maister: so should it not be any absurditie, if wee should confesse, that the Apostles gaue such preheminēce vnto Peter. Now let the Reader iudge whether it be Caluines meaning in good earnest or no, yt there was one chief among the Apostles: which being true (as it is) M. Doctor may with good conscience vse this answere of M. Caluine both against the Papistes, and the authours of the Admonition also, reasoning not much vnlyke vnto them.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 102. Sect. 1.
                     But I maruel yt he could not also see that which M. Caluine writeth in ye next sentence almost, where he sayth, yt Christ is only the head of the church, & that the church doth cleaue vnto another vnder his 
                           〈◊〉
                        , but by what meanes? According (saith he) to ye order & forme of policie, which he hath prescribed, but he hath prescribed no such forme of policie, yt one Bishop should be ouer all ye ministers & Churches in a whole dioces, or one Archbishop ouer al the ministers and churches in a whole prouince, therfore this form of policie which is by Archbishops & such Bishops as we haue is not ye meanes to knit vs one to an other in vnitie vnder the dominion of Christ. Touching ye titles & names of honor which are giuen to the Ecclesiastical persons with vs, & how that princes & 
                           〈◊〉
                         Magistrates may and ought to haue the title which cannot be giuen to the ministers, I haue spoken before, & therfore of Archbishops, Archdeaco
                           〈1 line〉
                        s, and the Lord bishops thus farre.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        M. Caluine in the nexte section after that he hath answered to other arguments ofCal. insti. ca 8. the Papists saith thus: But let it be as they would haue it, that it is good & profitable that the whole world should be conteined in one monarchie, which notwithstanding is most absurd, but let it be so: yet I wil not therfore graunt, that it doth likewise hold in the gouernmēt of the churche. For the church hath Christ her only head, vnder whose gouernment we are knit together acording to that order and forme of policie which he himself hath prescribed. VVherfore they do Christ notable 
                              〈◊〉
                           , which vnder this pretence will haue one man to rule ouer the whole church, bicause she can not want a head, for Christ is the head, wherby the whole bodie being compacted and coupled by euery ioynt of gouernment, dothe according to the operation in the measure of euery member, iucrease to a perfect bodie. Al whiche I agrée vnto as moste true, but nothing at all perteyniug to youre purpose. 
                                 〈◊〉
                               sayth, that vnder the gouernment of Christe we cleaue together among our selues, according to that order and that forme of pollicie, whiche he hath himselfe prescribed: And who denyeth this? But Quorsùm? This he speaketh of the spiritual regiment and policie, not of the externall: and yet that externall regiment and policie is also 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                              
by him, whiche is profitable for his Churche according to tyme, place, and pers
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ns, though it be not particularly expressed in his word, as partly hath bin declared before, and shall be hereafter more at large vpon particular occasion.
                        
                        Thus haue you (after so many yeares trauel in this controuersie) vttered all your skil against the Archbishop, poured out alyour malice, exercised your gibes and iests, whetted your slaunderous tong: and yet besides corrupt and false allegati
                              〈1 line〉
                           ns of wryters: fonde and toyish distinctions of your owne, contrary to al practise and learning: vnchristian speaches and heathenish floutes and frumpes, you haue vttered nothing. And I protest vnto the whole Church before God, yt your vnfaithfulnesse in handeling the matter, your vaine and friuolous reasons, haue muche more animated me to the defense of those auncient, reuerend, profitable, and necessarie offices. I speake of the offices as they be vsed in this church. And I shal most heartily desire the Reader to weigh and consider the authorities and reasons on both parties indifferently, and to iudge therof according to the truth.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ A briefe collection of suche authorities, as are vsed in this defense of the authoritie of Archbishops and Bishops.
               
                  Ca. 7.
                  
                     Timothie was Bishop of Ephesus, & Chrysostome saith in. 1. Ti. 5. yt 
                     
                        gens ferè tota
                        Testimonies of the Apostles tymes, & thervnto adioyning. 
                        Asiatica, almost the whole countrey of Asia was cōmitted to him. And vpon the. 2. to Timo. chap. 4. he saith, that Paul had cōmitted to Timothie 
                        gubernacula ecclesiae gentis totiu
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         the gouernment ouer the church of the whole nation, meaning Asia.
                  
                     Titus was Bishop of Creta, not of one citie only, but of the whole Is
                        〈1 line〉
                     e. So sayeth Chrysostome in his cōmentaries vpon the fyrst to Titus. And Lyra, Erasmns, Pellican and others write, that S. Paule made him Archbishop of Creta. And Illyricus calleth him and Timothie, 
                        multarum Ecclesiarū Episcopos, Bishops of many churches.
                  
                  S. Iohn (as Eusebius reporteth 
                        lib. 3. cap. 23.) after his returne from Pathm
                        〈1 line〉
                     s, did gouerne the Churches in Asia, and ordeyned Ministers and Bishops.
                  Iames was made by the Apostles Bishop of Ierusalem, and the gouernment of that churche was cōmitted to him. 
                        Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 23.
                  
                  The. 33. or as some counte. 34. of the Canons attributed to the Apostles apointeth one head and chiefe Bishop to be in euery nation or countrey, to whom all other Byshops of the same nation must be subiecte.
                  
                     Dionysius Areopagita was Archbishop of Athens, appoynted thervnto by S. Paul as Volusianus a godlie and learned writer testifieth.
                  
                     Polycarpus was by S. Iohn made Bishop of Smyrna. Tertull. de praescript.
                  
                  In the Church of Alexandria from the time of S. Marke the ministers had always a Bishop to gouerne them. Hiero. ad Euagrium.
                  
                  
                     Ignatius who liued in the Apostles tyme doth call a Bishop 
                        principem Sacerdotum, the prince of Priestes, in epist. ad Smyrnenses.
                     
                  
                  In Eleutherius 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     is tyme, whiche was 
                        Anno. 180. when this realme of EnglandTestimonies of the tymes nexte after the Apostles. 
                           Anno. 180.
                      was fyrst conuerted to Christianitie, there was appoynted in the same thrée Archbishops. and. 28. Bishops. M. Foxe To. 1. pag. 146.
                  
                  
                     Demetrius who liued 
                        Anno. 191. was Bishop of Alexandria, and of Egypt. 
                        Euseb. libr. 6. cap. 1.
                     191.
                  
                  
                     Cyprian who was 
                        Anno. 235. being Bishop of Carthage, had vnder him Numidia235. and Mauritania, as he himselfe sayeth, 
                        Lib. 4. Epist. 8. And Gregorie Nazianzene in an oration that, he made of Cyprian sayth, that he ruled and gouerned not onely the churches of Carthage and Aphrike, but of Spayne also, and of the whole East churche. And for this cause doth Illyricus call him a Metropolitane: the which name T. C. also doth giue vnto him in his Replie. 
                        Pag. 95. sect. 2.
                  
                  
                     Dionysius called Alexandrinus, who lyued 
                        Anno. 250. béeyng Bishop of Alexandria250. hadde also vnder his iurisdiction all the Churches in Pentapolis, as Athanasius testifyeth in a certainepistle 
                        Apol. 2. and yet hadde these Churches their proper Bishop, as Eusebius dothe witnesse 
                        lib. 7. cap. 26. Wherefore the Bishoppe

of Alexandria did gouerne them as Archebishop.
                  
                     Gregorie béeing Bishop, did gouerne all the Churches thorowe Pontus, An. 270270. 
                        Eus. lib. 7. cap. 14.
                  
                  
                     Epiphanius li. 2. to. 2. haeri. 68. maketh mention of one Peter, who liued 
                        An. 304. whom be calleth Archbishop of Alexandria, and declareth that Meletius then Bishop in Egypt304. was vnder him: where also he hath these words: 
                        Hic enim mos obtinet vt Alexandriae Episcopus, totius Aegypti, ac Thebaidis, Mariotae
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ac Lybiae, Ammonicae
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ac Mariotidis, ac Pentapolis ecclesiasticam habeat administrationem. For this custome hath preuailed, that the Bishop of Alexandria should haue the Ecclesiasticall gouernment of all Egypt, Thebai
                           〈1 line〉
                        , Mariota, Lybia, Ammonica, Mariotis, and Pentapolis. And haere. 69. he sayth, 
                        Quotquot enim ecclesiae in Alexandri
                              〈1 line〉
                            cat
                              〈1 line〉
                           olicae ecclesiae sunt, sub vno Archiepiscopo sunt, For all the Churches in Alexandria that be Catholike, are vnder one Archebishop.
                  
                  The same Epiphanius in the same place doth call Meletius, Archbishop of Egypt,304. but yet he sayth that he was subiect to the Archbishop of Alexandria. And this Meletius liued also 
                        Anno. 304.
                  
                  The Councell of Nice 
                        An. 330. in the. 4. Canon sayth that the confirmation of Bishops3
                           〈1 line〉
                        0. doth pertein to the Metropolitane of euery prouince: and in the. 6. mention is made of Metropolitanes to be in euery prouince, and that 
                        sec
                              〈1 line〉
                           ndùm antiquum morem, according to the olde custome. And it is further sayde, that the Bishop of Alexandria hath the regiment of Libya and Pentapolis in Egypt.
                  In the. 6. &. 37. Canons of the secōd Councell of Arelat. it is decréed that no Bishop may be ordeined without the consent of the Metropolitane: nor any thing to be attempted335. against the great Synode of the Metropolitane.
                  The Councell of Antioch in the. 9. Canon willeth yt in euery prouince ye Bishops be subiect to their Metropolitane bishop which hath ye care of the whole prouince. &c. And in that Canon is this clause also. 
                        Secundùm antiquam à patribus nostris regulam constitutam,
                        344. according to the auncient rule appointed by our forefathers.
                  
                  
                     Athanasius was Archbishop of Alexandria, and had iurisdiction ouer the rest of the clergie, to whom also Mariotes was subiect. 
                        Atbana. apo. 2.
                  
                  
                     Amphilochius Metropolitane of Lycaonia gouerned y• whole coūtry. 
                        Theod. lib. 4. ca. 11.
                  
                  
                     Zozomene li. 7. ca. 19. writeth that though there be many cities in Scythia, yet they haue but one Bishop.
                  
                     Aurelius bishop of Carthage in the councell of Aphrica sayth, that he had the ouersight and care of many churches.
                  
                     Ambrose li. de dig. sacer. ca. 5. maketh mētion of Archbishops, & he himself was a Metropolitane, hauing charge and gouernment of many churches, as the authors of the Centuries testifie in their fourth Centurie.
                  
                     Simeon was Archbishop of Seleucia 
                        Zozo. lib. 2. cap. 8. he liued about the tyme of the Nicene Councell. Basile Metropolitane of 
                        Capadocia. Zozo. lib. 3. cap. 16.
                  
                  In the councel of Constātinople, which is one of the. 4. general Councels in the. 
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                     An. 38
                           〈1 line〉
                        . and. 5. Canons this authoritie & regimēt of Primates, Metropolitanes & Archbishops is conteine
                        〈1 line〉
                     . Which thing also Socrates doth note in the same Councell 
                        lib. 5. cap. 8.
                  
                  In the. 
                        〈1 line〉
                     . Counce
                        〈1 line〉
                     l of Carthage Canon. 12. &c. it is euident that in euerie ProuinceAn. 415. there was a primate.
                  In the councell of Chalcedon, Flauianus is called Archbishop of Constantinople: Dioscorus
                     An. 453. Archbishop of Alexandria: Leo Archbishop of Rome, and the authorities of these offices and degrées there in diuers pointes specified.
                  In the first Canon of the councel of Ephesus it may manifestly be gathered, yt allAn. 468. other Bishops of ye same Prouince wer then subiect to their Metropolitane Bishop.
                  
                     Hierome ad Rusticum Monachū
                        
                      sayth: Singuli ecclesiarum Episcopi, singuli Archipresbyteri, singuli archidiaconi. &c. I omit his other places ad Lucif. ad Titum. &c.
                  
                  
                     Ambrose in 4
                              〈1 line〉
                            d Ephe.
                      sayth that all orders be in a Bishop, bicause he is 
                        primus sacerdos, hoc est princeps sacerdotum, the chief Priest, that is, Prince of priestes.
                  
                  
                     Augustine in his questions 
                        in vetas & nouum test. cap 101. sayth, Quid est Episcopus, nisi primus presbyter, hoc est Summus sacerdos?
                  
                  
                     
                     Chrysostome being Archbishop of Cōstantinople did also gouern the Churches in Thracia, Asia, and Pontus. 
                        Tbeodo. lib. 5. cap. 28 The authors of the Centuries affirme the same, and call him Archbishop. 
                        Cent. 5. cap. 10.
                  
                  
                     Theodorete being bishop of Cyrus had vnder his gouernment. 800. Churches, as he himselfe t
                        〈1 line〉
                     stifieth in his Epistle to Leo.
                  
                  
                     Gennadius Bishop of Constantinople writeth to the Bishop of Rome thus, 
                        Curet
                        Rufsi. libr. 1. cap. 29. 
                        sanctitas tua vniuersas tuas custodias, tibi
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            subiectos Episcopos.
                     
                  
                  Infinite testimonies and examples there are of this sorte, and no man that is of any reading can be ignorant but that these degrées of superioritie, and this kynd of regiment hath bin in the Churche continually, euen from the Apostles tyme.
                  
                     M. Bucer vpon the fourthe to the Ephes. sheweth that these de
                        〈1 line〉
                     rees in the churche Bishop, Archbishop, Metropolitane, Primate, Patriarke, be not onely moste auntient, but also necessarie.
                  
                     M. Caluine in his 
                        Instit. cap. 8. Sect. 52. vpon the place of Hierome in the Epistle ad Euagriu sayth, that in the old tyme there was to euery citie apointed acertain region, Prouince, or Dioces, Quae presbyteros indè sumeret, & velut corpori illius ecclesia accenseretur, and that y• same also was vnder the Bishop of the citie. Quod si amplior erat ager, qui sub eius episcopatu erat, quàm vt sufficere omnibus episcopi munijs vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         possit: per ipsum agrum designabantur certis locis presbyteri, qui in minoribùs negotijs eius vices obirent, eos vocabant 
                           〈1 line〉
                        borepiscopos, quòd per ipsam prouinciam episcopum representabant.
                  
                  
                     M. Beza lib. conf cap. 7 calleth the names of Archbishops, Bishops. &c. Holie names: for thus he sayth, That Pastors in proces of tyme were distinct into Metropolitanes, Bishops, and those whome they nowe call Curates (that is, such as be appoynted to euery Parishe) was not in the respect of the ministerie of the worde, but rather in respecte of iurisdiction and discipline. Therfore concerning the office of preaching the word, and administring the Sacramentes, there is no difference betwixte Archebishops, Bishops, and Curates, for all are bounde to feede their flocke with the same breade, and therefore by one common name in the Scriptures they bee called Pastours and Bishops. But what impudencie is there in those men (meaning the Papistes) to vse those holie names, and therfore to glorie of the succession of the Apostles and true Bishops. In the same chapter, he maketh two kynds of degrées vsed in the Papistical Churche: the one vnknowne to the Apostles, & to the primitine church, the other taken out of the word of God and from the primitiue Church: In this second order he placeth Archebishops, Curates, Can
                        〈1 line〉
                     ns, Seniors or Ministers, Archedeacons, Deanes, Subdeacons, Clearkes.
                  But what should I stand longer in this matter? There is not one writer of credit yt denieth this superioritie to haue bin always among the clergie, and these degrées to come euen from the best tyme of the Church since the Apostles, and so be both most
                        〈1 line〉
                      auncient and generall. Wherfore I can not but compt suche as denie so manifest a truthe, eyther vnlearned and vnskilful persons, or else verie wranglers, and men desirous of contention.
               
            
            
               A briefe comparison betvvixt the Bishops of our tyme, and the Bishops of the primitiue Churche.
               
                  Chap. 8
                  I Knowe that comparisons be odious, neither would I vse them at this tyme, but that I am thervnto (as it wer) compelled by the vncharitable dealing of T. C. who by comparing the Bishops of our time with the Bishops in the olde Churche, hath soughte by that meanes to disgrace them, if it were possible. I may peraduenture in this point sée me to some to flatter, but the true iudgement therof I leaue to him, that knoweth the secretes of the heart. In the meane tyme I will affirme nothing, which is not euident to all those that be learned diuines, and not ouer ruled with affection. My compar
                        〈1 line〉
                     ion shal consist in these thrée points: Truthe of doctrine, Honestie of lise, and right vse of externall things.
                  Touching the fyrst, that is truth of doctrine, I shall not néed much to labour. For I think T. C. and his adherents wil not denie but that the doctrin taught & professed by our Bishops at this day, is much more perfect and sounder, than it commonly was in

any age after the Apostles time. For the most part of the auncientest Bishops were deceyued with that grosse opinion of a thousande yeares after the resurrection, whereinEuse. lib. 3. cap. 39. &. 35. the kingdome of Christe should here remaine vpon earth: The fautors whereof were called M
                           〈1 line〉
                        llenarij. Papias who liued in Polycarpus and Ignatius his tyme, béeing Bishop of 
                        〈1 line〉
                     erusalem, was the first author of this errour, and almost all the moste auncient fat
                        〈1 line〉
                     ers were infected with the same.
                  
                     Cyprian and the whole Councel of Carthage erred in rebaptisatiō, & Cyprian himselfTo. con. 1. Lib. epi. 2. ep. 3. also was greatly ouerseene in making it a matter so necessarie in the celebration of the Lords Supper, to haue water mingled with wyne, which was no doubt at y• tyme cōmon to moe than to him: but the other opinion which he confuteth, of vsyng water only, is more absurd, and yet it had at that tyme patrones among the Bishops.
                  Howe greatly were almost all the Bishops & learned writers of the greke church, yea and the Latines also for the most part, spotted with doctrines of freewill, of merites, of inuocation of Sainctes, & suche lyke? Surely you are not able to recken in any age since the Apostles tyme, any companie of Bishops, that taught & helde so sound & perfect doctrine in all poynts, as the Bishops of England do at this tyme.
                  If you speake of Ceremonies, & of the syncere administration of the sacraments, you shall finde the like difference: for compare the cerenionies that Tertullian sapet
                        〈1 line〉
                      
                     lib. decoro. mil. then to be vsed in the Churche about the Sacraments, and otherwise: or those that Basile reherseth Lib. de Sancto spi. or suche as we may reade to haue bin in S. Augustins tyme, with those that we nowe reteine in this Churche, and you can not but acknowledge, that therin we are come to a far greater perfection.
                  I meane not to stande in particulars, I thinke T. C. and his companions wil not contende with me in this poynt, for if they doe, it is but to maynteyncontention. Seing then that in the truthe of doctrine, which is the chief and principall point, oure Bishops be not only comparable with the olde Bishops, but in many degrées to be preferred before them, we thinke there is tootoo great iniurie done vnto them, and to this doctrine whiche they professe, when as they are so odiously compared, and so contemptuously intreated by T. C. and his Colleags.
                  2 Touching honestie of life, which is the second point, I wil not say much, I do not think but that therin they may be compared with the old Bishops also: and in some points preferred: euery age hath some imperfectiōs in it, and the best men are most subiect to the slanderous tong. Great contention ther was among the Bishops in the Councell of Nice, insomuch that euen in the presence of the Emperour they ceased not to libell one against an other. What bitternesse and cursing was there betwixt Epiphanius and Chrysostome? what affectionate dealyng of Theophilus agaynste the same Chrysostome? what iarring betwixt Hierome and Augustine? But I wil not prosecute this. Men, be they neuer so godly, yet they be men. & the cōm
                        〈1 line〉
                     n sorte of people, when they waxe wearie of the worde of God truely preached, then doe they begin to depraue the true and chiefe ministers of the same.
                  3 For the third poynt, that is, the vse of external things, if the 
                        〈1 line〉
                     ishops nowe haue more land & liuing than Bishops had then, it is the blessing of God vpon his church: and it is commodious for the state and time. If any man abuse himself therin, let him be reformed, let not his fault be made a pretence to cloke a minde desirous to spoyle. I sée not how those lands and liuings can be imployed to more bene
                        〈1 line〉
                     ite of ye churche, cōmoditie of the cōmon welth, & honor of the Prince, than they be nowe in state and cōdition wherin they remain. Bishops shal not now need to liue by pilling & polling,Amb. de dig. sacerd. August. lib. 3. aduer. Permenìa. as it séemed they did in Cyprians tyme, for he complaineth therof. Ser. de lapsis. Nor as some did in Ambrose or Augustins. They haue (God be thanked) liuing sufficient with out any such vnlawfull meanes, and I doubt not but if their expenses shall be compared with their predecessors, it shall appeare that they be according to the proportion that God hath limitted vnto them. But an eye dimmed with malice, or bente to the spoyle, can sée nothing that may hinder the desired purpose. God roote out of the hartes of men such rauening affections and gréedie desires.
               
            
         
         
            
            Of the Communion Booke. Tract. 9.
            
               The generall faultes examined, vvhervvith the publike Seruice is charged by T. C.
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 102. Sect. 2.
                     Before I come to speak of prayers, I wil treat of the faults that arecomitted almost throughout the whole Lyturgie, and publike Seruice of the Churche of Englande, whereof one is that, whiche is often obiected by the authors of the Admonition, that the forme of it is taken from the Churche of Antichriste, as the reading of the Epistles and Gospels so cutte and mangled, as the moste of the prayers, the maner of ministring the Sacramentes, of mariage, of burial, Confirmation, translated as it were worde for worde, sauing that the grosse errours and manifest impieties be taken away. For although the formes and ceremonies whiche they vsed were not vnlawfull, and that they conteyned nothyng whiche is not agreable to the worde of God, (whiche I would they did not) yet notwithstanding neyther the worde of God, nor reason, nor the examples of the eldest Churches, both Iewish and Christian doe permit vs, to vse the same formes and ceremonies, beyng neyther commaunded of God, neyther suche, as there maye not as good as they, and rather better be established.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In these woords are conteined two false principles, the one is that the forme and manner of prayer vsed in the Churche of England, is taken from the churche of Antichrist: the other, that it is not lawful to vse the same formes (of prayer) and ceremonies, that the Papists did: this latter I haue already proued to be otherwise, in the beginningTract. 7. cap. 5 diui. 3. 4. &c. where I spake of Ceremonies, and intend hereafter to answere such arguments as shal be vsed to proue the contrarie: the first wil appeare to be most vntrue, being manifest that such things as we now vse in the booke of Common prayer (though some of them haue ben vsed in the time of Papistrie) were appointed in the church by godlie and learned men, before the Pope was Antichrist, or the Church of Rome greatly corrupted, as the reading of the Epistle and gospell, whiche is of verie long continuance in the Church, euen whilest the church of Rome was as yet, in the principall pointsReading of gospels and epistles verie auncient. of doctrine pure, being also chosen places of scriptures apt for the time, and moste to edifying, which no honest heart and godly disposed person, can discommende.
                        If in the administration of the sacraments, celebration of mariage, burying of the dead, confirmation, those thyngs that are good and profitable be reteyned, and the grosse errours andThings 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              bused maye be vsed, imp
                                 〈1 line〉
                              eties being taken a waye. manifest impieties taken away, as you say they be, why do you then on this sort trouble ye church, for vsing that which is good, & refusing that which is euill? Is Papistrie so able to infect the word of God, godlie prayers, and profitable Ceremonies, that they may not be vsed in the Church reformed, the errours and impieties being taken away? Why doe we call our churches, reformed Churches, rather than newly builded, or as it were wholly transformed, but that we reteyne whatsoeuer we fynd toThe churche is reformed, not transformed. be good, refuse or reforme that which is euill. But of these matters, more is to be spoken, as occasion is offered. Hytherto you vse but woordes, whiche haue no weyghte without good and sounde reasons.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 102. Sect. 3.
                     For the worde of God I haue shewed before, both by the example of the Apostles conforming the Gentiles vnto the Iewes in their ceremonies, & not contrarywise the Iewes to the Gentiles and by that the wisedome of God hath thought it a good way to kepe his people from the infection of idolatrie and superstition to seuer them from idolaters by outwarde ceremonies, and therfore hath forbidden them to doe things which are in themselues verie lawfull to be don
                           〈1 line〉
                        .
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What you haue spoken in any place of your booke cōcerning this matter, is there

answered, wher it is spokē: but you haue not as yet to my remēbrāce any wher shewed yt God euer hath forbidden his people to do things in themselues very lawfull to be done,Tract. 7. cap. 5 bycause the same were vsed by Idolaters, I haue before proued the contrary, both by the manifest words of the scripture, and by the testimonie of Saint Augustine, and diuers other learned writers.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 102. Sect. 4.
                     Now I will adde this further, that when as the Lord was carefull to seuer them by ceremonies from other nations, yet was he not so carefull to seuer them from any, as from the Egyptians amongst whome they liued, and from those nations which were next neighbours vnto them, bycause from them was the greatest feare of infection. Therefore by this constant and perpetuall wisedome which God vseth to kepe his people from idolatrie, it followeth that the religion of God should not only in matter and substance, but also as farre as may be informe and fashion differ from that of the idolaters, and especially the Papists which are round about vs, & amongst vs. An vnadu
                              〈1 line〉
                           sed 
                              〈◊〉
                           . For in deede it were more safe for vs to conforme our indifferent ceremonies to the Turkes which are 
                           〈1 line〉
                        arre off, than to the papists which are so neare.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Egyptians and Idolatrous gentiles neither worshipped, nor preteuded toThe Gētiles and Papists not like in all respects. worship the God of Israell, and therefore no maruell though in rites, and ceremonies they were vtterly seuered from them: but the Papists eyther worship or pretend to worship the same God which we do, and therefore there is no suche cause in all pointes of rites and ceremonies to differ from them. And it is most vntrue thatThe Iewes and the Gentiles in some respect agreed in ceremo
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ies God so seuered his people from the Egyptians or other nations néere adioyning, that they had nothing common with them, or no ceremonies like vnto theirs: for they were like in many things touching the externall forme. The Gentiles had sacrifices and so had they: The Gentiles in worshipping their Gods vsed externall pompe of garments, of golden and siluer vessels and such like, and so did they, yea diuers learned men be of this iudgement, that God did prescribe vnto the Israelites that solemne manner and forme of worshipping him by externall rites and ceremonies, shortly after their returne out of Egypt, that they being therewith not onely occupyed, but also delighted, should haue no desire to retourne into Egypt, or to worship their Gods whome they had séene with great solemnitie of ceremonies and externall rites adored. And therefore you ground your talke vpō false principles, which you haue not proued, but imagined.
                        Now if we may haue ceremonies common with them, or like vnto them, from whome we whollie differ in matter and substance of religion, as we do from th
                              〈1 line〉
                            Gentiles, and from the Turkes, muche more may we haue Ceremonies common with them, or like vnto them, from whome we do not wholly diff
                              〈1 line〉
                           r in mat
                              〈1 line〉
                           er and substance, but in certaine materiall and substantiall points. As for this your saying, That it were better for vs to conforme our indifferent Ceremonies to the Turks which are farre off, than to the Papists which are so neare. I take it to be but spoken in a heate, and that you will otherwise thinke when you haue better considered the matter: the one being a professed enimie vnto Christ, and the name of Christ, the other pretending the contrary. But to put you out of doubt, we do not in any kinde of ceremonies, conformeWe conforme not our selues to the Papists in ceremonies. 
                                 Tit. 1.
                            our selues to the Papists, but vsing Christian libertie in externall thinges, & knowing that al things be cleane to those that be cleane, such things as we find instituted by learned and godly men, and profitable to the Church as perteyni
                              〈1 line〉
                           g to e
                              〈1 line〉
                           ifying, or comelinesse and order (though abused of the Papists) we reteine in our Churches, and restore to the right vse: as our forefathers did the Temples of Idols, turningTract. 7 cap 5 diuis 3. 4. &
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            them to Christian Churches, and reuenewes consecrated to Idolls, transposing them to find the ministers of the Church, and such like, as I haue declared in an other place.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 103. Sect. 1.
                     Common reason also doth teach, that contraries are cured by their contraries: now Christianitie and Antichristianitie, the Gospell & poperie, be contraries, therfore Antichristianitie must be cured not by it selfe, but by that which is (as much as may be) contrary vnto it. Therefore a medled and mingled estate of the order of the Gospell, and the ceremonies of poperie, is not the best way to banish poperie, and therefore as to abolish the infection of false doctrine of the Papists, it is necessary to establish a diuers doctrine, and to abolish the tyrannie of the popish gouernment, necessary to plant the discipline of Christ: so to heale the infection that hath crepte into mens minds by reason of the popish order of seruice, it is meete that the other order were put in place thereof.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Contraries must be cured by contraries in all things wherein they be contrary. ChristianitieHow contraries must be cured by contraries. and Antichristianitie: the Gospell and poperie be not in all things cōtrary, touching outward professiō: and therfore no necessitie of abādoning all things frō Christianitie that was vsed in Antichristianitie. So much of the papistical doctrine as is contrary to the Gospell: that kind of gouernment in the Popes Church, that is repugnant to the word of God: all such order of seruice or kind of prayer, as is vngodly and superstitious, is to be remoued and cured with the contrary, but as they haue some truth in doctrine, so haue they some lawfull kind of gouernment, and good and godly prayers, all which being restored to their owne puritie, are to be reteyned: for no abuse can so defile any thing that is good, that the same thing may not be vsed, the abuse being taken away.
                        And yet, if you would speake the truth, you cannot say, but that the order of the popishThe order of popish seruice cleane altered in this church seruice is cleane altered in this Church: for what similituds hath the vulgar tong with a tong vnknowne? What likelihoode is there betwixt the multitude of ceremonies vsed by the Papists, and the fewnes of such as are now reteyned? How much doth the simplicitie vsed in our seruice, differ from the pompe and gorgeousnesse vsed in theirs? How contrary is our communion to their Masse? What diuersitie is there in the celebration of our sacraments and theirs? To be short, the differēce is as much as eyther the worde of God, or the state and condition of the Churche requireth: the which you might sée if you were disposed: but as I haue sayd before, 
                              Caeca malitia non videt apertissima: Blind malice seeth not those things that are most manifest.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 103 Sect. 1.
                     Philosophie which is nothing else but reason, teacheth, that if a man will draw one from vice which is an extreame, vnto vertue which is the meane, that it is the best way to bring him as farre from that vice as may be, and that it is safer and lesse harme for him to be led somewhat to farre, than he should be suffered to remayne within the borders and confynes of that vice wherewith he i
                           〈1 line〉
                         infected. As if a man would bring a dronken man to sobrietie, the best and neatest way is to cary him as farre from his excesse in drinke as may be, and if a man coulde not keepe a meane, it were better to fault in prescribing lesse than he should drinke, than to faulte in giuing him more than he ought, as we see to bring a sticke, which is A croked rule. croked, to be streight, we do not only how it so farre vntill it come to be streight, but we bend it so farre vntill we make it so croked of the other side, as it was before of the first side, to this end that at the last it may stand streight and as it were in the mid way betwene both the crokes: which I do not therefore speake, as though we ought to abolish one euill and hurtfull ceremonie for another, but that I would shew, how it is more daungerous for vs that haue bin plunged in the mire of Poperie, to vse the ceremonies of it, than of any other idolatrous and sperstitious seruice of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.The Replyer prescribeth a heathenish rule of retormation. Rom. 3.
                        
                        Philosophie also teacheth, that both the extreames be vices, and therefore your rule dothe teache that a man must go from one vice to another, if he will come to vertue, whiche is a meane: but Sainct Paule teacheth the contrary, saying, 
                              Non est faciendum malum, vt inde veniat bonum. VVe must not do euill that good may come thereof.
                           
Wherefore as your rule is heathenish and naught, so do you as naughtily 
                              〈◊〉
                            it Is there no way for the prodigall man to come to liberalitie but by 
                              〈◊〉
                           ? no way for the glutton to come to temperance, but by pyning himselfe? no way for t
                              〈1 line〉
                           e 
                              〈◊〉
                            person to come to the true feare and loue of God, but by des
                              〈1 line〉
                           eration? 
                              〈◊〉
                            way to come 
                              〈1 line〉
                           rom poperie to the Gospell, but by confusion, and 
                              〈◊〉
                            of all good ord
                              〈1 line〉
                           r and gouernment? Is this diuinitie? In déede 
                              〈1 line〉
                           uch 
                              〈◊〉
                            it is that Aristotle a prophane Philosopher doth teach in his Ethikes, but not that Chris
                              〈1 line〉
                            and his 
                              〈◊〉
                            do teach in the Gospell.
                        The ordinarie meanes whereby a Christian man must come from vice to vert
                              〈1 line〉
                           e,The ordinarie meanes to draw men from 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . from an e
                              〈1 line〉
                           treme to a meane, is the diligent reading and hearing o
                              〈1 line〉
                            the word of God, ioyned with earnest and heartie prayers. The best way therefore to bring a dronken man to sobrietie is, not to perswade him to a superstitious kind of abstinence or fasting, but to lay before him out of the word of God the horriblenes of that sinne, and the punishment due vnto the same. The similitude of a croked sticke is a
                              〈1 line〉
                           t to set foorth so croked a precept, but not so apt to make manifest the way vnto vertue. But I may not blame you for vsing and allowing those prophane rules, whiche you so aptly follow, and so commonly practise in all your doings.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 103. Sect. 1. 2.
                     This wisedome of not conforming it selfe vnto the ceremonies of the Idolaters in things indifferent, hath the Church followed in times passed.
                     Tertullian sayth, O sayth he, better is the religion of the heathen, for they vse no solemnitie of the Christians▪ neyther the Lords day, neyther the Pentecost, and if they knew them, they wouldeLib. de Ido latria. haue nothing to do with them, for they would be afrayd, least they shoulde seeme Christians, but we are not afraid to be called heathen.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Tertullian in that place speaketh against such Christians, as celebrated the feasts of the Gentiles togither with them remayning in their wicked abuse, as it appeareth in the words that go before, which are as followeth. 
                              Nobis quibus sabbata extranea
                              Lib. de Idolatria. 
                              sunt & neomenia, & feriae aliquādo a Deo dilectae, Saturnalia & lanuariae & Brumae & Matro
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ales frequentantur, munera commeant, strenae consonant, lusus, conuiuia constrepunt. O melior fides nationum in suam sectam. &c. The feasts of Saturne, of Ianus, of Bacchus, and of Iuno are frequented of vs, vnto whome the sabbats, new mones, and holydays sometimes beloued of God, are straunge, gifts and presents are very ri
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e, sportes and banquets keepe a sturre. O better is the faith of the Gentiles in their sect. &c. Wherefore this saying of Tertullian may aptly be alledged against those, that frequent the popish solemnities togither with them, come to their Churches, communicate with them in worshipping their idols, and yet professe the knowledge of the Gospell, but it can by no meanes be drawen vnto such, as withdrawing themselues from suche kind of communicating with them, do in their seuerall Churches vse those good things well, which the Papists haue abused: as the scripture, the sacraments, prayers and suche like. Wherefore you do not well to alledge Tertullians words, omitting the circumstances which declare his meaning.
                        A man being pr
                              〈1 line〉
                           sent at Idolatrous seruice must néedes giue great suspition that he is an Idolater, and therfore no man ought to be present at it, which in heart condemneth it. But as there is no honest and godly man, which can call our seruice Idolatrous or Papisticall, so is ther none that can suspect vs to be Idolaters or Papists. The whole world knowing that both our practise and profession is to the contrary.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 103. Sect. 3.Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 17.
                     
                     Constantine the Emperoure speaking of the keeping of the feast of Easter, saythe that it is an

vnworthy thing to haue any thing common with that most spitefull companie of the Iewes. And a little a
                           〈1 line〉
                        ter he saith, that it is most absurd and against reason, that the Iewes shou
                           〈1 line〉
                        de vaunt and glory, that the Christians could not keepe those things without their doc
                           〈1 line〉
                        rine. And in anotherSocrat. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . li. cap. 9. place it is sayd after this sort: It is conuement so to order the matter, that we haue nothing common with that nation.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Constantine speaketh of the feast of Easter, which he would not haue obserued according to the manner of the Iewes, and yet you know that the Churches in Asia, following the examples of Philip and Iohn the Apostles, and of Polycarpus, and many other godly men, did celebrate that feast togyther with the Iewes, as it is to be seene in the fifth booke o
                              〈1 line〉
                            Eusebius eccle. history. Wherfore the matter was not of so greatEuseb. lib. 5. cap. 23. 24. &. 25. 26. importance, before it was for quietnesse sake determined by the Churche: neyther doth Constantine in eyther of the places meane, that we should haue nothing common with the Iewes, but only that we should haue no suche thinges common with them, as are repugnant to Christian libertie, or to the truth of the Gospell, or such as may cō
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           rme them in their obstinacie and error. For if his meaning had bin generally and simply, then mighte he haue vtterly abrogated the feast of Easter, being no commaundement sor it in the new testament. As therefore Cōstantine thought that the Churche had not the feast of Easter common with the Iewes, not bycause the thing it selfe was abrogated, but the 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ay altered: Euen so the Churche of Englande cannot be said to haue any thing common with the P
                              〈1 line〉
                           pisticall Church, though it reteine something vsed in the same, bycause the manner is changed, and certayne circumstances altered: 
                              〈1 line〉
                           or whereas before it was in a straunge tongue, nowe it is in a tongue knowne: and whereas it was before abused and mixt with superstition, now it is rightly vsed and purged from all corruption. And therefore, although the thing remaine, yet bycause the circumstances be altered, it is not the same, no more than our Sabbat is the Iewes Sabbat, and our Easter the Iewes Easter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 103. Sect. 4. 5. 6.
                     The Councels although they did not obserue themselues always in making of decrees thys rule, yet haue kept this consideration continually in making their lawes, that they woulde haue the Christians differ from others in their ceremonies.
                     The Co ncell of Laodicea, which was afterward confirmed by the sixt generall Councell, decreed,Tom. 1. con Lao. can. 38 that the Christians should not take vnleauened bread of the Iewes, or communicate with their 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Also it was decreed in another Councell, that they shoulde not decke their houses with bay2. To. Braccar. can. 7
                              〈1 line〉
                           . leaues, and greene boughes, because the Paganes did vse so, and that they shoulde not rest from their labours those days that the Paganes did, that they shoulde not keepe the firste day of euery moneth as they did.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What is all this to your purpose? who saith that eyther we must vse all thinges that the Iewes and gentiles did, or that the Church hath not authoritie to take order therein as shall be thought most conuenient? the Churche at this time, did perceiue inconueniences in these customes and ceremonies, and therefore did by ordinaris authoritie abrogate them. In like manner and vpon like considerations hathe thys Church of England abandoned great numbers of Papisticall rites and ceremonies, but bycause it refuseth some, may it therefore reteine none? or bycause it reiecteth those which be wicked and vnprofitable, may it not therefore kéepe still suche as be godly and perteine to order and decencie?
                        The Canon of the Councell of Laodicea is this. 
                              Non 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  a Iudaeis azyma accipere,
                              Canon. 38. 
                              aut communicare impietatibus eorum. That we ought not to take vnleauened bread of the 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ewes, or communicate with their impietie. And surely, I maruell what you can cōclude

of it: for no man (as I suppose) doth thinke that we may vse ceremonies proper to the Iewes, and abrogated by Christ, or that it is lawful to communicate with theyr impietie.
                        That Canon which you call. 73. of the Councell of Bracar: is not to be found in any such Councell, for there are not so many Canons in any Councell so called: but the Canon that you meane (as I thinke) is among the Canons collected out of the Gréeke Synods by S. Martin, and in number. 74. The words be these. Let it not be lawfull to vse wicked obseruations of the calends, and to keepe the gentiles holy days, nor to decke houses with bays or greene 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              oughes, for all this is an heathenish obseruation.
                        
                        To what purpose do you alleadge this canon? what doth it proue? Christians are inhibited from obseruing days and times and other friuolous superstitions, after the maner of the Gentiles: But what is this to godly prayers, grounded vpon the word of God, or comely and decent orders and ceremonies?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 103. Sect. vlt.
                     Another Councell decreed that the Christians should not celebrate A manifest vntruth. feasts on the birth days of the mar
                           〈1 line〉
                        yrs, bycause it was the manner of the heathen: whereby it appeareth that both of singularAfric. conc. ca. 17. men, and of Councels in making or abolishing of ceremonies, heede hath bin takē that the Christians should not be like vnto the idolaters, no not in those things which of themselues are moste indifferent to be vsed or not vsed.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is maruellous to behold your dealing, and to consider how vnder the pretence of auoiding (I know not what) in reciting the words of such Authors as you alledge, you delude the Reader with an vntrue sense: as it euidently appeareth in this cannon of the Councell of Afrike, the words whereof be these. This is also to be desired (ofCon. Afric. Can. 27. the Emperours) that such feasts as contrary to the commaundements of God are kept in many places, which haue bin drawen from the errour of the Gētiles (so that now Christiās are compelled by the paganes to celebrate them, whereby another persecution in the tyme of Christian Emperours seemeth couertly to be raysed) might be by their commaundemēt forbidden, and the peyne layd vpon cities and possessions prohibited: especially seing they are not afrayd to cōmit such things in some cities euen vpon the birth days of blessed martyrs, and in the holy places. Vpon which days also (whiche is a shame to tell) they vse most wicked dauncings throughout the streates, so that the honour of matrones, and the chast shamefastnesse of many women which come deuoutly vnto that holyday, is by their lasciuious iniuries inuaded, in so much that those religious meetings are almost shunned. In these words the heathenish feasts of the gentiles which are against the commaundement of God, being full of impietie and vncleanesse, are forbidden to be vsed of Christians in the birth days of martyrs, or at any other time. How this can be applyed to your purpose, I know not, except that you count all that for fish that cōmes 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o nette.
                        Now let the Reader consider, what weightie reasons you haue hitherto vsed, against our order of prayer: nay rather how vnaptly you haue alledged both your rea sons and authorities. And whereas you séeme to insinuate that the things you haue spoken of be most indifferent, that is nothing so, for the most of those thinges prohibited by these canons, be things least indifferent, as it may appeare by that which is already spoken of them, and euen in the very canons themselues.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 104. Lin. 1.
                     It were not hard to shew the same considerations in the seuerall things which are mentioned o
                           〈1 line〉
                         in this Admonition, as for example in the ceremonies of prayer, whiche is here to be 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,Lib. de anima. we reade that Tertullian woulde not haue the Christians sitte after they had prayed, bycause the Idolaters dyd so: but hauing shewed thys in generall to bee the pollicie

of God firste, and of his people afterward, to put as much difference as can be 
                           〈◊〉
                         betweene the people of God and others which are not, I shall not neede to shew the same in the particulars.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If it wer not too hard, I doubt not but that you woulde saye something more in the matter, than you haue done. I know not to what purpose you haue alleadged Tertul
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ian for not sitting after prayer. &c. except your meaning be, that we shall not knéele in praying, bycause the Papists did vse that gesture. Howbeit there is no such thing to be found in that booke of Tertullian. Wherefore you are to carelesse in alleadging your Authors, and giue to much credite (as it should séeme) to other mens collections. In his booke de oratione, He reproueth certaine that vsed to sit after prayer, alledging for their Author Hermas to whome the booke called Pastor is ascribed, he shesheth that no such thing can be gathered of Hermas his words, and further addeth, that this gesture is to be reproued, not onely bycause idolaters did vse it in worshipping their idols, but also bycause it is an vnreuerent gesture. His words be these. 
                              Eò
                              Tertullian. 
                              apponitur & irreuerentiae crimen. &c. Herevnto is added the fault of vnreuerence, that might be vnderstoode euen of the gentiles themselues, if they were wise: for it is an vnreuerente thing to sit in the sight, and against the face of him, whome thou wouldest especially reuerence and worship, how much more is this deede most prophane in the sight of the liuing God, his Angell being as yet present at this prayer. Truly your generall reasons hitherto vsed, are neyther of sufficient pollicie 
                              〈1 line〉
                           or mighte to deface a booke, with so greate wisedome, learning and zeale collected and approued. If your particular reasons be no better, a small confutation will serue.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 104. Sect. 1.
                     Furthermore as the wisedome of God hath thought it the best way, to keepe his people from infection of idolatrie, to make them most vnlike the idolaters: so hath the same wisedome of God thought good that to keepe his people in the vnitie of the truth, there is no better way, than that they should be most like one to another, and that as much as possibly may be, they should haue all the same ceremonies. And therefore Sainct Paule to establish this order in the Churche of Corinth,1. Cor. 16. that they shoulde make their gat
                           〈1 line〉
                        erings for the poore vpon the firste day of the Sabboth (which is our Sunday) alleadgeth this for a reason, that he had so ordeyned in other Churches, so th
                           〈1 line〉
                        t as children of one father, and scruantes of one family he will haue all the Churches, not onely haue one dyet, in that they haue one word, but also weare (as it were) one liuerie in vsing the same ceremonies.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You take vpon you to tell what the wisedome of God is, withoute any warrante of gods word, which is presumptiō. I told you before, that in outward shew and 
                              〈1 line〉
                           orme the Israelites had many things like vnto the Gentiles, which cannot be denyed. Unitie of Ceremonies is to be wished in all Churches, though it be not so necessary: for from the beginning there hath bin therein great varietie: but s
                              〈1 line〉
                           eing it is a thing so greatly to be desired, why are you an occasion of the contrary? why do you not submit your sel
                              〈1 line〉
                           e to the Church, that vnitie in all things may be obserued.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 104. Sect. 2.
                     This rule did the great Councell of Nice follow, when it ordeyned that where certaine at theCon. Nic. can. 20. feast of Pentecost, did pray kneeling, that they should pray standing, the reason whereof is added, which is, that one custome ought to be kept through out a
                           〈1 line〉
                         the Churches. It is true that the diuersitie of ceremonies ought not to cause the Churches to dissent one with another, but yet it maketh much to the auoiding of dissention, that there be amongst them an vnitie, not only in doctrine, but also in ceremonies.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is to be wished throughout the whole Church of Christ, if it were possible:

but as i
                              〈1 line〉
                            neuer was hitherto, so will it not be as long as this 
                              〈◊〉
                            lasteth: and least it should be in this particular Church of Englande, Sathan hathe stirred vp instruments to procure the contrarie, wherfore in these words (as I thinke) you condemne your selfe and all other dis
                              〈1 line〉
                           urbers of the Church, for external rites and ceremonies.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 104. Sect. 2.
                     Nowe we see playnly, that as the forme of our seruice and Lyturgy commeth to neare that of the 
                           〈◊〉
                        , so 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         farr
                           〈1 line〉
                         different, from that of other Churches reformed, and therefore in both
                           〈1 line〉
                         these respects to be amended.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        From what reformed Church doth it so far differ▪ or to which reformed Churche would you haue it framed? or why should not other reformed Churches as well frame them selues vnto vs? for we are as well assured of our doctrine, and haue as good grounds and reasons for our doing as they haue: except you will bring in a newe Rome, appoynt vnto vs an other head Church, and crea
                              〈1 line〉
                           e a newe Pope, by whom we must be in all things directed, and according to whose vsage we must 
                              〈1 line〉
                           rame our selues.
                        
                           You knowe what M. Caluine sayth in the argument vpon the Epistle to the Galatians,Calu. in argu. in Epi. ad Gal. speaking of those that came from Ierusalem to other Churches: Many were puffed vp (sayth he) with vaine glory bicause they were familiar with the Apostles, or at the least were instructed in their schole: Therfore nothing pleased them, but that which they had seene at Ierusalem: all other rites that were not there vsed, they did not only refuse, butA 
                                 〈◊〉
                               mischiefe. boldly condemne. Such a kinde of frovvardnesse is a most pestilent mischiefe: vvhen as vve vvill haue the maner of on
                              〈1 line〉
                            Church to be in place of an vniuersall lavve. But this ariseth of a preposterous zeale, wherby we are so affected towardsPrepostrou
                                 〈1 line〉
                               zeale. one master, or place, that without iudgement or 
                              〈◊〉
                            we would binde all men, and places vnto the opinion of one ma
                              〈1 line〉
                           , and vnto the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of one place, as vnto a common
                              
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               Idē in. 15. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . rule. Albeit there is alwayes mixed ambition, yea rather alwayes too muche frowardnesse is ambitious. The like saying he hath vpon the. 15. of the Actes: Luke dothe not expresse by what affection these va
                              〈1 line〉
                           lets were moued, yet is it very like that a preposterous zeale was the cause that they set themselues agaynst Paule and Barnabas: for there are frowardeFrowarde wittes. wittes, whome nothing but their owne, can please. They had seene at Ierusalem circumcision and other rites of the lawe to be obserued: and whether soeuer they come they can abide no newe thing or diuers: As if the example of one Churche dyd bynde all other Churches, as vvith a certayn
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . But althoughe suche men are ledAmbition. with a preposterous zeale to more tumults, yet inwardly their ambition moueth them, and a certayne kinde of contumacie pricketh them forwarde. In the meane time, Sa
                              〈1 line〉
                           han hath that which he desireth, that the mindes of the godly beeing darkned with the smoke and mists that he casteth, can scant discerne blacke from white. Therefore this mischiefe is first to be auoyded, that none prescribe vnto other a lavve of their custome: least the example of one Church be preiudiciall to the cōmon rule. Then an otherA necessari
                                 〈1 line〉
                               caution. caution must be added, least the estimation of mens persons, do eyther hinder or obscure the searche and inquirie of the matter and cause. For if Sathan do transforme himselfe into an Angell of light, and if he oftentimes vsurpe with wicked 
                              〈◊〉
                            the holy name of God: what maruel is it, if through the same wickednesse he delude with the names of godly mē.
                        M. Gualter also vpon these words. 1. Cor. 14. An à vobis ser
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 o Dei profectus est? writethGualter i
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  1. Cor. 14. thus: VVho can thinke their insolencie to be tollerable, that vsurpe authoritie ouer all Churches, and wil haue them seruilely to be subiect vnto them? Therfore that which Paule here presently fayth to the Corinthians, the selfesame may at this day with better right be spoken to the Romish Cleargie, which will haue all men subiect to their lawes, and say that it is necessary vnto saluation, that all soules should be subiect to the Bishop of Rome. Thes
                              〈1 line〉
                            things may also be applyed agaynst those, whiche compell euery man to sweare vnto the

opinion of their master, as though it were sinne neuer so little to disagree from those things which he hath once vttered. And their ambition also is no lesse heere reproued, which goe about to bring all Churches vnto the forme of their order and discipline: and crie out that there is no discipline where all things are not correspondent to their orders and statutes: but these men receyue a iust rewarde of their arrogancie, when as they which come from them to other countreys, do goe beyonde all other in sausy malopartnesse, neyther bring they any thing with them from home, but a vayne and vntollerable contempt of all good men, neyther can they abide that they shoulde be corrected by 
                              〈1 line〉
                           nye admonition of others &c.
                        Beware of ambitious morositie, and take héede of a new Popedome. I thinke no Churche is so bounde to the example of an other, but that in externall rites and ceremonies there is frée libertie giuen vnto it, to appoynt what shall be for the presente state and time moste conuenient. You may not binde vs to followe any particular Churche, neyther ought you to consent to any suche newe seruitu
                              〈1 line〉
                           .
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 104. Sect. 3.
                     An other faulte there is in the whole seruice or Lyturgie of Englande, for that it maynteyneth an vnpreaching ministerie. And so consequently an vnlawfull ministerie, I say it maynteyneth, no
                           〈1 line〉
                         somuche in that it appoynteth a number of Psalmes and other prayers and chapters to be read, which may occupie the tyme which is to be spent in preaching, wherein notwithstanding it ough
                           〈1 line〉
                         to haue beene more wary, considering that the Diuell vnder this colour of long prayer, dyd thus in the kingdome of Antichrist banishe preaching, 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . à non 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪
                         I say not so muche in that poynt, as for that it requireth necessarily nothing to be done by the minister, which a childe of tenne yeare olde can not 
                           〈1 line〉
                        oe, as well and as lawfully as that man wherewith the booke contenteth it selfe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is a straunge collection, that the booke of Common prayer maynteyneth an 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           preaching ministery, bicause it appoynteth a number of Psalmes and other prayers and chapters to be read, whiche may occupie the time that is to be spent in preaching. Would you haue prea ching onely, and neyther reading nor praying in the publike congregation? or doe you thinke that the chapters and prayers that are read occupie too long time? or are you persuaded that there commeth no profite by rea
                              〈1 line〉
                           ing and praying? If you meane the first, you haue the examples of the Churches in all places, and at all tymes agaynst you: if you meane the 
                              〈◊〉
                            the time is not so long that is spent in praying and reading, but that there may be preaching also: the longest tyme (if there b
                              〈1 line〉
                            no Communion) is not more than an houre, and can you spende that houre better than in praying and hearing the scriptures read? If you meane the thirde, I shall haue oc
                              〈1 line〉
                           asion to speake more of it héereafter.
                        But you say it dothe not so muche maynteyne an vnpreaching ministerie in thatT. C. seeketh to deface the bo
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ke without reason. poynt, as for that it requireth nothing necessarily to be done by the minister, whiche a childe of ten yeres olde can not doe as well, and as lawfully, as that man wherewith the booke contenteth it selfe. It requireth of him (besides playne and distincte reading) the administration of the Sacramentes: and maye a childe of ten yeres olde doe that also? Who séeth not, that you are of purpose set to deface the booke, thoughe it be with chyldishe reasons? Bicause a chylde may reade the booke, dothe it therefore maynteyne an vnpreaching ministerie? you mighte as well saye, that bicause a chylde of ten yeres olde can reade the Byble translated into Englishe, therefore the Byble translated into Englishe maynteyneth an vnpreaching ministerie. This argument is à non caus
                                 〈1 line〉
                              .
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 104. Sect. 3.
                     Neyther can it be shifted in saying this is done for want of able men to be ministers, for it may be easily answered, that first the want of sufficient ministers ought to be no cause for men to breake the vnchaungeable lawes of God, whych be, that none may be made minister of the Church, whych can not teache, that none minister the sacraments, whyche doe not preache, for although it might be graunted (whych thing I would not denie, no not when there are inoughe sufficient ministers) that they may appoynt some godly graue man, which can 
                           〈1 line〉
                        oe nothing else but reade, to be a reader in the Churche, yet that may not be graunted that they may make of one that can do nothing but reade, a minister of the Gospell, or one which may haue power to minister the sacraments.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Where is that vnchaungeable lawe of God, that none may minister the sacramentsSome may minister the sacraments which do no
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  preache. C
                                       〈1 line〉
                                    rysost.
                               which doe not preache? what Scripture or authoritie haue you for it? Chrysostome Hom. 3. 1. Cor. 1. vpon these words: Non enim misit me Christus vt baptizarem. &c. saythe thus: He sayth not, I was forbidden, but I am not sent to doe this, but to doe that whiche was more necessarie. Euangelizare enim perp
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ucorum est, baptizare autem cuiuslibe
                                 〈1 line〉
                              , modò fungatur sacerdotio: for few can preach the Gospel, but euery man may baptise that i
                              〈1 line〉
                            a priest.
                        
                           And Ambrose vpon the same words and chapter, sayth thus: Non omni
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  qui baptizat
                           
                           Ambrose. 
                           idoneus est euangelizare, verba enims
                                 〈1 line〉
                              lennia sunt quae dicuntur in Baptismate. &c. Euery one which baptizeth, is not apte to preache the Gospell, for the words that are spoken in baptisme are vsuall: to conclude, the Apostle Peter commaunded other to baptize Cornelius, neyther dyd he vouchsafe to doe it himselfe, other ministers beeing present, &c.
                        Peter Martyr writing vpon the same words of the Apostle, sayth likewise: ThereforePeter 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            the office of baptizing was committed to euery one in the Churche, but not the office of preaching. Neyther is it to be doubted but the Apostles themselues would haue baptized, if there had lacked other ministers. But seeing there was many whō they might winne to the Gospell by preaching, they committed them to other to be baptized.
                        
                           So sayth M. Caluine also vpon the same words: Fewe there were to whome the officeCaluine. of preaching was committed, but to baptize was committed to many, &c.
                        Zuinglius in his booke de Baptismo; of this matter speaketh thus: The disciples administredZuinglius. the externall baptisme once, with doctrine and the spirite, for Christ taught, and they did baptize, as it appeareth Ioh. 4. And Paule sayde, Christ sente me not to baptize, but to preache: therefore some taught, and other some baptized.
                        Musculus also in his common places declareth, that In some Churches some wereMusculus in 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              oc. com. de c
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              na 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . admitted to minister the Sacraments, that were not admitted to preache. And he dothe not disallowe that maner, but alloweth it.
                        
                        
                           And M. Beza lib conf. cap. 5. sayth: That it was the office of Pastors and Doctors generallyBeza. to dispense the worde, and to pray, vnder the whiche also we comprehend the administration of sacraments, and the celebration of mariage, according to the cōtinuall custome of the Church: although deacons in these things oftentimes supplied the office of pastors. And to proue this he quoteth. 1. Cor. 1. verse. 14. 15. &c. and Ioh. 4. verse. 2.
                        
                        So doe other learned men in like maner: who also bring for their purpose, that which is written. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Tim. 5. Qui bene praesunt presbyteri. &c. So that you may vnderstande that learned men be of this iudgement, that some may be admitted to administer the sacraments, which are not admitted to preache.
                        I knowe it to be true, that there may be some appoynted to reade in the Churche, whiche be not admitted, eyther to preache, or to administer the Sacramentes. For so it was in the primitiue Churche, as it is to be séene in auncient stories and wr
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ters: But bicause you would haue nothing vsed in the Churche, especially no office appoynted withoute a commaundement in the worde of GOD, I praye you tell where you haue eyther commaundemente or example for suche kinde of Readers? I doe but demaunde this that the Reader maye vnderstande what

libertie you chalenge vnto your selfe of allowing and disalowing what you list, and when you list, without that warrant of Gods worde, to the whiche you so streightly hinde all other.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 104. Sect. 4.
                     Besyd
                           〈1 line〉
                        s that, how can they say that it is for want of sufficient ministers, when as there be put out of the ministerie men that be able to serue God in that calling, and those put in their roomes, which are not able, when there are numbers also which are fit to serue, and neuer sought for, nor once required to take any ministerie vpon them? If therfore it were lawfull to pleade want of able ministers, for this do
                           〈1 line〉
                        be ministerie, which is altogither vnlawfull, yet would this plea neuer be good, vntyll suche tyme as bothe those were restored whiche are put out, and all other soughte 
                           〈1 line〉
                        oorth, and called vpon which are fitte for that purpose.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You know what was before alleaged out of the confession of the Churches of Helvetia, that the harmlesse simplicitie of some shepheards in the olde Church, did sometimesConfes. Heli
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . more profite the Church, than the great, exquisite, or fine, or delicate, but a little too proude learning of some others. A great sorte thinke too well of themselues, & be of nature vnquiet:Unquiet natures must be remoued. suche of necessitie (if by no meanes they can be kept in order) must be remoued: for the Church may not for their sake be rent & torne in péeces: neyther muste you that so wel allow of discipline, burden other men with it, & cast it off your selues. There is none in this Churche of Englande remoued from his ministerie but vpon iust causes, and ministers must be subiect to lawes and orders.
                        Those that be willing to come into the ministerie lacke no prouoking nor mouingThe ministerie hindred, & by whome. thervnto, if they be knowne: but it is you & your company which labour by all meanes possible to dehorte men from the ministerie, persuading them that the calling is not ordinary and lawfull. And surely your meaning is to make this Church destitute of ministers, that it may of necessitie be driuen to admit your platforme and gouernment. But you shall neuer be able to bring it to passe: the more you labour the more you are detected. And those wise men that séeke the truthe in sinceritie of conscience, will espie your purposes dayly more and more, and be moued to a iuste mis
                              〈1 line〉
                           iking of them.
                        The restitution of those that be put out of the ministerie, I think is soone obteyned, if they will submit themselues to the order of the Church, which they ought of duetie to doe, bothe the lawes of God, and man requiring the same.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 104. Sect. vlt.
                     Agayne it can not be sayd iustly, that they haue taken these reading ministers, vntil such tyme as better may be gotten, for if the Churche could procure able ministers, & shoulde desire that they myght be ordeyned ouer them, they can not obteyne that, considering that these reading ministers haue a free holde, and an estate for terme of their lyues in those Churches, of the whyche they are suche ministers: so that by this meanes the sheepe are not onely committed to an Idoll shepheard. I might say a wolfe, and speake no otherwyse than Augustine speaketh, in that a not preachyng minister hath entraunce into the Church, but the doore also is shut vpon hym, and sparred agaynst any able minister that might happily be founde out.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And would you so gladly intrude your selues into some of their roomes? surely I beléeue it, & it is not vnknowē but that some of you haue labored to do it: Wel, I hau
                              〈1 line〉
                            before tolde you the iudgement of the reformed Churches touching such ministers as be not able to preach, béeing otherwise vertuous and godly. I haue also set downe the opinion of diuers learned and godly men, concerning ministers admitted to minister

the sacraments, whiche notwithstanding can not preache. If any man vse him sel
                              〈1 line〉
                           e in his ministerie leau
                              〈1 line〉
                           ly, or otherwise than beseemeth him, hys estate for terme of lyfe is not so sure, but that he maye be dispossessed of the same. Otherwyse if he vse him selfe honestly, and as it becommeth him, thoughe he haue not the gifte of preaching, (whiche notwithstanding is to be wyshed) God forbid that eyther you or any man else, shoulde seeke to displace him, that you might enioy the roome your selues. And surely if the minister were but tenant at will, or of Courtesie (as you would séeme to haue him) his state shoulde be moste slauishe and mis
                              〈1 line〉
                           rable, and he and his family ready to goe a begging, when soeuer he displeaseth his parishe.
                        If you had tolde me where Augustine speaketh that, I shoulde haue quickely let you vnderstand his meaning, but his bookes be many & large, the sentēce you alleage shorte, and therefore it were to muche for me to search
                              〈1 line〉
                            it out. Moreouer it improueth nothing nowe in question. But with what face can you 
                              〈1 line〉
                           loute and iest at me, for once or twice not quoting the chapter or leafe: your selfe so often offending in quoting neyther chapter, leafe, booke, nor tome?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 105. Sect. 1.
                     There is a third fault which likewise appeareth almost in ye whole body of this seruice & Lyturgie of Englād, & that is, that the pro
                           〈1 line〉
                        ite which might haue come by it vnto the people is not reaped, whereof the cause is, for that he whiche readeth is not in some place hearde, and in the moste places not vnderstanded of the people, throughe the distance of place betweene the people and the minister, so that a great parte of the people can not of knowledge tell, whether he hath cursed them or blessed them, whether he hath read in Latme or in Englishe, all the whyche ryseth vpon the word
                           〈1 line〉
                        s of▪ the booke of seruice, which are that the minister should stande in the accustomed place, for therevpon the minister in saying Morning and Euening prayer, sytteth in the Chauncel with hys backe to the people, as thoughe he had some secret talke with God whych the people might not heare. And herevpon it is likewise, that after Morning prayer, for saying another nūber of prayers he clymeth vp to the further end of the Chauncel, & runneth as farre from the people as the wall wyl let hym, as though there were some variance betweene the people & the minister, or as though he were afrayde of some infection of plague, & in deede it renueth ye memorie of the Leuitical priesthoode, which dyd withdrawe him selfe from the people into the place called the holyest place, where he talked wyth God, and offered for the sinns of the people.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This nothing toucheth the order or substance of the booke, and therefore no sufficient reason agaynst it, if it were true. But you héerein deale as you haue done in other matters, that is, corruptly and vntruely. For you do not reporte the wordes ofCorrupt dealing. the booke concerning this matter, as they be in déede: and it is wonderfull, and argueth great impadencie, that you are not ashamed, to reporte vntruely in so publike a cause. The words of the booke be these: The Morning and Euening prayer shall be vsed in the accustomed place of the Church, Chappell or Chauncell, excepte it shall be otherwise determined by the Ordinarie of the place. And you leauing out all the rest, say, that the words of the booke of seruice are, that the minister should stande in the accustomed place: as though it bounde him of necessitie to the Chauncell, which is nothing so. But youErrours and 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              isorder maynteyned by falsifying, must be borne with, your errours and disorders can not otherwise be maynteyned, but by falsifying. I thinke there are but fewe Churches in Englande where the Bi: shops haue not taken a very good order for the place of prayer, if any Bishop haue neglected it, the fault is in the Bishop, not in the booke.
                        But still I must desire the Reader to note the weightinesse of the reasons, where by you goe about to deface the booke of common prayer.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 105. Sect. 2.
                     Likewyse 
                           〈1 line〉
                        or marriage he commeth backe agayne into the body of the Churche, and for baptisme vnto the Churche doore, what comelynesse, what decencie, what edifying is thys? Decencie

(I saye) in running and trudging from place to place: edifying, in standing in that place, and a
                           〈1 line〉
                        ter that sorte, where he can worst be hearde and vnderstanded. S. Luke sheweth that in the 
                           〈◊〉
                         Churche bothe the prayers and preachings, and the whole exercise of religion was done otherwyse. For he sheweth howe S. Peter sytting amongest the rest, to the ende he myghte be the better heard, rose, and not that onely, but that he stoode in the middest of the people, that hys voyce mighte as muche as mighte be, come indifferently to all theyr ear
                           〈1 line〉
                        s, and so standing bothe 
                           〈◊〉
                         and preached. Nowe if it be sayde for the Chapters and Letanie, there is commaundement giuen th
                           〈1 line〉
                        t they should be read in the body of the Church, in deede it is true, and thereof is easily perceyued thys disorder which is in saying the rest of the prayers, partly in the hither end, & partly in ye 
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        urther end of the Chauncel: for 
                           〈1 line〉
                        eeing that those are read in the body of the Church, that the people may both heare & vnderst
                           〈1 line〉
                        nd what is read, what should be the cause why the rest should be read further of. Unlesse it be, that eyther those thyngs are not to be hearde of them, or at the least not so necessarie for them to be heard, as the other whych are recited in the body or middest of the Churche. And if it be further sayde, that the booke leaueth that to the discretion of the Ordinarie, and that he may reforme it, if there be any thyng amisse, then it is easily answered agayne, that besides that it is agaynst reason, that the commoditie and edifying of the Churche should depende vpon the pleasure of one man, so that vpon hys eyther good or euill aduyse & discretion, it should be well or euill with the Church: Besydes thys (I sa
                           〈1 line〉
                        ) we s
                           〈1 line〉
                        e by experience of the disorders which ar
                           〈1 line〉
                         in many Churches and Dioceses in thys behalfe, howe that if it were lawfull to commit such authoritie vnto one man, yet that it is not safe so to doe, considering that they haue so euill q
                           〈1 line〉
                        tten them selues in their charges, and that in a matter the inconuenience whereof is so easily seene, and so easily reformed, there is notwithstanding so great and so generall an abuse.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be passing weyghtie arguments to ouerthrowe the booke, and come from aWeighty reasons agaynst the booke. déepe and profounde iudgemente: If I shoulde vse the lyke, you woulde wype them away with scoffing. The booke appoynteth, that the persons to be married shall come into the body of the Churche with their f
                                 〈1 line〉
                              iendes and neighbours there to be married: and what faulte can you finde in this? Is not the middest of the Churche the moste méete place for suche a matter? The booke speaketh neyther of the comming backe of the minister, nor his going forwarde, these be but your iestes: and yet muste he goe both backwarde and forwarde, if he wil eyther come into the Church, or go out of it. For baptisme, ye booke appoynteth no place, but bicause there is no iust cause knowne why the fon
                              〈1 line〉
                           e should be remoued, therefore the minister dothe stande where that is placed, whiche is somewhere in one place, somewhere in another, for I know diuers plac
                              〈1 line〉
                           s where it is in the middest of the Churche, some place where it is in the nethermost parte, I knowe no place where it standeth at the Churche doore. And therfore in saying that for baptisme the minister goeth to the Churche doore, you doe but counterfeyte.
                        No man denieth but that bothe praying and preaching. &c. ought to be in that place where it may be best heard of all: and therefore the booke dothe prudently leaue it to the discretion of the Bishop. But the middest is not the fittest place for that purpose: He that standeth in the middest of the Churche hathe some behynde him, some before him, and some of eche syde of him, those whiche be behinde, or on the sides, can not so well heare, as those that be before, as experience teacheth in Sermons at the Spittle, at the Crosse in Paules, and other places. Wherefore in my opinion that place in the Churche is moste fittest, bothe for praying and preaching, where the minister may haue the people before him, except the Churche be so great, and the people so many, that he cannot be heard of them, then there ought to be some regarde thereof.
                        S. Luke telleth what S. Peter dyd in the congregation, he dothe not prescribe any general rule: Euery circumstance that is tolde in the scriptures, is not streightway to be made an inuiolable rule of all men to be followed. The place is not material, so that it be suche as the people may well heare and vnderstande that whiche is read and preached.
                        Concerning the lessons whiche are to be read, the booke prescribeth no place, only it willeth the minister to stande and to turne him so, as he may best be heard of all suche as be present. And are you offended at that? neyther doth y• booke appoynt any certein place for the Le
                              〈1 line〉
                           anie to be sayde in, and therfore you do but dally and trifle.
                        
                           The Ordinarie is the méetest man to whose discr
                              〈1 line〉
                           tion those things sh
                              〈1 line〉
                           uld be le
                              〈1 line〉
                           t: both for his learning & wisdome, and also that there may be one vniforme or 
                              〈◊〉
                            his diocesse: if any Ordinarie be carelesse in such matters, if you wil complaine of him, I am sure you shal be heard. But your delight & pleasure is to be gyrding at Bishops, though the cause be forged.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 20. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 105. Sect. 3.
                     And the ende of the order in the booke is to be obserued, which 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         is to kepe the prayers in the accustomed place of the church, chappell, or chauncell, which howe maketh it to edification? And thus for the generall faultes committed either in the whole lyturgie, or in the most part of it, both that I may haue no neede to repeate the same in the particulars, and that I be not compelled alwayes to enter a new disputation, so oft as M. Doctor saith, very 
                           〈◊〉
                         & vnlike a diuine, These be 
                              〈◊◊◊〉
                           . whence so euer this or that come, so it be not euill, it may be well established in the Church of Christ.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What is the ende of the booke in that matter? why do you not expresse it? But you say it is to keepe the prayers in the accustomed places. &c. if this be the ende: why doth the book
                              〈1 line〉
                            admitte alteration? do you not sée your solfe manifestly conuinced by the booke? I beléeue, and I am well assured, that the ende is edification, whatsoeuer you imagine to the contrarie. And vndoubtedly you haue founde out maruellous weightie and wittie reasons agaynst the whole Lyturgie, or the moste parte of it: And the faults you haue noted be very many and excéeding great. But haue you no conscience in calling good euill? or are you not afrayde vpon so light quarels to make suche a schisme in the Church, and to bring so worthy a booke into so great contempt? Well, you will one daye be better aduised, I doubt not: whiche truely I wishe for, and hope for, howe vncourteously so euer you haue vsed me.
                        That which M Doctor sayth, so vnskilfully and vnlike a diuine, he hath learned of better and more skilfull diuines, than eyther of vs bothe be: that is, of Ambrose and of Caluine: for the one sayth: 
                              Omne verum à quocun
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  dicitur à spiritu sancto est: All truthe of
                                 
                                    
                                       〈◊〉
                                     in▪
                                  
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 
                                 ▪ 
                                 Mat. vers. 37. whom soeuer it is spoken, is of the holy Ghost: the other, 
                              Purus est multarū 
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 erū vsus, quarū vitiosa est origo. The vse of many thinges is pure, whose beginning is vicious and vnpure. But M. Doctors bare affirmation (if he had so vsed it) is of as good credite, as your bare negation: But when he hath learned mē of his opinion and Iudgement: for you thus to shift it of, is but to bewray your vnablenesse to disproue it, either by authoritie or reason. You should at the least haue made true repor
                              〈1 line〉
                           e of my words, which you haue not done, but delt therin according to your accustomed manner, for my wordes be th
                              〈1 line〉
                           se. Fol. 82. It maketh no matter of whome it was inuented, inPag. 82. sect. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            what booke it is conteyned, so that it be good and profitable, and con
                              〈1 line〉
                           onant to Gods worde: and you reporte them thus: whence soeuer this or that come, so it be not euill, it may be well established in the churche of Christ. If you haue the truthe, why doe you thus goe about to maynteyne it with lyes? In so doing you hurt not me, but your selfe, and your cause.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ An examination of the particular faultes, eyther in matter or forme, wherwith the booke of common prayer is charged.
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 105. Sect. 3.
                     Nowe I come to the forme of prayer whiche is prescribed, wherein the Authors of the Admonition declare that their meaning is not to disallowe of prescript seruice of prayer, but of thys fo
                           〈1 line〉
                        rme that we haue, A prop
                              〈1 line〉
                            excus
                              〈1 line〉
                           . for they expounde them selues in the additions vnto the fyrst parte of the Admonition.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In déede they haue retracted it in some poynt, which argueth they writte their booke at the first with small aduise, and lesse discretion. It is no exposition but a retractation or recantation, for the places of Scripture which they quoted, and their very wordes declare that they ment the contrary, and so doth their practise in secrete conuenticles. But now you come to my Answere, wherein you take what you list, and leaue what you list as you haue hitherto done.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The fouretenth. Then ministers were not so tied to any forme of prayers inuented by mā, but as the spirit Rom. 8. 26 1. Tim. 1. 2 moued them, so they powred forth hartie supplications to the Lord. Now they are bound of necessitie to a Damasus the first inuentor of this stuffe, vvell furthered by Gregory the seuenth. prescripte order of seruice, and boke of common prayer.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 77. Sect. 3.
                        To proue that ministers were not so tied to any forme of prayer, inuented by man, but that as the spirite moued them, &c. you quote Rom. 8. & the 1. Timo. 1. In the eight to the Romaines the wordes be these: Likevvise also the spirite helpeth our infirmities, for vve knovve not vvhat to pray, as vve ought, but the spirite it self maketh request for vs, vvith fighes which cannot be expressed. This place speaketh nothing against any prescript forme of prayer, for then it should disallow the Lordes prayer, but it teacheth vs that it is the spirite of God that sturreth vs vp to pray, and maketh vs earnestly poure out our supplications vnto God. And thus the spirit worketh as well by prescript prayers as by prayers sodenly inuented. The wordes to Timothie Epist. 1. ca. 1. vers. 2. are far fetched, & nothing to the purpose: the wordes be these. Vnto Timothie my natural sonne in the fayth, grace mercie and peace from God our father, and from Christ Iesu our Lorde: what maketh these wordes against any prescript forme of prayers? peraduenture you would haue alleaged the 1. to Timo. 2. I exhort therefore that first of all, supplications, &c. which maketh directly agaynst you.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothing answered to this.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 78. Sect. 1.
                     If you meane by prayers inuented by man, such prayers as man inuenteth against the worde of God, as prayer for the dead, prayer vnto saincts, & such like, then it is true that you say. But if you mean such prayers as by godly men be framed according to the holy scriptures, whether they be for matters perteyning to the life to come, or to this life, then you shew your ignorāce, for it is manifest, that there hath bene alwayes in the Church of Christ, a prescript forme of publike prayer, as it appeareth in Iustinus Martyr. Apol. 2. Pro Christianis,
                         & otherIustinus Martyr. auncient fathers: neyther did euer any learned or godly man, or reformed Church finde faulte herewith, or not greatly cōmende the same, except onely the secte of Anabaptistes.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 105. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 106. Sect. 1.
                     It is not to any purpose, that M. Doctor setteth himself to proue that there may be a prescript

order of prayer by Iustine Martyres testimonie, which notwithstanding hath not one worde of prescript forme of prayers, only he sayth there were prayers, he sayth in deede the auncient fathers say that there hath bene alwayes such kinde of prayers in the Churches, and although they do say so, yet all men may vnderstand easily, that M. Doctor speaketh this rather by contecture, or that he hath hearde other men say so: for so much as that Doctor which he hath chosen out to speake for 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ll the rest, hath no such thing, as he fathereth on him. He sayeth that after they haue baptized, they pray for themselues, and for him that is baptized, and for all men that they may be meete to learne the truth, and to expresse it in their honest conuersation, and that they be founde to keepe th
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        mmaundementes, that they may atteyne to eternall life, but is this to say that there was a prescript forme of prayer, when he sheweth nothing els, but the chiefe poynts, vpon the which they conceyued their prayers? If you had alleaged this to proue what were the matters or principall poynts that the Primitiue Churche vsed to pray for, you had alleaged this to purpose, but to alleage it for a proofe of a prescript forme of prayer, when there is not there mentioned so much as the essentiall forme of prayer (which is the asking of our petitions in the name and thorough the intercession of our Sauiour Christ) without the which there is not, nor cannot be any prayer, argueth that eyther you little know what the forme of prayer is, or that you thought (as you charge the authors of the Admonition so often) that this geare of yours should neuer haue come to the examination.
                     But for as much as we agree of a prescript forme of prayer to be vsed in the Church, let that go: this that I haue sayde is to shew that when M. Doctor happeneth of a good cause, which is very seldome in this booke, yet then he marreth it in the handling.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue the lesse laboured in this point, bicause it is a thing so generally allowed of in all Churches, in all times, and so vnlearnedly impugned by the authors of the Admonition.
                        
                           Iustinus Martyr maketh much for my purpose, for in that he doth rehearse those chiefe poyntes of theyr prayers then vsed, it is manifest that they had a prescript order and forme of prayer, the which no man can denie that readeth the place. I graunt that these wordes prescript forme of prayer, are not there to be founde: Yet is there a prescript order and forme by him generally described: whereby it is more than probable, that at that tyme, there was vsed a prescript forme of prayer. In the 3. CouncellCon
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Carth. 3 Can. 23. of Carthage we finde this Canon: Let no man vse the formes of prayer which he hath framed to himselfe, without conference with brethren, that are better learned. Whereby it may euidently be gathered, that at that time there was a prescript forme of prayer vsed, and that it was not lawfull to vse any new forme of priuate prayers, except the same were allowed by the brethren. But for as much as in this poynt you consent with me, and graunt that there may be a prescript forme of prayer: I will omitte whatsoeuer I had purposed to haue sayde more in that matter: and so I will do also your taunts, respecting the matter, rather than Lucians Rhetoricke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 78. Sect. 2. 3.
                     
                        Damasus was a good Bishop & therfore no good thing by him appointedDamasus added Glori
                                 〈1 line〉
                               Patri, &c▪
                           
                         to be disallowed: but he did not first ordeyne a prescript forme of publike prayers, he onely added something therevnto. As Gloria patri, &c. to the end of euery psalme: And decreed that Psalmes should be song aswell in the night time, as in the day time in euery Church, but they were song in the Church before, and as I haue sayde, there was a prescript forme of prayer in Iustinus Martyrs time, who was long before Damasus.
                     
                     
                        Gregorie added the Letanie onely. I muse what you meane toGregory made the Letanie. write so manifest vntruthes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Nothing answered to this.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 79. Sect. 1.
                     You note not here (neyther are you able) any prayer in the whole Cōmunion booke, wherein there is any thing not agreeable to Gods worde, we may say as S. Augustine sayth in his 121. Epistle written 
                           Ad Probam viduam. Etsi per omnia praecationum sanctarum verba discurras quantum existim
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                           
                           Augustine. 
                           nihil inuenies, quod non ista Dominica contineat & concludat orati
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Vnde liberum est alijs at
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               alijs verbis, eadem tamen in orando dicere: sed non debet esse liberum alia dicere. And if thou runnest thorough all the vvordes of the holy prayers. I suppose thou shalt finde nothing vvhich the Lordes prayer doth not conteyne and comprehende: therefore vve may in other vvordes speake the same thinges in our prayers, but vve may not speake contrarie things.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 106. Sect. 1. 2.
                     After he a
                           〈1 line〉
                        irmeth, that there can be nothing shéwed in the whole booke which is not agreeable to the worde of God.
                     I am very loth to enter into this fielde, albeit M. Doctor doth thus prouoke me, both bycause the Papistes will lightly take occasion of euill speaking, when they vnderstande that we do not agree amongst our selues in euery poynt, as for that some fewe professoures of the Gospelt being priuate men, boldened vpon such treatises, take such wayes sometimes, and breake forth into such speaches, as are not meete, nor conuenient.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In so saying I do fullie agrée with such as haue learnedly and truly written agaynst the common aduersaries of this Booke: among whome there is one that wrote a Booke Entituled: A sparing restraynt of many lauishe vntruthes, which M. Doctor Harding doth chalenge in the first Article of my Lorde of Sarisburies Replye. TheA sparing re
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              trayne. Author of that booke writeth thus. O M. Harding turne agayne your writinges, examino your authorities, consider your Councels, applie your examples, looke if any line be blameable in our seruice, and take holde of your aduantage. I thinke M. Iewell will accept it for an Article. And a little after: Our seruice is good and godly, euery title grounded on holy Scriptures, and with what face do you call it darkenesse? This was his opinion then of our seruice. And it both was then, and is now my full perswasion: and I will (God willing) performe that against you, which he offred in M. Jewell his name agaynst Harding.
                        Your 
                              〈1 line〉
                           othnesse to enter into this fielde, is but dissembled: your continuall barkingThe Repliet his wordes contrary to his deedes. agaynst the state and forme of this Church of England, doth conuince you of the contrarie. Neyther haue you any respect or regarde for giuing occasion o
                              〈1 line〉
                            euill speach to the Papistes, much lesse of prouoking your adherentes to vnduetifull speaches (as you pretend) your booke tending wholly to the contrary.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 106. Sect. 3.
                     Notwithstanding my dutie of defending the truth, & loue which I haue first towardes God, and then towards my countrie, constrayneth me being thus prouoked to speake a few wordes more particularly of the forme of prayer, that when the blemishes thereof do appeare, it may please the Queenes inaiestie & hir honorable councell, with those of the Parliament, whom the Lorde hath vs
                           〈1 line〉
                        o as singular instrumentes to d
                           〈1 line〉
                        liuer this realme from the hote fornace and yron yoke of the popish Egipte, to procure also, that the corruptions which we haue brought from them (as those with which we being so deepely died and stayned, haue not so easily shaken of) may be remoued from amongst vs, to the ende that we beyng necrclicr both ioyned vnto the sinceritie of the gospell, and the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ollicie of other reformed Churches, may thereby be ioyned nearer with the Lord, and may be se
                           〈1 line〉
                        te so farre from Rome, that both we may comfort our selues in the hope, that we shall neuer returne thither againe, and our aduersaries which desire it, and by this to much agreement with them, and to little with the reformed Churches, hope for it, may not onely be deceyued of their expectation, but also being out of all hope, of that which they desire, may the soner yeelde themselues vnto the truth, wherevnto they are now disobedient.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What dutie can there be in defacing a knowne and receaued truth? what loue, in flaundering your countrie vniustly, and renting it in pieces with sectes and Schismes, and prouoking the subiectes to haue mislikyng of their Magistrates, and such as be placed in authoritie ouer them? these be but clokes to couer an euill and vngodly purpose. If you shall be able to shewe any suche blemishes in the booke of Common prayers, they shall not be couered for me: but if not, than are you not a man to be credited.
                        I haue tolde you M. Caluines, and M. Gualters opinion, touching the ambitiousSup̄ra Cap. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . t
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e 13. Diuisi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . morositie of such, as would haue all Churches framed, after the example of some one: and nowe I tell you agayne, that there is no cause why this Churche of Englande, eyther for truth of doctrine, sinceritie of publike diuine seruice, and other pollicie should giue place to any church in Christendome: and sure I am, that we are as 
                              〈◊〉
                            ioyned with the Lorde our God, as the members are to the bodie, and the bodie to the head.
                        Our aduersaries haue 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o such hope vpon any suche occasion as you pretende: ifThe aduersaries hope is in contention. their hope be any, it is especially in your contentions.
                        Wherein do we agrée with the Papistes, or wherein do we dissent from the reformed Churches? with these we haue all poynts of doctrine and substance common: from the other we dissent, in the most parte both of doctrine and ceremonies. From what spirite come these bolde and vntrue speaches?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 106. Sect. 4.
                     And as for the Papistes triumphe in this case, I shall not greatly neede to feare it▪ 
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        ring that their discordes and contentions are greater, a
                           〈1 line〉
                        d that our stryfe is 
                           〈◊〉
                         we 
                           〈◊〉
                         b
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        arther from them. For the other that professe the Gospell, I will desire in the name of God; that they abuse not my labour to other ende, than I bestowe it, and that they 
                           〈1 line〉
                        eepe 
                           〈1 line〉
                        hemselues in theyr callinges, committe the matter by prayer vnto the Lorde, leauing to the ministers of the worde of God, and to the magistrates that which apperteyneth vnto them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is true of the Papistes: but they deale in their controuersies more circumspectly and warely, though they dissent in matters of farre greater importaunce, and in the chiefe poyntes of their owne Religion.
                        To the professours of the Gospell you giue better Councell than you haue taken your selfe: and you shewe an example contrary to your wordes: and therefore how shall they beléeue you. But now to the matter: for hitherto you haue vttered nothing but woordes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C Pag. 106. Sect. vlt.
                     To come therfore to touche this matter. I answere that there is fault in the matter, and fault in the forme. In the matter, for that there are things there, that ought not to be, and things there are wanting in the order that should be. Of the firste sorte is, that we may euermore be defendedThe collect of Trinitie Sunday. from all aduersitie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The first fault that you finde in the matter of prayer, is a portion of the Collect of Trinitie Sunday, wherein we pray, That we may euermore be defended from al aduersitie: And is this the matter you mislike? let vs then consider your reason.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 107. Sect. 1.
                     Nowe for as much, as there is no promise in the scripture, that we should be free from all ad
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        ersitie, and that euermore, it scemeth that this prayer might haue bene better conceyued, being no

prayer of faith, or of the which we cā assure our selues that we shal obteyne it. For if it be sayd, that 
                           〈1 line〉
                        y the worde (aduersitie) is meante all euill, we knowe that it hath no such signification neyther in this tongue of oures, neyther in other tongues which vse the same worde in common with vs, but that it signifieth trouble, vexation, and cala
                           〈1 line〉
                        tie, from all the which we may not desire alwayes to be deliuared. And whatsoeuer can be alleaged for the defense of it, yet euery one that is not contentio
                           〈1 line〉
                        s, may see that it needeth some caution or exception.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I thinke no man will contende with you for the signification of this woorde 
                              〈◊〉
                           : for it properly signifieth all affliction or trouble that perteyneth eyther to the body, or to the minde. And it is 
                              species mali, a kinde of euill, for Malum doth conteyne not onely vice and sinne, but aduersitie also and affliction.
                        But to come to your reason: you say, there is n
                              〈1 line〉
                            promise in Scripture that we shouldThe argumēt retorted. be fre
                              〈1 line〉
                           rom all aduersitie: and therefore we may not pray to be free from all aduersitie. If this be a good argument then will I also reason thus: there is no promise in Scripture that we should be frée from all sinne: therfore we may not pray that we should be frée from all sinne. There is no promise in Scripture, that we should be frée fro
                              〈1 line〉
                            persecution but the contrarie rather, and therefore we may not pray agaynst persecution. Likewise there is no promise that we shall be alwayes deliuered from pouertic, and from diuers other particular euils. To be shorte, if this rule and reason be good, then muste we pray for nothing, except first we searche in the Scriptures, whether there be any promise for the same or no.
                        But you and all Christians ought to vnderstand, that our prayers and faith annexedOur prayers and fayth are grounded vpē promises. to them, are grounded vpon these promises. VVhatsoeuer you aske in my name, that will I do. And agayne: If you aske any thing in my name, I will do it. Iohn. 14. And in the. 16. chap. Verily verily, I say vnto you, whatsoeuer you shall aske my father in myIo
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 n. 14. n
                                 〈1 line〉
                              me, he will giue it you. Upon these promises is both our fayth and prayers grounded.Iohn. 16. But for bicause in asking of extern
                              〈1 line〉
                           ll thinges, we be vncertayne whether theyA condition 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              nnexed to petitio
                                 〈1 line〉
                              s for external things. be profitable for vs or no, therefore we aske them with a condition (which although if be not expressed, yet it is alwayes vnderstoode) if it be Gods will: beyng certaynely perswaded, that if those thinges we aske be profitable for vs, we shall obteyne them for his promise sake. And for as much as all good thinges come of God, whether they perteyne to the bodie, or to the soule, and at all times to be deliuered from aduersitie is on
                              〈1 line〉
                            of his singular benefites, we may no doubt begge the same at his handes, referring not withstanding the graunting of it to him, who knoweth what is better for vs than we do our selues. If you will spoyle vs of this libertie in praying, you shall not onely bryng prayer into a narrowe roome, but depri
                              〈1 line〉
                           e vs of one of the greatest and moste singular r
                              〈1 line〉
                           nsolations, that a Christian man can haue in this worlde. We cannot assure our selues that we shall obteyne any externall benefites by prayer at Gods handes: bycause we know not whether that which we aske be profitable for vs or no: and yet God forbidde, that we should cease from praying euen for such thinges. Dauid beyng put out of his kingdome by his Sonne Absolon, was not assured that he
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Samuel. 15. should be restored agay
                              〈1 line〉
                           e, and yet did he pray for it, with this condition, if it pleased God. Christe himselfe prayed to haue the cuppe of his passion remoued from him,Mattb. 26. which vndoubtedly he knew before would not be graunted vnto him. Many examples there be in the Psalmes, of prayers made for externall things, of the obteyning whereof the Prophete could not assure himselfe. Well sayth S. Augustine, VVhenAugustine. thou doest aske of God health of the bodie, if he knowe it be profitable for thee, he will giue it vnto thee: if he giue it not, then it is not profitable for thee to haue it. Therefore we may lawfully aske any externall ben
                              〈1 line〉
                           fite at Gods hande, bycause he hath willed vs so to do: and the same petition or prayer, is a prayer of fayth, bycause it hath 
                              〈1 line〉
                            promise in the Scripture to grounde vpon, which is, VVhatsoeuer you shall aske myIobn. 16. father in my name, &c. and such like. But the successe of our prayer we must committe to him of whom we aske, as Dauid did.
                        And why should this manner of speaking séeme so straunge vnto you, do we not

reade in the. 91. Psalme, that a promise is made to those that loue God in this manner.Psal
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . 91 
                           There shall no eui
                                 〈1 line〉
                              l come vnto thee, neyther shall any plague come nighe vnto thy dwelling. Is not this as much as though he should haue sayd, thou shalt euer be defended from all aduersitie? for as learned interpreters saie, 
                              dictione mali omnis generis afflictiones, miserias, & aerumn as complectitur, The Psalmist in that place by this word euil, doth comprehende all kinde of afflictions, miseries and calamities: so that you haue here the very wordes expressed, that you finde faulte with in the prayer vsed on Trinitie Sunday. Wherefore they may still remayne without any caution or exception. And I woulde to God, you were as farre from contention as those be that thinke so.
                        I might here adde and saye, that we are deliuered from all aduersitie after twóoDeliuerance from aduersitie of twoo sortes. sortes, that is, bodily and spiritually: Bodily, when we are not temporally and externally afflicted with them. Spiritually, when we are not ouercome by them, or caused to decline from God, or to mistruste in his mercies. That we may praye to be deliuered from all aduersitie, in the first signification, I haue proued: that we ought so to do in the latter signification, there is no Christian man that doubteth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 107. Sect. 2.
                     In the collect vpon the twelfth sunday after Trinitie Sunday, and likewyse in one of those which are to be sayde after the offertorie (as it is termed) is done, request is made, that God would giue those thinges, whiche we for our vnworthynesse 
                           〈1 line〉
                        are not aske: for it carieth with it still the note of the popy she seruile feare, and sauoureth not of that confidence and reuerent fam
                           〈1 line〉
                        liaritie, that the chyldren of God haue through Christe, with theyr heauenly father, for as we dare not without our sauiour Christe aske so much as a crumme of bread, so there is nothyng which in his name we 
                           〈1 line〉
                        are not aske, being nedefull for vs, and if it be not nedefull why should we aske it?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I praye you whether doth 
                              〈1 line〉
                           he prayer of the Pharisey, that so extolled himselfe,Humiliti
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               prayer. or of the Publicane that so humbled himselfe like you better? bylike you preferre theLuc. 18. Pharisies prayer, else would you neuer fynde faulte with vs, for acknowledging our owne vnworthynesse, which is the roote and grounde of humilitie, one of the principal ornamentes of prayer. We are not worthy of the least benefite that God bestoweth vpon vs: And therefore dutie requireth that we should not for desert desyre any thing at his handes: and humilitie sayeth, that in desiring we ought to acknowledge our owne vnworthinesse. If a man be desyrous to obteyne anye thing at his father or fre
                              〈1 line〉
                           des hande, of whome he hath receyued many things, and not recompenced the least, is not this a méete kynde of speache for him to vse? there is something necessary for me to haue, but I dare not aske it at your handes for my vnworthynesse, who haue receyued so much already without any kynde of recompen
                              〈1 line〉
                           e: surelye this is both the next waye for hym to obteyne that which he desyreth, and a good tóken not of seruile feare, but of true humilitie, and of that due reuerence that a good childe oweth to a moste naturall and louing father. The Publicane durst not come nighe, nor lifte vp his eyes: so did he acknowledge his vnworthynesse, such was his humilitie. And yet you knowe what Christe did pronounce of hym, and what generall rule he groundethLuc. 18. vpon that example, euen this. 
                              Omnis qui se exaltat &c. Euery one that exalteth hymselfe shall be brought lowe. &c. You knowe also what the prodigall sonne sayde to his owne father after his father hadde embraced hym, and receyued hym into mercy.Luc. 15. 
                           
                              Neque posthac sum dignus qui vocer filius tuus. And I am no more worthy to be called thy sonne.
                        
                        God forbyd that we should so presume of our selues, that we should shut humilitie, and the acknowledging of our owne vnworthinesse, from faythfull and heartye prayer. In that therefore we saye (for our owne vnworthynesse we dare not aske it) we both aske it, and yet with all humilitie acknowledge our owne vnworthinesse: which

if it be spoken vnfainedlye, cannot be but greately accepted of God. And surely this kinde of begging is moste effectuall and it is vsed towardes those to whom we thinke our selues most bounde, and whome (for their benefites bestowed vpon vs) we loue most derely. Neither doth this kynde of prayer sauoure of mistruste, but rather of greate confidence, in the mercy of God, at whose handes we craue those things, which we are of our selues vnworthy to aske, or receiue.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They praye that they may be deliuered from thundring and tempest when no daunger is nigh: that they syng, Benedictus, Nunc dimittis and Magnificat, we knowe not to what purpose, except
                           〈1 line〉
                         some of them were ready to die, or except they would celebrate the memorie of the Uirgin, & Iohn 
                           〈◊〉
                        . &c. Thus they prophane the holy scripture.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 202. Sect. 4.
                        You mislike also that we should praye to be deliuered from thundring andPrayer to be deliuered from thunder, good. tempest, when there is no daunger nighe. You broch many straunge opinions, may not we praye to be deliuered from perilles and daungers, except they be present, and knowen to be at hande? where finde you that Christ teacheth vs to saye in our daily prayer 
                              libera nos à malo, deliuer vs from euil? VVhat knovve vve vvhen there is any daunger of thundring and lightning: haue vve not examples of diuers that haue sodainly perished vvith the same? Is it not therefore necessary to praye for deliueraunce from thunder and lightning, as wel as from other daungers, though they be not present? well, men may see wherevnto this geare tendeth, ifMagnificar & Nunc dimittis &c. they be not blinde. 
                              Benedictus also, Nunc dimi
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 tis and Magnificat,
                            be great motes in your eyes, but you shewe no reason worthy to be answered: only in derision you saye, except some of them were ready to die, or would celebrate the memorie of the Virgine, or Iohn Baptiste. As though these Hymnes or Psalmes were not profitable for all men, as the reste of the holy scripture is, but these especially, bicause they conteine the misterie of our saluation, and the praise of God for the same. By this your reason we may not vse any of the Psalmes, vntill we be in lyke case as Dauid was, or other, when they were first made. But I thinke nowe the time is come, when those shall correcte Magnificat, Qui nesciunt quid significat. Truly this your doing is a mere prophanation of holy scriptures.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 107. Sect. 2.
                     And if all the prayers were gathered togither, and referred to these twoo heades of Goddes glorie, and of the thyngs which perteyne to this present lyfe, I can make no Geometricall and exacte measure, but verily I beleue, there shal be founde more than a thyrd parte of the prayers which are not Psalmes and textes of scripture, spent in 
                           〈1 line〉
                        raying for, and praying against the incommodities of this life, which is contrarie to all the argumentes or contentes of the prayers of the church which are 
                           〈1 line〉
                        et downe in the scripture, and especially of our sauiour Christes prayers, b
                           〈1 line〉
                         the whiche ours ought to be directed, which of seuen petitions bestoweth one onely that wayes: And that these fo
                           〈1 line〉
                        esayde prayers doe not onel
                           〈1 line〉
                         in generall wordes, but by de
                           〈1 line〉
                        uctyng the commodities and incommodities of this lyfe i
                           〈1 line〉
                        to theyr particular kyndes, & that we praye for the auoyding of those daungers which are noth
                           〈1 line〉
                        g neare vs, as from lightning and thundring in the myddest of wynter, from stor
                           〈1 line〉
                        e & tempest, when the weather is most faire, and the seas most calme. &c. It is true that vpon some vrgent calamities prayer may and ought to be fra
                           〈1 line〉
                        ed, which may begge eyther the commoditie,

for want whereof the churche is in distresse, or the turning away of that mischiefe, whiche eyther approcheth, or which is already vppon it, but to make those prayers which are for the present tyme and daunger, ordynary and daily prayers, I cannot hitherto see any either scrupture or example of the primitiue churche. And here for the symples sake, I will set downe after what sort this abuse crept into the churche.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I thinke you doe confesse and acknowledge that it is lawefull to praye for things whiche perteine to this present lyfe: if you should denie it, I coulde confute you by the prayer that Iacob made to be deliuered from the handes of his brother Esau, Ge, 32. and by sundrye of the Psalmes, and diuers examples in the Gospell, of such as craued the like thinges at Christes handes, and obteined their desyre: howe many such prayers be in the booke of common prayer, it skilleth not, so long as you cannot proue them to be other than godly and necessarie.
                        If in euery prayer we make some petition for temporall thinges, we doe but imitate and followe that prayer which Christe hath prescribed vnto vs, both as a moste necessarie prayer, and as a rule also to frame and forme all our prayers by. You might as well proue that we ought not so often to aske remission and forgiuenesse of our synnes, bicause of seuen petitions, there is but one onelye bestowed that waye. Howe farre therefore this reason is from godlynesse and reason, the godly and reasonable Reader may i
                              〈1 line〉
                           dge.All things to be prayed for tende to the glorie of God.
                        
                        All thinges we praye for tende to the glo
                              〈1 line〉
                           ie of God, who is the authour and giuer of all thinges, both eternall and temporal. Things that are to be prayed for, are of two sortes, the o
                              〈1 line〉
                           e temporall, the other eternall: but they both perteyne to the glorie of God though not equally and in lyke manner.
                        The wyse man sayeth, in the dayes of prosperitie thinke of aduersitie. &c. Christe Math. 24. forewarning his disciples of the external afflictions and euils, which shouldPrayers be
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                               daunger. happen as well before the destruction of Ierusalem, as the ende of the worlde, willethE
                                 〈1 line〉
                              cle. 11. them to praye before the daunger be present, saying: Praye that your flight bee not in wynter, nor vpon the sabbath, and will you not ha
                              〈1 line〉
                           e vs to praye for deliueraun
                              〈1 line〉
                           e fromMath. 24. such perilles and daungers wherevnto we be subiect, except they be present? shall we not praye to be deliuered from thundering & lightening, stormeand tempest, plague and pestilence and such like, except we be in manifest perill and daunger, these things beyng in Gods handes to punishe vs with, euen in a moment, and when we thinke it moste vnlike? haue we not sundrie examples of such as haue sodenly perished with thundering and lightening, and some sithence the publishing of your booke? what scriptureThe presum
                                 〈1 line〉
                               tion of the Re plier. haue you or authoritie of any learned man to the contrarie? wyll you be credited vpyour bare worde against so many graue, learned, wyse and godly men, that 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ad the penning and allowing of that booke? surely that were against all order and reason: and it is to great presumption for you with so light and slender reasons to go aboute the ouerthrowe of that, which so many godly and learned men haue both liked and allowed, except they had allowed that which the scriptures do disalowe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 107. Sect. 3.
                     There was one Mamereus bishop of Vienna, which in the tyme of great earthquakes which werPlat. cap. Leo. in Fraunce, instituted certayne supplications, which the Grecians and we of them, call the Letany, which concerned that matter, there is no doubt but as other discommodities rose in other countries, they lykewyse had prayers accordingly. Nowe pope Gregor
                           〈1 line〉
                        e either made hymselfe, or gathered the su
                           〈1 line〉
                        plications that were made against the calamities of euery countrey, and made of them a great Letany or supplication, as Platina calleth it, & gaue it to be vsed in all churches, which thyng albeit all churches might do for the tyme, in respect of the case of the calamitie which the churches suffered, yet there is no cause why it should be perpetuall, that was ordeyned but for a tyme, and why all landes should praye to be deliuered from the incommodities that some lande hath vin troubled with.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        As though we were not at all times subiect to these perilles and daungers: and as though we ought not by the calamitie of other nations, to be moued earnestly to pray against the like, which might also happen to vs.
                        It is not to be doubted, but that the prayer of the iuste is acceptable to God, and that of his mercy he beyng thereby moued, doth stay from plaguing vs with earthquakes, thundring and lightenyng and such like calamities, wherewith he would otherwise punish vs.
                        Truly your reasons be maruelous prophane, and they might as well be alleaged,The reason vsed agaynst the Letanie is of the same force agaynst the psalmes. agaynst any of the Psalmes, which all were made at the first vpon some speciall occasion, and yet are profitable for euer, in all states of the Churche to be vsed. Whatsoeuer good and godly prayer, in the time of any common miserie and calamitie hath bene inuented, the same is at other times profitable to be vsed in the Church, bycause the like punishments and plagues, are in Gods handes, at all times to execute vpon sinners, and therefore continually to be prayed agaynst.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 107. Sect. 4.
                     The lyke may be sayde of the Gloria patri, and the Athanasius Creede, it was fyrst brought into the Churche, to the inde that men thereby▪ should make an open profession in the Churche of the diuinitie of the sonne of God, agaynst the detestable opinion of Arius and his Disciples, wherwith at that tyme maruelously swarmed almost the whole Christendome, A weake reason. nowe that it hath pleased the Lorde, to quench that fyre, there is no such cause why these thinges shoulde be in the Church, at the least why that Gloria patri, should be so often repeated.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Euen as conuenient now as it was then: for it is as necessarie to maynteyneThe manifestation and maintenance of truth as necessary as the suppressiō of errours. truth, and make it knowne, as it is to suppresse errours: and yet it is not vnknowne, that euen in our dayes, and in this Churche there haue bene Arians, and I praye God there be none still. I much suspect the matter, not well vnderstanding wherevnto those glances of yours at Gloria patri▪
                            and Athanasius Creede do tende. Gloria patri, besides that it conteyneth a briefe confession of the Trinitie, and of the Diuinitie ofGloria patri. Iesus Christe, it is a magnifying and glorifying of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, thrée persons and one God: and Athanasius creede, is not onely an excellentAthanasius Creede. confutation of Arius heresie, but a playne declaration of the mysterie of the Trinitie, such as is necessary for all Christian men to learne and know: and therefore he that is offended with the ofte repetition or saying of eyther of them, I cannot tell what I should iudge of him. But vndoubtedly there is greate cause why I should suspect him at the leaste of singularitie and vnquietnesse. Shall we not oftentymes rehearse the Articles of our beliefe in God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoste, bycause all menne be now perswaded therein, and none knowne that maketh any doubte? the reason is all one, and preuayleth as well agaynst the repeating of this, as of the other. I thinke your meaning is, that we know to muche, and therefore now we must learne to forget.
                        Well your authoritie is little, and your reasons much lesse, and therefore they are lyke to stande in Statu quo: and this is moste sure, that harme they do none, but much good, bycause a good thing cannot be to ofte sayde or hearde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 107. Sect. vlt.
                     Moreouer to make Benedictus, Magnificat, and Nunc dimittis, ordinarie and dayly prayers,

seemeth to be a thing not so conuenient, considering that they do no more concerne vs, than all other scriptures do, and than doth the Aue Maria, as they called it. For although they were prayers of thankes giuing in Simeon, Zacharie, and the blessed virgin Mary, yet can they not be so in vs, which haue not receiued like benefites, they may be added to the number of Psalmes, and so song as they be, but to make dayly and ordinary prayers of them, is not without some inconuenience & disorder.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Here is no reason shewed, nor any thing answered to that I haue alleadged to proue the contrarie. Your obiection of the Aue Maria is vayne, for it perteyneth to the virgin onely, and is spoken to her persons. But if it were not so: what kynde of reasoning call you this? The Church doth not vse daylie in publike prayer to saye Aue Maria, Ergo it may not saye Benedictus, Magnificat or Nunc dimittis, these thrée are moste metest for vs, for they conteine (as I haue sayde in my Answere) the misterie of our saluation and the praise of God for the same, and therefore cannot be to often either sayde or song.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 108. Sect. 2.
                     And so haue I Very slender lye: and if you had sayd lesse of them, you had saide nothing 
                              〈◊〉
                            all. aunswered vnto those thinges, whiche are conteyned in the. 202. 203. pages, sauing that I must admonishe the reader, that whereas you will proue that we oughte to haue an ordinary prayer, to be deliuered from daunger of Thunder, Lightninges. &c. bicause there are examples of certayne that haue bene kylled thereby, you might as well bryng in a prayer, that men maye not haue failes from their horses, maye not fall into the handes of robbers, maye not fall into waters, and a number such more sodayne deathes, wherewith a greater number are taken awaye, than by thunderinges or lighteninges, and such lyke, and so there should be neuer any ende of begging these earthly commodities, which is contrary to the forme of prayer, appoynted by our Sauiour Christe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The punishement of God by thundering and lightening, is more notorious and terrible, not by any helpe of man to be repelled: where as the other thinges that you speake of, come oftentymes and moste commonly through negligence, wylfulnes, vnrulines, to much boldnes, vndiscretenes of the parties themselues: besydes this there are ordinary meanes to auoyde them, and yet I thinke it moste conuenient, that we should praye against those euilles, and so doth the Church daylye in the laste collect, vsed in the morning prayer: which thing also is most consonant to the Lords prayer, petitions to the lyke ende and purpose, being there expressed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page 108. Sect. 2.
                     And wheras you alledge the petition of the Lordes prayer (deliuer vs from euill) to proue this prayer against thunder, &c. besydes that, all the commodities and discommodities of this lyfe are prayed for, and prayed against in that petition, whereby we desyre our dayly bread, it is very strange to apply that to the thunder, that is vnderstanded of the Deuill, as the article 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         doth declare, and it is a marueylous conclusion that for so much, as we ought daylye and ordinarily, and publikely desyre to be deliuered from the Deuill, Ergo we ought dayly, & ordinarily, & publikely d
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        syre to be deliuered from thunder: it is one thing to correct Magnificat, and an other thing to shewe the abuse of it. And therefore I fee no cause why you should vse this allusion betwene Magnificat and significat, vnles it be for that you purposing to set out all your learning in this booke, would not so much as forget an olde rotten prouerbe, which trotted amongst the monkes in their cloysters, of whome I may iustly saye which Tully sayd in an other thing, Nec quicquam ingenium potest monasterium: that is, the cloyster could neuer bring forth any wittie thing, for here although there bee Rythmus, yet it is sine ratione.Ryme without reason.
                     
                     
                        Io. VVhitgift.
                        All men may sée that you hunt for contention and strife, and not for the truthe,The interpretation of the last petition. otherwise you would be more vpright and sincere in your dealing. The effect of my Answere to the Admonition is, that for asmuch as this worde malum in the last petition of the Lordes prayer, doth conteyne all kinde of euill, whether it perteyne to

the body or to the minde, therefore all such prayers as are for our deliuerance, from externall perilles and daungers, being grounded vpon that petition, are lawfull, whether they be daylie vsed or otherwise, in whiche sorte and kinde those prayers are, wherein we desire to be deliuered from thundring and lightning, the daungers therof beyng so frequente, and so terrible.
                        And whereas you say, that the worde Euill, doth there signifie the Diuell, & therefore not aduersitie, & externall euill that happeneth to the bodie, you shall vnderstand your errour, by the expositions both of the olde and new wryters. Cyprian in his exposition vpon the Lordes prayer interpreting these wordes sayeth thus. In the lasteCyprian. place we put. But deliuers vs from euill: comprehending all kinde of aduersities, vvhich the enimie vvorketh agaynst vs in this vvorlde. And a little after: But when we say, deliuer vs from euill, there remayneth nothing which ought further to be desired, seyng we pray at once for the protection of God agaynst euill, which being obteyned, we stande secure and safe, against all thinges which the worlde and Deuill worketh.
                        
                        
                           Augustine likewise in his Epistle ad Probam viduam in number. 121. and 
                              Cap. 11. expoundethAugustinus. the same wordes in like sorte. VVhen we say deliuer vs from euill: we admonish to consider that we are not as yet in that good (estate) where we shall suffer no euill: and this which is last placed in the Lordes prayer, is extended so farre, and so playnely, that a Christian man moued with any kinde of tribulation, may in this petition sigh, in this shedde his teares, beginne herein, continue herein, and end his prayer herein.
                        
                        
                           M Bucer expounding the same wordes in his Commentaries vpō the. 6. of Mathew,Bucer. sayth. Satan is therefore called a tempter, bicause he doth tempte and exercise vs: especially labouring for this, that he may withdrawe vs from a right fayth in God: but if he cannot bring that to passe (such is his hatred) then he doth reioyce in afflicting and molesting vs, with externall euils, as we reade that he hath done against Iob and other holy men. And a little after: VVherefore for as much as Satan is (as it were our tormenter, by whose ministerie God doth also outwardly exercise vs) in this respect, the prayer, to be deliuered from bodily euils, is included in this last petition. In like manner doth Musculus expounde the same: and do you thinke that these men did not vnderstand their Pater noster? You see therefore that although the worde signifie the Diuell, yet it nothing hindreth my interpretation, but maketh much for it, bicause the Diuell is the Author of all euill, that cōmeth either to the body or to the soule, and therfore beyng deliuered from him, there is no cause why we should be any longer carefull.
                        There is no abuse of Magnificat as yet shewed, but there is a very vnlearned reason in the Admonition put, why it should not be vsed, to the Answere whereof you haue not replied, and therefore I may iustly say of their correcting of Magnificat, that which I haue sayde: and the Prouerbe is méete for such vnskilfull persons: but your childish or rather prophane iestes and scoffes be not séeming for a Diuine, and him that would he counted so greatly learned and mortified.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 108. Sect. 3.
                     As these are diuers things more than ought to be conueniently, so want there some things in the prayers: there are prayers set forth to be sayd in the common calamities, & vniuersall scourges of the realme, as plague, famine, &c. And in deede so it ought to be, by the worde of God, ioyned with a publike faste cōmaunded, not only when we are in any calamitie, but also when any the churches rounde about vs, or in any countrie receyue any generall plague, or grieuous chastisement at the Lordes hand. But as such prayers are needefull whereby we begge release from our distresses, so there ought to be as necessarily prayers of thankes giuing, when we haue receyued those things, at the Lordes hande, which wee asked in our prayers. And thus much touching the matter of theGreat faultes in little matters. prayers, eyther not altogither sounde, or else to much or to little.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If any thing lacke in the booke, that derogateth nothing from that which is good & godly in the same: neyther is it any cause why any man should depraue it or make such a stirre and schisme in the Churche for it.
                        
                           It is méete that we should as well giue thankes for the benefites receyued, as to pray for the receyuing of them: neyther is the booke voyde of any suche kinde of prayers. These be vut verie small quarels agaynst the booke, and slender faultes (if they were faults) to make so great a schisme for. But as I sayde with S. Augustine,
                           August. Epist. 121. agaynst the Authours of the Admonition, so say I vnto you. If thou runnest through all the wordes of the holy prayers, I suppose thou shalt finde nothing which the Lordes prayer doth not conteyne: therfore we may in other wordes speake the same things in our prayers, but we may not speake contrarie things. You haue not as yet, neyther will you euer be able to shewe one lyne in any prayer conteyned in that booke, to be contrarie to the worde of God, or not consonant or agréeable vnto the same. And this dealing of yours agaynst it vpon so weake reasons (or rather none at all) argueth that you séeke only contention, and that your chiefe quarell is at the mainteyners of the booke, and not at the matter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 108. Sect. 4.
                     Concerning the forme, there is also to be misliked: a great cause whereof is the following of the forme vsed in Poperie, agaynst which I haue before spoken. For whylest that seruice was set in many poynts as a patterne of this, it commeth to passe, that in steade of such prayers as the primitiue Churches haue vsed, and those that be reformed nowe vse, we haue diuerse These are 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           seemely terme▪ for Godly prayers, be they re
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            so sho
                              〈1 line〉
                           t short curtes & shreddings, which may be better called wishes than prayers. And that no man think that this is some ydle fansie, and that it is no matter of weight what forme of prayer we vse, so that the praiers be good, it must be vnderstanded, that as it is not sufficient to preach the same doctrine whiche our Sauiour Christ and his Apostles haue preached, Where learn you that▪
                         vnlesse the same forme of doctrine, and of teaching be likewise kept: so is it not ynough that the matter of our prayer be such as is in the word of God, vnlesse that the forme also be agreeable vnto the formes of prayers in the scripture. Nowe we haue no such formes in the scripture as that we shoulde pray in two or The Lordes prayer is not much more: the prayers of the publican, of Steuen, & of Christ on the Crosse, are much lesse. three lynes, and then after hauing read a while some other thing come and pray as much more, and so to the. xx. and. xxx. tune, with pawses betweene.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue verie aptly answered your selfe, though you woulde séeme to make it an obiection, and to wipe it away: for vndoubtedly when you thought that other men woulde count this d
                              〈1 line〉
                           uise of yours an ydle fansie, you thought truely, and your owne thought therein condemneth you. But I adde that it is not onely an ydle fansie, but an vntrue surmise: for first, which be those prayers that the primitiue Churche vsed, in steade whereof we haue but short cuttes and shreddings? Why doe you not name them? Will you still speake without proofe? Will you rayse vp a generall slaunder, and shew no particulars?
                        Touching your charging vs with following of the forme vsed in Poperie, I haue answered before, where you haue in like maner obiected it, and onely obiected it.
                        Howe proue you that it is not sufficient, to preache the same doctrine that our SauiourThe fensie of the 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              plyer concerning the forme of preaching. Christ and his Apostles haue preached, vnlesse the same forme of teaching bee lykewyse kepte? For I take that to be an ydle fansie, and vtterly vntrue. I am perswaded that if the same doctrine be preached, the maner and forme of preaching is left for euerie one to vse, according to the gift that God hath giuen vnto him, as he shall thinke it to be most expedient to edifying: but this is an olde fansie of yours, partly grounded vpon an arrogant opinion of your selfe, whose maner and forme of preaching you woulde binde all men: vnto partly of emulation and enuie, bicause you haue perceyued other mens maner and kinde of preaching, to haue béene much better lyked than yours. But to let this passe, Christ and his Apostles did not vsually pray before nor after their Sermons, or at the least it is not expressed in Scripture that they did: they when they preached did not vsually take any one certaine place or portion of Scripture to intreat of: and it is manifest that they vsed not any vniforme maner of preaching, but they spake as God gaue them vtterance: neyther did they labour or studie for their Sermons,

but preached as present occasion serued: and therefore for my part, vntill I heare verie good reasons of this newe deuise, I must néedes accompt it a verie fonde imagination.
                        Shewe me wherein the forme of our prayers doth differ from the maner and forme of praying conteyned in the Scripture? Or shewe me in the Scripture, any prescript forme of publike and dayly prayers commaunded, the Lordes prayer onely excepted. Or let me vnderstande what scripture you can alledge why in the publike congregation, we may not somtime pray, and sometimes reade the scriptures: & what do we else in the whole order of our seruice? will you still more and more vtter your contempt agaynst God, against his Church against a most pure and godly kynde of publike prayer and seruice, and that with such vnreuerend speaches? But I omit thē, it is inough to haue noted thē in the margent, for they are cōfutation to thēselues.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 108. Sect. vlt.
                     If a man should come to a Prince and keepe such order in making his petitions vnto him, that hauing very many things to demaunde, after he had demaunded one thing he woulde stay a long tyme, and then demaunde another, and so the thirde, the Prince might well thinke, that eyther he came to aske, before he knew what he had neede of, or that he had forgotten some piece of his sute, or that he were distracted in his vnderstanding, or some other such like cause of the disorder of his supplication. And therefore how much more conuenient were it, that according to the maner of the reformed Churches: first the minister with an humble and generall confession of faults, should desire the assistance of the Lord, for the fruteful handling and receyuing of the worde of God, and then after that we haue heard the Lorde speake vnto vs in his worde, by his minister, the Church should likewise speake vnto the Lorde, and present all those petitions and sutes at once, both for the whole Church, and for the Prince, and all other estates which shall be thought needfull.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        As much differencs as there is betwixt man and God: so farre is your similitudeThe dissimilitude of the replyers similitude. from prouing your purpose: except you will admit the like similitude vsed by the Papists, to proue praying to Saints: for the one hath as muche strength to proue ani
                              〈1 line〉
                            thing as the other, and yet neither of them both worth a rush. And here you doe iniurie to God, to compare him to an earthly Prince, especially in this behalfe. For what Prince would not thinke himselfe abused, if a man shoulde dayly and hourely sue vnto him? But it is not so with God: for we haue a commaundement to pray continually. Luke. 18. 1. Thes. 5. and he doth not respect the forme of wordes, but the affection of the heart. And in verie déede it is most conuenient that reading of the scriptures and praying should be intermingled.
                        All the scripture that you haue to alledge is the reformed Churches, let other men thinke what they will, I verily beléeue that in our maner and kinde of worshipping God, in our publike and common prayers, there is no cause why we shoulde thinke our selues one whit inferiour vnto them: they also or the must part of them, haue allowed the same order of ours, at what time the like contention was about the same booke, amōg our English mē which were in Q. Maries time banished for the gospel.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 20. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 109. Sect. I.
                     And if any will say that there are short prayers found in the Acts, it may be answered that S. Luke doth not expresse the whole prayers at large, but only set downe the summes of them & their chiefe poyntes. And further it may be answered, that alwayes those prayers were continued togyther, and not cut off, and shred into diuerse small pieces.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Howe knowe you that S. Luke doth not expresse the whole prafers at large, but onely set down the sums of thē & their chief points? What scripture haue you that teacheth you so to think? & if this be a sufficient answere to say, the scripture hath not expressed the whole. &c.

Why is it not also a sufficient answere for me to that which foloweth, that the scriptureThe scripture hath not prescribed any forme of publike prayer▪
                            hath not expressed any certaine, or determinate forme of publike prayer to be vsed in all Churches (as in déede it hath not) but onely in the Lordes prayer giuen certaine generall poynts, according to the whiche all our prayers must be framed? Surely your fansie is strong, but your arguments be excéeding weake. For tell mée I pray you, where haue you in the whole newe testament (the Lordes prayer onely excepted) any forme of publike prayer vsed in the Church described? If you cannot shewe this, why do you so childishly dallie?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 21. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 109. Sect. 2.
                     Another fault is that all the people are appoynted in diuerse places, to say after the Minister, whereby not onely the tyme is vnprofitably wasted, and a confused voyce of the people, one speaking after another caused, but an opinion bred in their heades, that those onely be theyr prayers which they say and pronounce with their owne mouthes. Which causeth them to giue the lesse heede to the rest of the prayers which they rehearse not after the Minister, which notwithstanding are as well their prayers, as those which they pronounce after the Minister, otherwise than the order which is left vnto the Church, of God doth beare. For God hath ordeyned the Minister to this ende, that as in publike meetings, he onely is the mouth of the Lorde from him to the people, euen so he ought to beVntruth▪
                         onely the mouth of the people from them vnto the Lorde, and that all the people should attende to that which is sayde by the Minister, and in the ende both declare their consent to that which is sayde, and their hope that it shall so be and come to passe whiche is prayed, by the worde Amen. As S. Paule declareth in the Epistle to the Corinthians. And Iustine Martyr1. Cor. 14. 1. Apol. pro Christianis. sheweth to haue bene the custome of the Churches in his time.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        God be thanked, that the booke is so per
                              〈1 line〉
                           te, that you are constreyned for sauing your credite with your Disciples, thus triflingly to deale with it: you vnchristianly say, that the time is vnprofitably wasted, which is spent in prayer: you imagine that of the people, that neuer entered into their thoughts: you call it a confused voyce, that is a most acceptable sounde vnto the Lorde: and if to surmise or to imagine be sufficient, then may we imagine your doctrine to tende to the contempt of prayer, and the ouerthwarting of all good and godly order. But you must knowe that there is more speciall cause, why the people should rather reherse after the Minister those things that the booke appoynteth them so to do, than the other prayers, bicause they conteyne a generall confession of sinnes, which all Christians togither as well in voyce, as in heart, ought to confesse: neyther doth the booke prescribe the people to say any thing after the Minister (the Lordes prayer after the Communion onely excepted) but these generallMuscul. in 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Math. and publike confessions: and yet if it did, I sée not howe you can iustly therefore reproue it. Musculus expounding these wordes, Et cum bymnum cecinissent. &c. thinketh it not vnlikely 
                              ipsum ita praeloquutū esse, vt verba ipsius ab illis sint excepta & vicissim reddita. That Christ did in that order speake before his Disciples, that they repeated his wordes after him. Whereby it appeareth that he was so farre from thinking this order to bée on vnprofitable wasting of tyme, that he doubteth not to ascribe it to our Sauiour Christ and his Apostles. But if it be such an vnprofitable wasting of tyme, to rehearse prayer after the Minister, how happeneth it, that you and all other your partners that be preachers, vse to cause the people to pray after you in your Sermons? Is it lawfull for you so to do in the Pulpite, and is it not lawfull for the Minister to do the same in the Churche? Belike nothing is well done that you do not your selues, or are not the Authours of.
                        But here I cannot omit that which you so boldly affirme, of the Minister, whomThe ministes not the onely mouth of the people. you say God hath ordeyned to be the onely mouth of the people from them vnto the Lorde in publike meetings: are you of that opinion, that the people may ioyne with the minister in pronouncing publike prayers, at no time? Or that they should onely attende to that

which is sayde by the Minister, and in the ende giue their consent by this woorde Amen? Hath God ordeyned this? I pray you where finde you this ordinance? Sure I am that the place by you alledged doth not proue it. For although it be true that the Minister is the mouth of the people to God, yet doth it not followe, that hee is the onely mouth of the people vnto the Lorde▪ And although we reade that the people vsed to giue their consent vnto the prayer pronounced of the Minister, by this worde Amen: yet if you will hereof conclude that they ought onely to say Amen: and at no time ioyne as well in voyce as in heart, with the Minister (which you séeme to affirme in saying he is the onely mouth) then besides the weaknesse of your conclusion, the practise of the Church of God will sufficiently confute you. Wée reade that when Peter and John were let go, after their examination before the Priestes and Elders, for healing the man that was lame from his mothers wombe, they came to the rest of his Disciples, and declared to them what had happened, and when they hearde that,Act. 4. they lift vp their voyces to God with one accorde, and sayde, Lorde thou art God, &c. So that the Minister here was not the onely mouth of the people, but the whole companie that was assembled ioyned togither in this prayer, lifted vp their voyces and spake with one accorde. And surely it is not vnlike, that they vsed herein that order which you before accounted an vnprofitable wasting of time: for séeing that this prayer was framed according to the present occasion, I am perswaded that the rest did rather repeate the wordes after him that conceyued the prayer, than that they all miraculously ioyned vpon the sodeyne in one and the same for me of wordes. Plinie in an Epistle toPlinius Epist. lib. 10. Traiane the Emperour concerning the Christians, wryteth that their custome was 
                              stato die ante lucem conuenire carmen
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  Christo quasi Deo dicere, secum inuicem, &c. to meete togither early at an appoynted day, and to sing togither a song vnto Christ as vnto God. Chrysostome goyng about to proue that in some respect there is no difference betwixt the Priest and people, vseth this for an example, that in publike prayer they somtime ioyne togither. His wordes be these, 
                              Quin & precibus. &c. A man may also see the peopleChrysost. hom. 18. in. 2. Cor. to offer many prayers togither for those that are possessed & penetenciaries (as they term them) for common supplications are made both of the Priest, and of them, and they all say one prayer, &c. And again, 
                              quid miraris si cum sacerdote populus loquitur? vvhy dost thou maruell if the people speake togither vvith the priest, &c. You can not be ignorant (I am sure) that Basill likeneth the sounde of men, women, and children praying in the Church, to the roring of the waues agaynste the Sea bankes. ThisBasil. Hexam. might you haue séene also euen in that place of Iustine Martyr whiche you quote: for4. Apol. 2. there describing the liturgie, he sayth, that after the exhortation or Sermon, 
                              Omnes surgimus & compre
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 amur, we do all rise and pray togither, &c. This you skipped ouer, and tooke that which followed, bycause it made more for your purpose: for indéede Iustine doth describe both, that is both the prayer of the whole Church togither, and of the Bishop alone the people giuing their consent by this worde Amen. I néede not to vse mo testimonies, these may suffice to declare by the practise of the Church, that the Minister is not the only mouth of the people in publike meetings, which you haue only set downe without any proofe, for what purpose, you knowe best your selfe, surely I cannot coniecture, except it be that the people should wholy depende vpon the Ministers wordes, and as it were hang vpon his lippes, which where vnto it woulde in tyme grow, wise men can consider.
                        But what néede I to stande so long vppon this poynt, séeing you your selfe afterwardeThe replyer contrarie to himselfe. 
                                 Pag. 163, in the middest.
                              
                            affirme as muche▪ For finding fault with the order of singing Psalmes syde by syde, you haue these wordes. From whence soeuer it came, it cannot be good, consydering that when it is graunted that all the people maye prayse God (as it is in singing of Psalmes) there this ought not to be restreyned vnto a fewe, and where it is lawfull both with heart and voyce, to sing the whole Psalme, there it is not meete that they shoulde sing but the one halfe with their heart and voyce, and the other with their heart onely. For where they may both with heart and voyce sing, there the heart is not ynough. Than the which, what can be more contrarie to this, that the Minister ought to be the onely mouth of the people to the Lorde? For here you affirme that all the people may prayse God, and sing Psalmes,

not with heart onely, but with voyce, and so to be their owne mouth vnto the Lorde. Howe you can reconcile this géere I sée not: sure I am that truth is not contrarie to it selfe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 22. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 109. Sect. 3.
                     Although these blottes in the common prayer be such, as may easily enough appeare vnto any, which is not wedded to a preiudicate opinion, and that there is no great difficultie in this matter,Conscientia 
                              〈1 line〉
                           lle testes. yet I knowe that thys treatise of prayer will be subiect to many reprehensions, and that there will not be wanting some probable colours also whereby these things may be defended, if men will set themselues to striue and to contende: yet for the desyre that I haue that these things should be amended) and for the instruction of the symple, which are studious of the truth, I haue beene bolde to vtter that whiche I thinke, not doubting also but that the lyght of the truth shall be able to scatter all those mystes of reasons, which shall go about to darken the clearnesse thereof.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely if the blottes be so manifest as you woulde séeme to make them, it is not wisely done of you so slenderly to passe them ouer.
                        You do well to thinke that this treatise of yours touching prayer will be subiect toThe pith of the replie concerning prayer. many reprehensions: and why shoulde it not? What is there in it worthie of commendation? What learning? what reason? what truth? what godlinesse? except vaine wordes be learning: fancies reason: lyes truth: contempt of good lawes and orders, with vnséemely iestes, bée godlynesse: for what is there else in thys treatise? Truely if you had not settled your selfe to striue and to contende, and had not béene desyrous to peruert the simple, rather than to instruct them, you would neuer vpon so weake a ground & with so féeble reasons, or rather vaine fansyes haue gone about to depraue so worthie a Booke: In the whiche as I haue sayde before, you are not able to shewe any thing, especially touching the order, maner, and matter of prayer, that is not consonant to the worde of God. Neyther haue you for all that is spoken against the forme of prayer, alledged one text of Scripture, or one sentence of any auncient or late wryter: and doe you thinke that men will beléeue you vpon your bare wordes, agaynst so many Martyrs and learned men, as haue allowed and doe allowe that booke? Your credite is not so greate as you thinke it is: and that which you haue, when you are accordingly detected, will vtterly vanishe and fade away.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Baptisme by women, wherewith the Communion booke is falsely charged.
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     In which a great number of things contrarie to Gods worde are conteyned, as baptismeMat. 28. 19 1 Co. 14. 35 The fyrst appoynter hereof vvas Vietor. 1. Anno. 198. by women.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 79. Sect. 2. 3. 4. 5.All prayers good in the Communion booke.
                        
                        But you say, a number of things contrarie vnto Gods worde are conteyned in this booke, as baptisme by women. &c.
                        
                        
                           Here is not one prayer in all the Communion booke founde fault with, and yet your quarell is agaynst a prescript forme of prayers inuented by man.
                        You marueylously forget your selfe, and confusedly go from matter to matter, without any consideration.
                        Digressing therefore from prayers conteyned in the Communion booke, you come to other matters in the same, agaynst Gods worde (as you say) and first you alledge baptising by women.
                        I denie baptising by women to be expressed in that booke, and when you haue proued it to be necessarily gathered out of the same, then shall you heare my iudgement thereof.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 109. Sect. 4.
                     Mayster Doctor requireth that it shoulde be proued vnto him, that by pryuate Baptisme is ment, Baptisme by women. First it is ment that it shoulde be done by some other than the Minister, for that the Minister is bidde to giue them warning, that they shoulde not baptise the childe at home in their house, without great cause and necessitie: secondarily, I woulde gladly aske him who they be that are present, when the childe is so shortly after it is borne, in great daunger of death, and last of all Mayster Doctor doth not see, howe he accuseth all the Magistrates of this Realme of the neglect of theyr duetie, in that they allowe of the dayly practising by women in baptising children, if so be that the booke did not so appoynt it, or permit it. If he 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nt plainly herein there needed not so much a doe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Here is nothing sayde whiche the Authours of the Admonition haue not alledged before, eyther in theyr booke or in theyr Additions, and therefore the same answere that was made vnto them, will serue for you. I tolde you thereWhy baptism is called priuate. that the booke of Common prayer doth call it priuate Baptisme, in respect of the place, which is a priuate house, and not in respect of the Minister: whiche euidently appeareth in these wordes, whiche you your selfe alledge in this place, that is, that the Minister is bidde to giue them warning, that they shoulde not baptise the childe at home in their house. &c. but you cannot thereof conclude the meaning of the Booke to be, that women shoulde baptise: for euen in that necessitie, the Curate may be sent for, or some other minister that may sooner be come by.
                        Your question is soone answered, for no man doubteth of the persons that bée present at suche a tyme: but I haue tolde you, that when suche necessitie requyreth, the Curate, or the next Minister is soone sent for, as often tymes he is in as great extremities as that: and what a reason call you thys, women bée present when the chylde that is borne is in great daunger of death, therefore the Minister cannot be sent for to baptise the childe?
                        To your obiection (of the Magistrates allowing the practise of Baptising by women) I answere first, that your generall proposition is vntrue (as I thinke) for all the Magistrates of this Realme, doe not so. Secondly, that if they did, yet it followeth not that they doe it by the authoritie of the Booke: for many things bée permitted as tollerable, whiche are not established by any lawe: and therefore if you had done well, you shoulde rather haue reproued the custome that doth vse it, than the booke that speaketh neuer a worde of it.
                        
                           I deale as playnly as I can, for I kéepe me to the Booke. But your vayne coniectures and friuolous reasons against that booke, may not be yelded vnto, but opened, that they may appeare in their colours.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition Pag. 79. Sect. vlt.
                     Your places of Scripture alleadged against it, are not of sufficientFeeble arguments. force to proue your purpose. Christ in the. 28. of Mathew, sayde to his disciples, Go and teache all nations, baptisyng them in the name of the father. &c. ergo women may not baptise. I saye this argumente followeth not, no more than this doth: Ergo pastors may not baptise, for it is manyfest that an Apostle is dislincte from a Pastor.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 109. Sect. 5.
                     The place of the. 28. of Sainct Mathew is as strong agaynst womens baptizing as it is agaynst theyr preaching. For Vntruth, 
                              〈◊〉
                            hath 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         the ministerie of the worde and Sacramentes can not be pulled in sunder, which ye Lord hath ioyned togither from time to time. For These examples proue not the purpose. Noah which was a preacher vnto the olde worlde of the will of God, was ordeyned also of God to make the Arke, whiche was a Sacramente and seale of his preachyng, touchyng the destruction of the worlde. And These examples proue not the purpose. Abraham whom the Lorde would haue to be the Doctour of his churche, whiche was then in his familie, was also commaunded to minister the Sacrament of circumcision vnto his familie. The These examples proue not the purpose. Priestes and Leuites whiche were appoynted to teache the people, were also appoynted to sacrifice and to minister other sacramentes in the Church. Lykewise the same Prophets which God stirred vp to preach, he also ordeyned to confirme the same by signes & Sacraments. The These examples proue not the purpose. same may be also drawne throughout the new Testament, as vnto euery of the twelue, and afterwarde to the seuentie, power was giuen bothe to preache the Gospell, and also to confirme wyth signes and miracles, whiche were seales of their Doctrine. And These examples proue not the purpose. Sainct Paule by the commaundement that our Sauiour Christe gaue hym to preache, vndertooke also to baptise, although there were no expresse woordes that licenced him therevnto, for hee knewe right well that it was the perpetuall ordinaunce of God, that the same shoulde bee the ministers of the worde and Sacramentes. Wherevpon it followeth, that forasmuche as women maye not prcache the Gospell, no not by the lawes of the realine, that they ought not to minister Baptisme.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        My reason alleadged in my Answere to the Admonition, why this place doth not make any necessarie conclusion agaynst the baptizyng by Women, is not answered: but there is a newe collection made of the same place, whyche is of as great force as the other: for you myght as well conclude thus: Ergo, Pastors maye not preache, bycause Pastours bée not Apostles. I speake of the Argumente, not of the thyng. For I woulde not haue the Scriptures abused to confirme, no not a truthe, least it make men the bolder to wreast them at their pleasure, and for the confirming of errour. M. Zuinglius in hys booke De Baptisme sayth, that Christe didZuinglius. not in this place of Mathewe, institute baptisme nor prescribe eyther tyme, place, or any other circumstance, perteyning to the same.
                        
                        I haue proued before, that the administration of the Sacraments, may bée committed to some, to whome the publike preachyng of the worde is not committed, and youre examples here alleadged doe not proue the contrarie, excepte you wyllTract. 9. ca. 1. sect. 15. haue vs to grounde poyntes of doctrine, vppon bare examples: whych if we should doe, many inconueniences would followe, yea euen baptizyng by women, whiche you so greately mislyke. 
                              A facto ad ius, or à non facto ad non ius,
                            bée the vsuall reasons of the Anabaptistes, but of no force.
                        The example of Noah helpeth you not, except you will either allegorie, or proue yt the minister of the worde may make Sacramēts, bicause Noah made the Arke, 
                              〈◊〉
                            Arke can not be proprely termed a sacrament in yt signification yt ours be, for it had no promise of eternal life annexed vnto it, neither was it any seale of gods promise:

but a meanes to saue Noah and his family from perishing by the waters: and a tipe and figure of the Church of Christ, as you haue before confessed.Pag. 63. Sect. 1
                        
                        Your examples which follow (although some of them be very vnapt, for miracles be no sacraments, neyther yet euery kind of signes and wonders) may as examplesT. C. omitting the purpose, proueth that which is not denied. shewe, that the administration of the sacramentes, was committed to suche as were preachers of the word. But they cannot proue that it was onely committed vnto them, and to no other. It is not required of you to proue whither he that maye preach, may also administer the sacraments, but whither it be of necessitie, that none shoulde be admitted to minister the sacraments except the same also be admitted to preach: the contrary whereof I haue shewed before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag. 80. Sect. 1.
                     The second place you do alleadge is. 1. Cor. 14. where Paule sayth it is a shame for Women to speake in the congregation: Paule saith not, it is a shame for women to speake at home in priuate houses, for women may instruct their families, yea and they may speake also in the Congregation, in tyme of necessitie, if there be none else there, that can or wyll preache Chryste, and hereof we haue examples.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 110. Lin. 13. &. Sect. 1.
                     But M. Doctor riseth vp, and saith that a woman in time of necessitie, and where there is none other that eyther can or will preache, maye preache the Gospell in the Church.
                     This is straunge doctrine, and such as strengtheneth the Anabaptists hands, and sauoureth stronger that ways, than any one thing, in all the Admonition, which is so often condemned of Anabaptisme. His first reason to proue it, is that there are examples thereof. When we alleadge the examples How vayne this bragge is, hath bin shewed Tract. 3. of all the churches of the Apostles times, to proue the election of the minister by the Churche, and in other cases which are generall examples, approued and executed by the Apostles, contrary to no commaundement nor institution of God, yea, and as hath bin proued according to the commaundement of God, M. Doctor gyueth vs our answer in a worde, that examples proue not: now that the question is to make good womens preaching in the Church, examples, I will not say of all churches, but of no one Church, only of a few singular persons, not according to the1. Cor. 14. 1. Tim. 2. commaundement of the word of God, but cleane contrary to the prescript word of God: I say now examples, and such singular examples are good proofes and strong arguments.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In what poynt doth he strengthen the Anabaptists? If you coulde haue told I trust it should not haue bin kept in silence. I haue charged the Authors of the Admonition with nothing, but I haue shewed my author for it, deale you with me in like manner and spare not: otherwise your wordes do but sauoure choler. Examples withouteWhat force is in exāples. preceptes make no generall or necessary rule: but they sometimes declare what was done, and what may be done extraordinarily, vpon like occasion, and the same circumstances, if they be commendable examples.
                        Women were the first that preached Christes resurrection: A woman was theMath. 28. first that preached Christ in Samaria. Io. 4. and yet vndoutedly none of these dydIo. 20. contrary to the prescript word of God. Women may not speake ordinarily in theIo. 4. congregation, nor chalenge any suche function vnto themselues, but vpon occasion they may speake as I haue said in my Answer.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 110. Sect. 2.
                     Nowe, if the speache be a true messenger of the hearte, I perceyue master Doctor is of
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                        
this mind, that he would haue women preach in the Church of England at this time: for he cannot denie, and he also confesseth it sometimes that this is the time of necessitie: and indeede it must be needes an extreme necessitie, that driueth to make one man Pastor of two churches, especially so farre distant, that driueth to make men, whiche are not able to teach, ministers, and diuers more things, which are contrary to the word of God: Therefore this being a time of necessitie, by M. Doctors iudgement we ought to haue women to preach. Besides this he sayth if neyther none other can or will preach, that then women may preach, but in the most churches of this realme, there is none that eyther can or will preach, therefore there, and in those churches, women (at the leaste if they be able) may preach the Gospell, and consequently minister the sacraments.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You wander from the matter and do but séeke occasion to quarel: there is no such necessitie in this Church (God be thanked) as M. Doctor speaketh of: for there is none in anye place or corner thereof, that be ignorante of Christ, or do not professe the name of Christ: In all places they haue the scriptures red vnto them, whiche conteine matter sufficient to saluation, and therefore there is no cause why women should take vpon them to preach in the congregation: neyther doth M. Doctor meane any such thing, as you know very well, but that it is your pleasure to dallie. He meanethIn what time a womā may preach Christ. such places where all be infidells, where they haue neither heard of Christ, nor haue his word, neither yet any other meanes to come by the knowledge of the same, which is no where in this Church.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Women that may 1. Co. 14. 34 1. Tim. 2. 11 not speake in a congregation, may yet in time of necessitie minister the Sacrament of Baptisme, and that in a priuate house.
                     
                        Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag 186. Sect. vlt.
                        You say, women that may not speake in a congregation, may yet in time of necessitie, minister the sacrament of baptisme, and that in a priuate house. And to proue that women may not speake in a congregation, you quote. 1. Cor. 14. 1. Ti. 2. whereas you should rather haue proued, that women may not in time of necessitie, minister baptisme, for that is the question, and not the other. Women may speake in the congregation, if necessary occasion do require, as M. Caluin teacheth in his institutions. Chap. 13. Sect. 32.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 110. Sect. 3.
                     In the. 187. Page, he citeth M. Caluine in the. 13. Chap. Section. 32. to proue that women may teach: wherein An argument of your ignorance. I maruell, what he meaneth, so to alleadge M. Caluine continually: he alleadgeth the. 13. Chap. and no booke, as though he had written but one booke, and indeede there is no such thing, in no such chapter of any booke of his institutions, or many other place throughout his whole works, as I am perswaded. If this fault had bin but twise or thrise, I woulde haue thought it had bin the Printers, but now that it is continuall, and so oftentimes, surely he gyueth great suspicion that eyther some body, hath mocked him with these places, or else he would abuse others, and especially him that should answere his booke, setting him to seeke that he shoulde neuer finde.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You pleade ignorance, of such an edition of M. Caluines institutions, but it is bycause you cannot answer the place (for other places which I haue in like manner alleaged, for the which you might haue any colour of answering, you haue found out at the first: yea and this selfe same place now in question) but when there is no shifte to auoyd that which is alledged, then you quarell with the booke, and suspect, that eytherPag. 19. Sect.. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            some body hath mocked him, or that he would abuse others. &c. No, no, T. C. I thanke god I vse no such dealing, I do alledge nothing which I haue not red in the Authors

themselues. I study not to encounter the Answer, for eyther I set downe the whole place, or else quote it so, that it may easily be found. Touching this booke of institutions of M. Caluines, which I now follow, I haue spoken before, and declared why I do vse it rather than any other: I haue laboured it, noted it, I am acquainted with it, and belike, I red it, before you knew whether there was any such booke or no: and if there be no suche booke of M. Caluines institutions, only deuided into chapters and sections, and not into bookes, I will giue you all M. Caluines works, bycause you so complayne of lacke of bookes.
                        But to come to the thing it selfe, M. Caluine in that place speaking of such lawes and orders in the Church, as are not perpetuall but alterable, as occasion serueth, vseth this commaundement of S. Paules touching the silence of women in the Churche, for one example to make the matter more manifest: his wordes be these. Or is the commaundement touching hir silence such, as it may not be broken without wickednesse?
                           Chap. 1
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Sect. 32. And alittle after. 
                              Et est, vbi loqui nō minus opportunum illi sit, quàm alibi tacere, And there is a time and place, when and where it is as fit for hir to speake, as else where to holde 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ir peace. These words be plaine, and do sufficiently answer all, that you can obiect to the contrary.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 110. Sect. 4.
                     As for M. Caluines iudgement what it is of womens preaching, it may appeare by that he4. Li. institut. cap. 15. Sect. 20. will not by no meanes, no not in time of necessitie (as they tearme it) suffer eyther woman, or any lay man to baptise, or minister any sacrament, and therefore not to preach.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I doubt not of M. Caluines iudgement in that poynt, and yet I knowe other learned and notable men that thinke otherwise, and namely Zuinglius in his booke de baptismo, neyther do I go about to teach that women may preach. I tell you onely what extreame necessitie maye extraordinarily permitte, withoute iust cause of reprehension.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 110. Sect. vlt.
                     And as for the examples of Mary the sister of Moyses, of Olda, of Anna, and the daughters of Philip the Euangelist, whiche are all called prophetesses (tor I thinke M. Doctor meaneth these examples) as for them I say, it will be hard for to shew that they euer prophecied or taughte openly in any publike me
                           〈1 line〉
                        ng or congregation. But the surer answer is, that although the Lorde do sometimes, not being vnder any law, change the order which he hath set, in raysing vp certayne women, partly to the shame of men and to humble them, partly to let them vnderstand that he can if he would, want their ministerie: yet it is not lawfull for vs to draw that into example and to follow it: or that for as much as he breaketh the law which is not subiect vnto it, and which he made not for himselfe, that therefore we may breake the law wherevnto we be subiect and to whome it is giuen. But we must go in the broad high way of the commaundement, and of the ordinarie vsage of God, in gouerning his Church, and not in the byepath of certayne singular examples, which haue bin in dtuers ages. And as often as God hath vsed this extraordinarie meanes of the ministerie of women, so often also hath he confirmed their calling eyther by miracle, or some wonderfull issue, or with some other singular note and marke, whereby he hathe made their calling otherwise strange and monstrous, most certayne and vndoubted to all men.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There be other examples also besides these, & yet these be sufficient to proue any thing that I haue spoken touching this matter: he that wel cōsidereth what is written of Mary the Sister of Moyses. Num. 12. or of Olda. 2. Reg. 22. will not doubte whether they spake openly in the congregation or no: but you will not sticke vpon thys poynte. And in your seconde aunswere I agrée with you in thys,

that we must make no generall rule of these particular examples: and that women may not presume to preach in the congregation, except they be extraordinarily called therevnto, and haue certaine and sure signes of their calling. And surely I muse what you meane to spend so muche laboure about this matter, wherein there is no controuersie. I might say vnto you, as it hathe pleased you to saye vnto me, that you haue some old rusty notes which you would gladly vtter, and you know not how otherwise to make marchandise of them, than by picking suche a quarell to vtter them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 111. Sect. 1.
                     There is a greater difficultie than M. Doctor mentioneth in the words of S. Paule, where1. Cor. II. he sayth, a 
                           〈1 line〉
                         oman praying or prophesing ought to be vayled, and haue hir head couered, in whyche words it seemeth that the Apostle licenceth a woman to prophesie, so that she do it, with hir head couered, but to him that shall diligently consider the place, it shall appeare that the women of Corinth, did passe the boundes of modestie and of shamefastnesse, two ways, whereof one was that they came into the congregation contrary to the custome of those countries with their heads and faces vncouered: another was, that they also tooke vpon them to speake in the congregation, bothe which faults S. Paule condemned, but in their seueral and proper places. Although therfore speaking against the abuse of vncouering their head, he doth not condemne their boldnesse in teaching, yet he did not therefore approue it, the confutation whereof he reserued to a more commodious place.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To what ende bring you in this saying of S. Paule? I do not remember that I haue at any time vsed it, for any proofe: and yet you haue obiected more than you can well answer: Howbeit, bycause it perteineth not to improue any thing that I affirme, I will not examine your answer (and yet not yours but M. Caluins) nor trouble the Reader with friuolous and vayne digressions.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition Pag. 80. Sect. 2. 3.
                     If women do baptise, they baptise in priuate houses not in the congregation.
                     Surely you are able to marre a good matter for lacke of skilfull handling.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 111. Sect. 12.
                     But sayth he if women do baptise it is in priuate houses. I haue shewed before that they may not baptise at all, therefore not in priuate houses: besides that that I haue in the Reply vnto the section in the one and twenty page shewed, how it is not lawfull, neyther to preach the word, nor to minister the sacraments in priuate corners.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I answer to their argumente, and go not aboute to confirme the baptising by women. I saye thys argumente followeth not. Saincte Paule forbiddeth them to speake in the congregation. Ergo they may not baptise, for they baptise in priuate houses, not in publike places, and Saincte Paule dothe bid them to speake in priuate places. Whatsoeuer yon haue replyed vnto, I haue there answered where you haue replyed: and it is manifest that both the word may be preached, and the sacraments ministred in priuate places, vpon iust occasion.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 111. Sect. 2. 3. 4.
                     For the which matter of not ministring the sacraments in priuate houses, to the Authours of the Admonition, citing the cleuenth Chapter of the first epistle vnto the Corinthtans. M. Doctor answereth, that he reproueth the prophanation of the supper, by banquetting, and contempt of their brethren, and exhorteth to tarrie one for another.
                     But what is this to the purpose? we aske not M. Doctor the interpretation of this place, as we do not of all the rest which he interpreteth, where there is no occasion in the world to interpreteThe places be interpreted to shew how farre out of square they be alledged in the Admonitiō
                         them, being of themselues very cleare, and the interpretation which is brought neuer almost making any thing for the solution of that which is obiected: which I desire the Reader to marke throughout his whole booke. For what if S. Paule reproue the prophanation of the supper of the Lorde, doth it follow therefore that he doth not giue to vnderstand, that the sacrament shoulde be administred in a common assemblie? What if he exhort to tarrie one for another, therefore doth he not dehort from celebrating of the sacrament in a priuate house?
                     And surely me thinke you cannot be so ignoraunte as you make your selfe, that you shoulde not vnderstand their argumente, and therefore I thinke you do rather dissemble it, as you do in diuers other places: for al men may easily perceiue, that as Saint Paule opposeth the supper of the Lord, to the cōmon supper: his banquet to the common banquet: so he opposeth there manifestly, the Churche and congregation vnto the priuate house: and declareth that as the common supper or banquet, ought to be kept at their houses, so the Lords supper, & his banquet, ought to be celebrated in the congregation.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I thinke indéede that M. Doctors interpretations, trouble you shrewdly: for they detect much of your vanitie, and make manifest the lacke of discretion and learning in the authours of the Admonition. I say lacke of discretion and learning, for otherwise to euidently and so oft to abuse the scriptures were great dishonestie or rather impietie. If I haue missed in interpreting, or wrōgfully accused them, why do not you make it knowne as occasion is offered It stands you vpon, for it is much to your dishonestie, and a great discredite to your whole cause.
                        Touching this place of S. Paule. 1. Cor. 11. I say. as I said before: and I adde, that he only reproueth such abuses as were vsed among them in their publike assemblies, he speaketh not of celebrating the communion in priuate places.
                        S. Paule maketh no such opposition in that place as you speake of, neyther doth he speake any thing sounding that way, only he reproueth the abuse which was thē crept into the supper of the Lord, among the Corinthians, 
                              Quòd sacro & spirituali epulo profana symposia permiscerent, id
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  cum pauperum contumelia, In that they mingled prophaneCal. in. 1. Co. 11 banquetts with that holy and spirituall feast, and that with the contumely of the poore, as M▪ Caluine sayth. Wherefore it appeareth that either you are disposed to make good whatsoeuer they haue written be it neuer so absure, or else you wittingly dissemble the true sense and meaning of this place.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag. 80. Sect. 4.
                     You say in your margent, that Uictor Anno. 198. did first appoynt that women might baptise. By this you adde more credite to the cause, than you are aware of, for Uictor was a godly Byshop, and aUictor a good Byshop and martyr. martyr, and the Church at that time was in great puritie, not being long after the Apostles time. But truly I can find no such thing in all his decrees, onely this he saythe, that suche as be conuerted of the Gentiles, to the faythe of Chryste in tyme of necessitie, or at the poynte of deathe may be baptised, at any tyme in any place, whether it be in the sea, or in a riuer, or in a pond, or in a well, so that they make a confession of their fayth: he maketh no mention at all, of

any baptizing by women: and therfore you haue doone youre cause greate iuiurie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Nothing answered here vnto.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of ministring the Sacramentes in priuate places.
               
                  Chap. 4. the first Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Then they were ministred in publike assemblies, nowe in priuate houses.
                     
                        Answere to the Admonition. Pag. 92. Sect. 2.
                        The places of Scripture whereby you proue that SacramentsBaptisme m
                                 〈1 line〉
                               nistred in priuate places. were then ministred in publike assemblies, be taken out of the firste of S Marke, and. 1. Cor. II. which places of scripture proue, that Iohn did baptize openly, and that the Lordes Supper was ministred in the publike congregation, but neyther of them bothe conclude, that these Sacramentes may not also be ministred vpon any occasion in priuate houses: for what sequele is there in this reason, al the c
                              〈1 line〉
                            untrey of Iudea, and they of Ierusalem, went out vnto him and werArg non sequitur. baptized of him in the riuer of Iordan, confessing their synnes: Ergo baptisme may not be ministred vpon any occasion in priuate houses? you may as well conclude, that none ought to be baptized but in the riuer of Iordan, and none but such as be able to confesse their sinnes, and so you shoulde seclude children from Baptisme, as the Anabaptists doe.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 111. Sect. vlt.
                     To the admonition obiecting in the nintie and two page, that Iohn baptized openly, amongst the congregation, he answereth and sayth, that it may be as well concluded, that we should baptize only in the riuer of Iordane, and none but those that be of age, by whiche saying he giueth to vnderstand Nay I giue you to 
                              〈◊〉
                            the fondnesse of the argument. that to baptize in the Church, hath no greater necessitie, than ye baptizing in Iordan, nor it skilleth no more, whether baptisme be ministred in the publike assemblie, than it is necessatie or skilleth, whether we be baptized in the ryuer of Iordan, and that the baptisme of yong infants hath no better groundes than priuate baptisme hath. The latter wherof, (both beyng absurde) is tootoo 
                           〈◊〉
                         vnto the baptisme of yong infantes. For as of our Sauiour Christes preaching in publike places, and refusyng priuate places, we doe gather that the preachyng of the woorde, ought to be publike. Euen so of S. Iohns preaching and baptizing in open meetings, we conclude that both preaching and baptizing, ought to be in publike assemblies.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I referre it to the learned Reader to iudge whether this be a good argumente or no: Iohn baptised openly in the Riuer Iordan, Ergo baptism
                              〈1 line〉
                            may at no time vpon any occasion be ministred in a priuate house. And if any will iudge it to be good, thē will I demaunde of them, why this should not be as good: Iohn did baptise in Iordane: Ergo, none ought to be baptized but in the riuer Iordane. Or this. Iohn baptized suche as confessed their synnes, Ergo none muste be baptised, but suche as are able to make a confession of their sinnes. This is that vnskilful kinte of reasoning, that Zuinglius so ofte reproueth the Anabaptistes for, and he calleth it an argumente à facto ad ius. I doe not in any respecte speake agaynste baptizing in the Churche, but doe greately commende it, as a thyng moste conueniente: but I doe not so tie the Sacramente to the place, or publike congregation, that I make it of the necessitie of the Sacramente, so that it maye not vppon any occasion be ministred in a priuate house. I compare not baptizing in the Churche, and in the riuer Iordane together: neyther doe I saye that baptizing of yong infantes hath no better

groundes than priuate baptisme hath: but I disallowe this kinde of proofe, which the A
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           monition vseth: and I sée not why it is not of lyke force in all other the circumstances of that place, and those examples that I haue alleadged.
                        Christe preached both priuately and publikely: in the temple, and in priuate families: in great assemblies, and seuerally to his owne disciples, and at all tymes as occasion serued: and therefore you can not conclude by the example of Christe, that the preachyng of the Gospel, ought only to be publike in the open congregation, and at no tyme priuate vpon any occasion.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 112. Sect. 1.
                     And although to some one action there concurre diuers things, which partly are not to be folowed at all, partly are indifferent to be followed or not followed, yet neyther the vnlawfulnesse of the one to be followed, nor the indifferencie of the other can hinder, but there are some other things in the same action necessarie to be followed, whyche maye be consydered bothe of the place of the Actes, touchyng the election, where I haue It is sayd, but not proued. proued some thyngs there mentioned to be necessarie to be doone in elections, although other some be not conuenient nor fit for vs to followe. And I haue shewed it also by M. Caluine, whiche M. Doctor allcadgeth for himselfe, and by Cyprian A digression from the matter to the person. whose authoritie he woulde be loth to reiecte I am sure, least he shoulde lose the opinion of his studiousnesse of the olde writers, which he hunteth so diligently after in this booke, & wherof he maketh the authors of the Admonitiō so great contemners. And it is not hard to shew the same in twentie places more, as in the tenth of S. Math. and S. Luke, where as there are diuers things not to be followed of the ministers now, other things indifferent to be followed, so are there also other things that be as well commaunded to all the ministers that nowe are, as they were then eyther to the. 12. or. 70. disciples.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And of those circumstances wherof there is no comm̄aundement, howe proue you whiche be indifferent, whych be vnlawful or not conueniēt to be followed, which necessary? why is it not as necessarie by this example of Iohn, that they shoulde be baptized in Ioroane, or that they shoulde confesse their synnes, before they be baptized, as it is that they shoulde bée publikely baptised? If you take vppon you to interprete without authoritie and grounde ofscripture, it is méete that you should shew verie good and substanciall reason. I demaunde the lyke touching the places alleadged out of the Acts, where you reteyn what you list, refuse what you list, alter as you list, as though you were lorde ouer the Scripture, and had 
                              omnia iura tam diuina quàm humana in scrinio pectoris, all lawes as wel diuine as humane in the coffer of your breast, lyke to the Pope. But to these places of the Actes I haue answered in their due place. Your s
                              〈1 line〉
                           ffes make not your cause one whit the better.
                        Of twentie places you recite not one: And of diuers things some indifferent, some not to be followed, other some comaunded to all ministers spoken to the twelue or scuentie disciples in the. 10. of Matthew and Luke you name none: speaking without ground or reason is but pratling. I knowe that in one action there be diuers circumstances, of diuers conditions and natures, but if any of them be necessarie at all tymes to be obseiued, theNecessarie cir cumstāces are commaunded. same is conteyned in some commaundement in the Scriptures, and therfore well sayth Zuinglius that an argument à facto ad ius, is then strong, when as we are able to shewe, that that whiche is doone, is done according to some rule or commaundement. Now if you can shew me either rule or commaundement in scripture, that vppon no occasion we may preache or baptise in priuate families, I yelde vnto you.What examples doe proue without commaundement. But if you can not this doe, your examples proue what was then done, and what in the lyke cause may be doone nowe, but they make not any generall and perpetuall rule.
                        
                           Nowe touchyng these and suche lyke circumstances in my opinion, M, Zuinglius in his booke de baptismo, maketh a full resolution, which may satisfye any reasonableZuinglius. man. His wordes be these: There is here three errours about circumstances, that is, the elementes of the worlde. The first is of the tyme, for they thoughte that baptisme was not rightly administred, except it were in the fyrst day: for the tyme is of no greate weight, so

that we take diligent heed of this, that none rashly or negligently differre it, longer than is conuenient, for by this occasion, it may come to passe, that the baptisme of children might be taken away. An other errour is touching the circūstance of the person: for they thought that baptisme could not be administred of no other than of a priest: when as notwithstanding euery man may minister it, euen a woman, if necessitie require: the thirde errour is in the circumstance of the place, bicause it is not necessarie that the insant shoulde only be baptized in the Churche.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvero to the Admonition Pag. 92. Sect. 3. 4.
                     Baptisme was ministred in Cornelius house, Actes. 10. The place is not of the substance of the sacramentes.
                     To the. 1. Cor. II. it is answered before. Surely this church of EnglandeBaptisme an house. dothe not permit the sacramentes to be ministred in priuate places, except there be a congregation, and then not vsually, but only in certaine cases.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 112. Sect. 1.
                     An other reason he addeth there, that S. Peter baptized in Cornelius house. But M. Doctor maketh not the best choyse of his arguments. For S. Paules baptizing in the house of the Iayler, had bene more fit for him, for vnto his place it may be easyly answered, that Cornelius hauing so greate a familie, as it is lyke he had, and besydes that dyuers souldiours vnderneathe him, and further his frendes and his acquayntance whiche he had called, had a competente number, and as many as would make a congregation, and as could co
                           〈1 line〉
                        mmodiously be preached vnto in one place. But the answere to bothe these examples, and other such lyke, as that S. Paule baptized in the house of Stephana is easy. For there being persecutions at that tyme, so that it was not safe neyther for the minister nor for the people to be seene, it was meete that they shoulde doe it in houses, whiche otherwyse they would haue done in open places: and then those houses whiche receyue the congregation, are not as I haue shewed for the time to be counted priuate houses: and further in places where the gospell hath not bene receyued, nor no churche gathered, but one onely householde, embracing the Gospel, I say in suche a case, and especially in the tyme of persecution, where shoulde the Ministers preache, or minister the Sacramentes, more conueniently than in that house where those professours of the gospell be? nowe to drawe this into our churches, which may safely come into open places, and where the churche and congregation standeth of diuers houscholdes, is a token of greate want of iudgement, in shuffelyng those things together, whyche for the great diuersitie of their natures will not be myngled.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The example of Peters baptizing in Cornelius house, is sufficient to proue that then it was lawful to baptize in priuate families: the example of Paul baptizyng the iaylour and his familie, proueth the same: But it ministreth a more readie answere to a quareller, bicause Paul then being prisoner, had not such libertie to make cheise of his place, as Peter had. But they are both verie fit examples for my purpose, the bignesse of Cornelius familie or the smalnesse, is not materiall to this question, for we speake of the place, not of the persons. And whereas you say, that in Cornelius house, there was a competent number, and as many as would make a congregation, I answer that so it is with vs when baptisme is ministred in priuate families: for wheresoeuerMath. 18, two or three be gathered together in the name of Christ, there is a congregation.
                        To your seconde answere of the difference of tyme, bicause that was in tyme of persecution. &c. I say that as persecution was then a cause why baptisme 
                              〈1 line〉
                            as vsually mistred in priuate houses, so necessitie is now yt cause, why the same is ministred some tymes in priuate families. Neither doe I mayntein or allow the administring of the sacraments in priuate families, to be vsual or without vrgent cause, but only vpon extreme necessitie of sicknesse, peril of death & such like. In which cases as neuer any lerned man misliked ministring of the sacraments in such places, so are not you able to shew, either scripture, doctor or reson to yt cōtrary, & whatsoeuer you say of ye tune of persecutiō touching ye matter, yt same may be said of the time of necessitie also. But here I would haue the Reader to note, yt you are now driuen to confesse a difference

in the Churche betwixte the tyme of persecution, and the tyme of prosperitie, and that to be conuenient in the one, which is not conuenient for the other: whiche distinction and diuersitie of tymes, you would not before acknowledge to make any difference in the election of ministers, and gouernment of the Churche, and yet the case is all one.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They should fyrst proue that priuate Cōmunion. &c. are agreeable to the written word of god
                     
                        Answere to the Admonition. Pag. 152. Sect. 2.
                        If you meane by priuate Communion, the Communion ministred toOf the communion ministred in priuate places. one alone, there is no such allowed in the boke of Common prayers, but if you call it priuate, bicause it is ministred sometimes in priuate houses to sicke persons: Then haue we the example of Christe, who ministred the Supper in a priuate house, and inner parlour Mark. 14. Luke. 22. Math. 26. we haue also the example of the Apostles themselues, who did minister the supper in priuate houses, especially yf that place be vnderstanded of the supper, whiche is in the seconde of the Acts, and before alleadged of you to proue that common and vsuall bread ought to be in the Supper. Likewise of the primitiue church, as appeareth in the seconde apologie of Iustinus Martyr, Tertull. de Corona militis, and others.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 112. Sect. 2.
                     And in the page. 152. he bringeth other reasons to proue that the Sacramentes may be ministred in a priuate house, wherof the fyrste is, that our Sauiour Christe celebrated his Supper in a priuate house, and in an inner parlour, the reason whereof is easyly to be knowne, for the lawe of God ordeyned, that euery housholder in his house shoulde eate the passouer with his owne familie. If it were so great, as that they myght well eate vp a whole lambe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        That is a reason why Christe did eate the passouer in a priuate house: but it is no reason why he did celebrate his Supper there in lyke maner. Wherefore my reason holdeth as yet.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 112. Sect. 3.
                     Our sauiour Christ therfore with his housholde, obserueth this law, and for bicause he woulde declare, that the passouer had his ende, and that his holy Sacrament should come in place therof, he doth foorthwith celebrate his supper in the same place, which if he had not done, neither could he haue done it at al, the houre of his apprehension then approching, neyther should it so lyuely haue appeared, that eyther the passouer was abolished, or that the Supper came in place of it, beeyng celebrated both at an other tyme, and in an other place.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Our Sauiour Christes example of instituting and ministring his supper in a priuate familie, giuing afterwarde no commaundement to the contrarie, is a manifest proofe that the place is not of the substance of the sacramente, and that vpon occasion it may be ministred in a priuate house. You shewe a reason why Chryste at thatUnnecessarie proofe. tyme, and in that place did minister his Supper, but you shewe no reason why wée may not in lyke maner vpon necessarie occasion, celebrate the Communion in the lyke place.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 6. diusion.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 112. sect. vlt.
                     
                     For the celebrating of the Supper in houses in the Apostles tymes, and in Iustinus and Tertullians tymes, which were tymes of persecution, I haue spoken before, where also I declared, that suche houses for the tyme are not priuate but publike.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This answere is as fitte for me, as it is for you, for admit that the Sacraments may be administred in priuate families in the case of necessitie, and I aske no m
                              •••
                           . For if persecution be a necessarie cause, why is not sickenesse and perill of d
                              ••
                           th so in lyke maner? agayne, if a priuate house be no priuate but a publike place, when for the feare of persecution the Sacramentes be ministred in it, why is it not so lykewise, when they be there ministred for extremitie of sickenesse and feare of death the reason is all one, and the case of necessitie like: and therfore you haue not sayde any thing agaynst me, but with me.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 113. Sect. 1.
                     And these are his reasons, wher with he would proue, that the sacraments, and therfore also the sacrament of Baptisme may be ministred in a priuate house.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And these reasons haue you confirmed rather than confuted, but to the contrarieCircumcision in priuate houses. you haue shewed no reason at all, and therfore these stand in ful force, to the which I might adde, that circumcision was celebrated in priuate families, as M. Caluine truly gathereth, vpon the. 58. verse of the first chapter of Luke, which is a better argument to proue that the Sacramentes may be ministred in priuate places, than you haue shewed any to the contrarie.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶The Sacramentes ministred by other than Ministers.
               
                  Chap. 5. The fyrst Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Then by ministers Mat. 28. 19 1. Cor. 4. 1 only, nowe by Midwyues, and Deacons equally.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 93. Sect. 2.
                        That then the Sacraments wer ministred only by ministers, youWhether any may minister the sacramentes besides the minister. alledge the. 28. of Math. which place is answered before. Likewise. 1. Cor 4. Let a man so think of vs as of the ministers of Christ, & disposers of the mysteries of God. Here is not one word for your purpose, except you take mysteries for sacramentes, which if you doe, you are muchWhat myst
                                 •
                              
                              ries be. deceiued: for by the word mysteries here, he vnderstandeth the word of God, and gospell of Christ, as al learned writers do interprete it.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothing answered to the vnapt allegation of the. 1. Cor. 4.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 93. Sect. 2.
                     We reade in the eight of the Actes, that Philip a Deacon did baptize:Philip deacon baptised. Moyses wife 
                              〈◊〉
                            circumcise wee reade also, that Moyses wife did circumcise. But where doth this Churche of Englande allowe any woman to baptize, or deacon to celebrate the Lordes Supper? And if it did, the dignitie of the Sacramentes do not depende vpon the man, be he minister or not minister, be he good or euill. Lette euery one take heede, that

they doe not vsurpe that authoritie wherevnto they be not called.
                  
                  
                     T. C. P ag. 113. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                     He hath certayne other Vntruth, for I vse no reasons to that end. to proue that women may baptize, whereof the first is in the. 93. page, and that is that Sephora Moses wife, circumcised hir child, wherevnto I haue answered partly before, that particular examples especially contrary, to generall rules, are not to be followed, and will further answer if I first admonish the Reader, wherevpon this baptisme of midwiues, and in priuate houses rose, that when we know of how rotten a stocke it came, the frute it selfe may be more lothsome vnto vs. It first therefore rose vpō a false interpretation of the place of S. Iohn. V nlesse a man be borne againe of vvater and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen.
                        3. Iohn. Where certayne do interprete the word water, for the materiall and elementall water, wherewith men are washed, when as our sauioure Christ taketh water there, by a translation or borrowed speach, for the spirit of God, the effect whereof it shadoweth out. For euen as in another place by the fire and spirit, he meaneth nothing but the spirit of God, which purgeth and purifyeth as the3. Math. fire doth: so in this place, by the water and the spirit, he meaneth nothing else but the spirit of God, which clenseth the filth of sinne, and cooleth the broyling heate of an vnquiet conscience, as water washeth the thing which is foule, and quencheth the heate of the fire. Secondarily, this erroure came by a false and vnnecessary conclusion drawen of that place. For although the scripture should say, that none can be saued, but those which haue the spirit of God, and are baptised with materiall and elementall water, yet ought it to be vnderstanded of those whiche can conueniently and orderly be brought to baptisme, as the Scripture saying, that who so doth not beleeue the gospell, isIohn. 3. already condemned, meaneth this sentence of those which can heare the gospell, and haue discretion to vnderstand it, when they heare it, and cannot here shut vnder this condemnation, eyther those that be borne deafe, and so remayne, or little infants, or naturall fooles that haue no witte to conceiue what is preached.
                     And herevpon S. Augustine concludeth, that all not baptized are condemned, which is as absurdly106. Epist. ad Bonifac. in lib. de meritis & remissi. pec
                              〈1 line〉
                            cat. 1. ca. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           4 concluded of him, as that of our sauioure Christes words: excepte one eate the flesh of the sonne of man, he hath not life, he concludeth, that whatsoeuer he be whiche receyueth not the Sacrament of the Supper, is damned.
                     Upon this false conclusion of S. Augustine, hath risen this prophanation of the sacramente of baptisme, in being ministred in priuate houses, and by women or lay men, as also vpon his other absurd conclusion, sprong a horrible abuse of the Lords supper, whilest they did thrust the bread and wine, into yong infantes mouthes, for that menne were perswaded, that otherwise if their children should die, before they were baptised, or had receyued the supper, that they were damned for euer. And what better token can there be, that this was the cause of this blind baptisme, than that the Papistes, from whome this baptisme by women is translated, were of the same iudgement, and for that cause brought in their baptisme by women. Herevnto may be added another cause, which is, that as (when the Churche began not only to decline, but to fall away from the sinceritie of religion) it borrowed a number of other prophanations of the heathen: so also it borrowed this. For as the heathen had women priests, so it would haue also hir women priests, andLi. 3. ca. 9. that this was another occasion of bringing in the baptisme by women, it appeareth by your Clement, if he can speake any truth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is vntrue that I vse any reasons at all to proue, that women may baptise: onely I bring this and such like examples to improue this generall assertion of the Admonition, that then sacraments were ministrred by ministers only, and not by midwiues or deacons. For Deacōs then did baptise, and Moses wife long before that time did circumcise. I know that particular examples make no general rules: but you are not ignorant thatParticular examples may sometimes be followed. particular examples may in the like cases and circumstances be followed, when ther is no rule to the contrary.
                        The place in the. 3. of Iohn by you alleadged hath diuers interpretations, and the most part of the auncient writers, do take water in that place, for materiall and elementall water: as Augustine, Chrisostome, Ambrose, Cyrill, and sundry others, euen asChr. in. 3. Io. 3. lib. de spirit. sanct. lib. 2. de Abrabam patriar. Cyri. in. 3. Io. many of the auncient fathers, as I haue red vpon that text. But bycause I do mislike as much as you the opinion of those that thinke infants to be condemned, which are not baptized, therefore I will not contend with you, eyther in the interpretation of that place, or in anye other thing that you haue spoken touching this erroure: onely this I saye, that you must take héede, least in auoiding an errour, you fall into an heresie, and giue place to Anabaptistes, in not baptising infants. And I knowe not what you can saye agaynste priuate baptisme, in that case of necessitie, whyche they doe not in lyke manner alleadge agaynste the baptising of yong Infantes. Master Caluine in his Introduction

                           Aduersus Anabap. though he allowe not this errour, which condemneth chyldren not baptized, yet doth he approue and allowe the necessitie of baptizing infantes: His woordes be these. But some man will say, that the grace of God towardes vs, is not diminishedCaluine 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 
                                 uers 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . if infantes be not admitted to Baptisme, so that it be not denied, that God is as mercifull vnto them as vnto the children of the Iewes, but I will shewe that it is much diminished: for we muste esteeme the grace of God, especially by the declaration thereof which he maketh both by his worde and Sacramentes. Seyng therefore Baptisme is nowe ordeyned, that the promise of saluation may be sealed in our bodies, as it was in tymes past in the people of the Iewes: Christians should be depriued of a singular consolation, if theyr children shoulde be secluded from this confirmation, which all the faythfull haue at all tymes enioyed, that they should haue the visible signe, whereby the Lorde doth shewe and witnesse that he receyueth their children into the Communion and fellowship of the Churche.
                        
                        If the Authours of the Admonition say truly, that Victor who liued 
                              Anno. 198. did firste appoynt that women might Baptise, then came it neyther from the Papistes, nor yet from the Gentils. But whensoeuer this began, or from whom soeuer it was taken, the baptizing of infantes hath alwayes bene thought necessarie in the Church, by all such, as haue not deuided themselues by any Schisme or Heresie from the same.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 113. Sect. 4.
                     Now I returne to the example of Sephora, and say that the vnlawfulnesse of that facte doth appeare sufficiently, in that she did it, Mose
                              〈1 line〉
                            by reson of sicknesse was not able to do it himselfe. before hir husbande Moses, which was a Prophete of the Lorde, and This is contrary to that he hath, Pag. 17
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Sect. 1. to whome that office of circumcision did appertayne: so that vnlesse M. Doctor would haue midwiues baptise in the presence of the Bishop, or the minister, there is no cause why he shoulde alleage this place, besides that she did cut of the fore skinne of the Infante not of minde to obey the commaundement of God, or for the saluation of the chylde, but in a choler onely, to the ende that hir husbande might be eased, and haue release: which minde appeareth in hir, both by hir woordes, and by casting away in anger, the foreskinne which she had cut of. And if it be sayde, that the euent declared that the acte pleased God, bycause that Moses forthwith waxed better and was recouered of his sickenesse, I haue shewed before, how if we measure things by the euent, we shall oftentymes iustifie the wicked, and take the rightuousnesse of the rightuous from them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In the. 170. Page of your booke, you say that God toke the Priesthode from Moses,Pag. 170. Sect. 1. and gaue it to Aaron, and nowe you séeme to affirme the contrarie in saying, that Moses was a Prophete of the Lorde, to whome that office of circumcision did apperteyne, for hereby you do insinuate that Moses was a Prieste. Moreouer, Moses at this tyme was extréemely sicke, and therefore could not execute that office himselfe? And in the Geneua Bible, there is this note: that it was extraordinarie, for Moses was sore sicke, and God euen then required it. Sephora therefore did circumcise in a poynt of extremitieBaptisme true though not ordinarily ministred. and not wilfully or of purpose: & that circumcision was a true circumcision, though it were not done ordinarily: euen so Baptisme is true Baptisme, though it be sometimes ministred by such, as be not ordinarie ministers.
                        The euent doth oftentimes declare the thing, Exitus acta probat, though not necessarily: but this is certayne that these euentes are better reasons to iustifie the fact, than you can she we any out of that place to the contrarie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 113. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 114. Sect. 1.
                     An other reason he hath which is, that the dignitie of the sacramentes doth not depende vpon the man, whether he be minister or no minister, good or euill.
                     In deede vpon this poynt whether he be good or an euill minister, it dependeth not, but on this

poynt whether he be a minister or no, dependeth not onely the dignitie, but also A straunge as sertiō auouched without proofe. the beyng of the Sacrament, so that I take the baptisme of women, to be nomore the holy Sacrament of baptisme, than I take any other dayly or ordinarie washing of the childe, neyther let any man thinke that I haue at vnwares slipped into this asseueration, or that I haue forgotten, that soone after the tymes of the Apostles, it was the vse of certayne Churches, that Deacons shoulde baptize in the tyme of necessitie (as they call it) for as for the Baptisme of Deacons, I holde it to be lawfull, for bycause although (as it is with vs) they giue him the name of Deacon, Vrge hoc &c. yet in deede he is as he then was in the elder tymes a minister, and not a Deacon. And although he did then provide for the poore, and so had two functions (which was not meete) yet his office ought to be esteemed, of the principall parte of his function, which was preachyng and ministring of the Sacramentes, in certayne cases. And as for the baptising by laye men, considering that it is not onely agaynst the woorde of God, but also founded vpon a false grounde, and vpon an imagined necessitie (which is none in deede) it moueth me nothing at all, although it be very auncient, for so muche as the substance of the Sacrament dependeth chiefly of the institution and woorde of God, whiche is the forme, and as it were the lyfe of the sacrament, of which institution this is one, and of the chiefe partes, that it should be celebrated by a minister.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If this be true and sounde doctrine, then is there many that go vnder the nameThe inconuenience of the Repliers doctrine. of Christians, whiche were neuer baptized: for besides diuerse that haue bene baptized by women, some there are, and not a fewe, that haue bene baptized by suche as haue taken vpon them the ministerie, not beyng therevnto eyther ordinarily, or extraordinarily called: and it may so be that T. C. hath hereby proued himselfe to be no Christian.
                        
                           And surely if you peruse all the writinges of the auncient Fathers, and of theThe assertion hath no sufficiēt patrones. late wryters in lyke manner. I beléeue that you shall not finde the lyke proposition affirmed, for although diuers, bothe olde and newe, do not allowe that Lay men shoulde be suffred to baptise, yet is there none of them (suche onely excepted, as erre in rebaptisation) that thinke the beyng of the sacrament so to depende vpon the minister, thatBaptisme by lay men. Tertull. Ambrose. Hierome. Augustine. Zuinglius.
                               it is no sacrament if it be not celebrated by a minister. Tertull. in his booke De Baptismo sayth, That laye men may Baptise. Ambrose in the. 4. ad Ephes. sayeth, that in the beginning it was lawfull for all menne to Baptise. Ierome, ad Luciferianos affirmeth, that it is lawfull for Laye men to Baptise if necessitie do requyre. And herevnto also dothe S. Augustine agrée, in his 2. Booke, agaynst the Epistle of Parmenian, the. 13. Chapter. M. Zuinglius in the place before by me alleaged: VVriteth that the seconde errour in the circumstances of Baptisme is aboute the person, bycause they thinke that Baptisme can not be gyuen of any but of a Prieste onely, whereas if necessitie do requyre any man may do it. And a little after he sayeth, That this and such lyke circumstances are not De ipsa Baptismi essentia, Not of the beyng of the Sacrament. Whiche is directly contrary to your assertion. M. Caluine also in his Institutions Cap. 17. Sect. 16. doth sufficientlyCaluine. confute this errour in these woordes: Nowe if it be true that we haue set downe, the Sacrament is not to be esteemed of his hande, by whome it is ministred, but as it were of the hande of God, from whome it certaynely commeth: hereof we may gather, that nothing is added or taken from the dignitie of it, by him by whome it is ministred. And therefore among men if an Epistle be sent, so that the hande and seale be knowne, it skilleth not who or what manner of person caryeth it: euen so it is sufficient for vs, to knowe the hande and seale of the Lorde in his Sacramentes, by whomesoeuer they be deliuered. Hereby is the errour of the Donatistes confuted, who measured the vertue and woorthynesse of the Sacrament by the worthynesse of the minister. Such be now a dayes our Anabaptistes, which denie vs to be rightly baptized, bycause we were baptized by wicked and idolatrous persons in the Popos Churche. And therefore they furiously vrge rebaptisation: agaynst whose folly we shall sufficiently be defended, if we thinke that we were baptised not in the name of any man, but in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, and therefore baptisme not to be of man but of God, by vvhome soeuer it be ministred. Haec Caluinus.
                        
                        Undoubtedly if this your assertion were true there had néede be some generall

rebaptisation throughout all Christendome, as well of men as of children, for certayne it is, that that Sacrament hath bene ministred to many by such, as be in no degree of the ministerie.
                        Your opinion of a Deacon, that he should nothing differ from a minister, is very straunge, and vnheard of in any writer olde or newe. Shew any authour, any example, any Scripture, that proueth or alloweth it: Diaconus and Presbyter or Sacerdos be distinct in all Authours. But I know wherefore this is affirmed of you, euen to stoppe a gappe, but it will not serue. I will say no more: the opinion is very absurde and vnlearned, contrarie to the Scriptures, and all learned Authours. Neyther do you shew any reason of your Paradoxe, which you ought to do, seing it is 
                              Contra opinionem omnium, contrarie to all mens opinions, not one excepted.
                        Agaynst baptising by laye men in tyme of necessitie you haue no Scripture. ButBaptisme by Lay men not condemned us Scripture. for the allowing of it, you haue the authoritie of learned men, euen such as were farre from the opinion of Augustine in condemning infantes not baptized, as namely Zuinglius, who also in the place before recited, sufficiently answered, whatsoeuer is here by you barely without any kinde of proofe set downe.
                        You haue also examples thereof in Ecclesiasticall histories, Socrates Lib. 1. cap.Examples of baptisme by lay men. 14. and Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 17. wryte: That Alexander Bishop of Alexandria togither with the rest of the Clergie determined that baptisme which was ministred by Athanasius beyngSocrates. but a childe, to certayne other children, to be true baptisme, and not to be itterated, bicauseSozomen. after examination he was founde to haue vsed the woordes, and right forme of baptisme.
                           
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              hanasius beyng a childe baptised. Whereby it is playne, that the opinion of the Church at that tyme was, the minister not to be of the substance or being of baptisme. There is recited a storie in the Centuries,Cent. 2. cap. 6. of a Iewe baptized in the case of necessitie by Laye men, and with sande, bicause there was no water. Afterwarde the Bishop of Alexandria beyng demaunded of the matter, 
                              De sententia Ecclesiae respondit, baptizatum esse Iudaeum si modò aqua denuò perfunderetur, He answered by the iudgement of the Churche, that the Iewe was baptized, if so be he were agayne sprinkled with water. This argueth that the Church then made no doubt in the respect of the persons that ministred this Baptisme, but onely bycause there lacked water. This storie is cited out of Nicephorus lib. 3. cap. 37. and alleaged by the Authours of the Centuries, to proue the simplicitie of the Churche at that tyme, aboute Baptisme, neyther do they in any respect shewe any misliking of it. And surely I know not wherein this opinion of yours doth differ from the Donatistes, or Anabaptistes, except it be in this, that you speake of Laye men, and they of Ministers.
                        And whereas you say, that the minister is one of the chiefe partes, and as it were of theThe Replier in so weightie a matter vseth no proofes. lyfe of the Sacrament: In so weightie a cause, and greate a matter, it had bene well if you had vsed some authoritie of Scripture or testimonie of learned Authour: for so farre as I can reade, the opinion of all learned men is, that the essentiall forme, and as it were the lyfe of Baptisme, is to Baptise in the name of the Father, of the Sonne,The essential poynt of baptisme. and of the holy Ghoste, which forme beyng obserued, the Sacrament remayneth in full force and strength of whom soeuer it be ministred, or howsoeuer by Ceremonies or other additiōs it is corrupted. This I am sure is the answere of Zuinglius, both in his booke De Baptismo, and in his Elench. contra Anabap. to the Anabaptists, who would haue them all to be rebaptised that haue bene baptised in the Popes Churche. And the same is the opinion of M. Caluine in the place before recited, and of all other learned men that I haue redde.
                        And certaynely if the boyng of the Sacrament depended vpon man in any respect,The force of baptisme 
                                 〈◊〉
                               not vpon 
                                 〈◊〉
                               but vpon God. 1. Cor. 3. Confusion & disorder is not maynteyned. we were but in a miserable case, for we should be alwayes in doubte whether wée were rightly baptized or no: but it is most true, that the force & strength of the Sacrament, is not in the man be he minister or not minister, be he good or euill, but in God himself, in his spirite, in his frée & effectuall operation. And therefore sayeth S. Paule, VVhat is Paule, what is Apollo, &c. This I speake not to bring cōfusiō into the Church (for as I sayde before, let men take héede that they vsurpe not an office, wherevnto they be not called, for God will call them to an account for so doyng) but to teache

a truth, to take a yoke of doubtfulnesse from mens consciences, and to resist an error, not much differing from Donatisme and Anabaptisme.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag 114. Sect. 1.
                     For although part of the institution, in that the name of the holy Trinitie is called vpon, be obserued: yet if the whole institution be not, it is no more a Sacrament, than the Papists communion was, which celebrating it in one kinde, toke a parte of the institution, and lefte the other.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you can shew as manifest Scripture that the minister is of the substance of Baptisme, as I can do that the cuppe is one of the essentiall partes of the supper, then it is something that you say: but if there be no likelyhode betwixt the one and the other, than can you not want iuste reprehension, for so confidently auouching that which you cannot proue.
                        The distribution of the cuppe in the Lordes supper, is commaunded in manifest and expresse woordes as a parte of the Supper, but you cannot shew me the like commaundement that only a minister shall celebrate Baptisme, or els that it is no Baptisme. We know that circumcision, the figure of Baptisme, was ministred sometimes by such as were no Priests: and yet right and true circumcision.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 114. Sect. 1.
                     And for as much as S. Paule sayth that a man cannot preach which is not sent, This is added to the text. no notRom. 10. although he speake the wordes of the scripture and interprete them, so I cannot see how a man can baptise, vnlesse that he be sent to that end, although he poure water and rehearse the wordes which are to be rehearsed in the ministrie of baptisme.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        S. 
                              〈◊〉
                            in that 10. chapt. to the Rom. speaketh of the extraordinarie calling to the office of preaching, so sayeth M. Martyr in his Commentaries, vpon this place.Martyr. 
                           And although Paule intreateth in this place of calling, and sending, and this is as I sayde ordinarie and extraordinarie: there is no doubt but that he nowe speaketh of the extraordinarie calling, &c. And M. Caluine lykewise vpon the same place sayeth, that PauleCaluine. doth not there speake, 
                              De legitima cuius que vocatione, of the lawfull calling of euery man. Wherefore if you will grounde any such reason vpon this place, it muste be thus: S. Paule sayth that a man cannot preach which is not sent, and he meaneth of an extraordinarie sending, therefore no man may preach vnlesse he be extraordinarily called therevnto: and so consequently not minister baptisme, except he be called in like manner. If you will reason thus, then do you cōfirme the baptizing by laye men, who do it not ordinarily but extraordinarily vpon necessitie.
                        S. Paule doth not say, that a man cannot preach which is not sente, no not although heThe Replier addeth to the text, and for what purpose. speaketh the wordes of the scripture, and interprete them. These wordes be so added by you, that the simple and ignorant, may thinke they be the woordes of S. Paule. He that speaketh the wordes of the scripture, and doth interprete them, preacheth, though he be not there vnto called, and it is the true woorde of God he preacheth, if he truly interprete, but he intrudeth himselfe into a vocation where vnto he is not called, and thereforeUsurpers both in preaching and ministring the Sacraments offend God. offendeth God: but that doth derogate nothing from the woorde preached. The same reason is of the administration of the Sacramentes, for as the woorde of God, is the woorde of God, by whom so euer it be preached minister or other: so is the Sacrament of Baptisme, true baptisme by whom soeuer it be celebrated: the vsurper of the office hath to answere for his intrusion, but the Sacrament is not thereby defiled.
                        
                           It is no harde matter to shew that in the primitiue Church, laye men were suff
                              〈1 line〉
                           dLay men su
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              fred to preach. 
                                 Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 20.
                            to preach: you know that Euseb. sayeth that Origene being a lay man was sent into Arabia to preach the Gospell which he also did, both before & after in the Church of Alexandria, and likewise in Cesarea. And although Demetrius then Bishop of Alexandria, founde faulte that Origene beyng a laye man shoulde preache in the presence of Bishops at Cesarea. Yet is it manifest that he allowed laye men to preach, if Bishops were not present. And in the same chapt. by diuers examples it is shewed (as of Euelpis at Laranda, of Paulinus at Iconium, of Theodorus at Synada) that the custome of the Churches both then and before that time was, that laye men might preach euen in the presence of Bishops, so that you haue erred both in applying the place of S. Paule, and in saying that laye men may not preache the woorde vpon occasion, and so consequently Baptise.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 114. Sect. 1.
                     I know there be diuers The more to blame you are without proo
                              〈1 line〉
                            to enter into such difficulties. difficulties in this question, and therefore I was soth to enter into it, but that the Answerer setteth downe so considently, that it maketh no matter for the truthe of baptisme whether he be minister or no minister, and so whether one haue a calling or no calling, wherein notwithstanding he doth not onely by his often handling of one thing confounde his reader, but himselfe also, and forgetteth that he is in an other question, than which is propounded. For although it should be graūced him, that the sacrament doth not depende vpon that, yet hath he not that This is no
                              〈1 line〉
                            intended. which he would haue, that women may baptise for it is one thing to say the baptisme which is ministred by women is good and effectuall, and an other thing to say, that it is lawfull for women to minister baptisme. For there is no man doubteth but that the baptisme which is ministred by an hereticall minister is effectuall, and yet I thinke that M. Doctor will not say, that therefore an hereticall minister may baptise, and that it is lawfull for Herctikes to baptise in the Churche. And therfore men must not only take hede (as M. Doctor sayth) that they vsurpe not, that which they are not called vnto, but they must also take heede, that they receyue not functions and charges vpon them, whereof they are not capable, although they be therevnto called.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There are mo difficulties in this question than you can wel determine: and therfore it had bene beste, eyther not to haue spoken of it at all, or els to haue handled it more substantially: but the scarcitie of matter and reasons, argueth the weakenesse and fayntnesse of the cause. I passe ouer your woordes: I go not aboute to proue that women may baptise, onely I withstande this errour, that the Substance and beyng of the Sacramentes dependeth vpon the man in any respect. I say that baptisme ministredBaptisme true baptisme though vulawfully ministred. by women is true Baptisme, though it be not lawfull for women to baptise, as the baptisme also ministred by heretiks is true baptisme, though they be vsurpers of that office. And the same, S. Augustine affirmeth of baptisme by laye men in the placeAugust. lib. 2. contr. Epist. Parmea. ca. 13. before alleaged: Although (sayeth he) it be vsurped without necessitie, and is giuen of any man to any man, that which is giuen cannot be sayde not to be giuen, although it may be rightly sayde not to be rightly giuen. And I further say, that if the baptisime, ministred by hereticall ministers, which be no members of the Churche, be notwithstanding good and effectuall, I sée no cause why it should not be so rather, if it be ministred by laye men, which are members and partes of the Churche.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 153. Sect. 2.
                     
                        M. Bucer in his censure vpon the Communion booke, speaking ofBucer. the order appointed in the same for priuate Baptisme, writeth thus. In this constitution all things are godly appoynted, I vvoulde to God theyDifferring of baptisme not expedient. vvere so obserued, and especially this that the baptisme of infants be not differred,

for therby is a dore opened vnto the Deuill, to bring in a contempt of baptisme, and so of our whole redemption, and cōmunion of Christ which thorough the sect of Anabaptistes, hath to much preuayled vvith many.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 114. Sect. 2.
                     In the 153. page, M. Bucers censure vpon the cōmunion booke is cited, for the allowaunce of that it hath touching priuate baptisme, and consequently of the baptisme by women. It may be, that as M. Bucer although otherwise very learned hath This is but grosse courtesie. other grosse absurdities, so he may haue that. But it had bene for the credite of your cause, if you had shewed that out of those writings, which are published & knowne to be his, & not out of those, wherof men may doubt, whether euer he wrote any such or no: And if he wrote, whether they be corrupted by those into whose hands they came. And if you would take any aduauntage of M. Bucers testimonie, considering that a witnesse is a publike person, you should haue brought him out of your studie into the stationers shop, where he mought haue bene common to others, as well as to you, whereby his stile and manner of writing as it were by his gestures, and countenaunces, and by those things that go before, and come after, as it were by his head, and by his fecte, we might the better know whether it were the true Bucer or no.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is very grosse courtesie that you shewe to so worthie and learned a man: modestieThe reuerēce which T. C. giueth to learned men. and charitie would not haue bene so rashe as to answere that whiche he well speaketh, in opprobriously obiecting vnto him his other errours, which you call grosse absurdities. But this is the reuerence that you giue to all learning, and learned men, that are contrary to your opinions. I haue sometimes heard a Papiste burst out into this rage, against M. Bucer beyng pressed with his authoritie: But you are the first professour of the Gospell, that euer I hearde so churlishly to vse so reuerent, so learned, so paynefull, so sounde a father, being also an earnest and zelous professour. It causeth me the lesse to regarde what you speake of me, when I heare such bitternesse agaynst all other, be they neuer so zealous and excellent. Well Bucers reasons (which touch the quicke) would haue bene reasonablie answered without spyte: and you should rather haue considered them, than the authour. There is nothing in these woordes by him affirmed, which is not in as playne termes auouched by Zuinglius, in the woordes before recited. The booke of M. Bucers is forth cōming to be shewed, and he affirmeth nothing therein contrary to his bookes published: he had more speciall occasion here offred to speake both of this and other matters now in controuersie, and therefore the more he is to be credited.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 114. Sect. 2.
                     For although I wil not say but that this may be Bucers doing, yet it seemeth very straunge, that Bucer should not onely contrarie to the learned writers nowe, but also contrary to all learned antiquitie, and contrarie to the practise of the Churche, whilest there was any tollerable estate, allowe of womens baptizing. De virgin. velan. Tertullian sayeth it is not permitted to a woman to speake in the Churche, nor to teache or to baptize, nor to do any worke of a man, much lesse of a minister. Lib. de Baptis. And in an other place, although he do permit it to be done by Laye men, in the time of necessitie (as it is termed) yet he giueth not that licence to the woman. Epiph. li. 1. contra haeres. Epiphanius vpbraydeth Marcion that he suffred women to baptise. And Lib. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Vbi de Phry gib. & Priscil. in an other booke he derideth them that they made women Bishops. And Lib. 3. in an other booke he sayeth, it was not graunted vnto the holy mother of Christe to baptise hir Sonne.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        M. Bucer speaketh not one woorde in this place of baptising by women: but of priuate Baptisme, which neyther Tertullian, nor Epiphanius in these places by you alleaged do disallow.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 115. Lin. 6.1. Li. de merit. & remis. peccat. 24. cap. Contra E
                              〈1 line〉
                            pist. Parmen. lib. 2. 13. cap.
                     
                     Augustine although he were of that minde, that children could not be saued without baptisme,An vntruth. yet in the time of necessitie (as it is called) he doth not allow eyther of baptisme in priuate houses, or by women, but when there was daunger the women hasted to carie the children vnto the Church, and although he do seeme to allowe of the baptisme of a Lay man, in the time of necessitie, yet there also he mentioneth not womens baptisme. And further he doubteth whether the childe shoulde be baptised againe, which was baptised by a laye man.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Where doth S. Augustine disallow baptising by women, or in priuate houses? he vttereth no suche thing in any of the places quoted in the margente. Will you still counterfeit? is there no ende with you of falsifying? In his seconde booke 
                              contra Epistolam Parmeniani, Cap. 13. he dothe not onely say that a lay man may baptise in the tyme of necessitie, but he also addeth, that if it be ministred without necessitie, yet notwithstanding that it is baptisme: as appeareth in these words (as I haue before sayde) But althoughe it be vsurped (he meaneth baptisme by lay men) without necessitie,Aug. lib. 2. contra Epist. Parm. cap. 13. and is giuen of any man to any man, that whiche is giuen can not be sayde not to be giuen, althoughe it maye be rightly sayde, that it is not lawfully giuen. And he dothe make the same manyfest by two prety similitudes following, whiche I omitte for to auoyde tediousnesse. The learned Reader maye in that place of Augustine soone perceyue, what an errour this is to saye, that the Minister is of the substance and beeing of the Sacrament: neyther dothe he in eyther of the places, eyther disallowe baptisme by women, or in priuate houses, as you affirme, but ad Fortunatum he saythe thus: InAug. ad Fortunatum. necessitie when the Bishops or Priests, or any other minister can not be founde, and the daunger of him that requireth dothe constrayne, least he shoulde departe this lyfe without this sacrament, we haue heard, that euen lay men haue giuen the sacrament that they haue receyued.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 115. Lin. 12.
                     And in the fourth Councell of Carthage it is simply decreed that a woman oughte not toTom. 1. cō. ca. 100. baptise.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This Canon in Gratian de conse. Disti. 4. is thus reported: 
                              Mulier quamuis docta & sancta, viros in comuentu docere, vel aliquos baptizare non praesumat, nisi necessitate cogent
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 
                               Let not a woman, although learned and godly, presume to teache men in an assembly, or to baptise any, excepte necessitie constrayne. So that the Canon inhibiteth women to preache or to baptise in the open Churche and publike assemblies. And this is a sufficient answere to this place, neyther dother it impugne any thing affirmed in the Answere.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 115. Lin. 13.
                     The authors of the Admonition obiect that necessitie of saluation is tyed to the Sacraments by this meanes, and that men are confirmed in that olde errour that no man can be saued without baptisme, whiche in deede is true. For muste it not be thought to be done of necessitie, and vpon great extremitie, for the doing whereof the orders that God hathe let, that it shoulde be done in the congregation, and by the Minister of the Gospell, are broken? Yes verily. And I wyll further say, that although that the Infants which dye without baptisme should be assuredly damned (whiche is moste false) yet oughte not the orders whiche God hathe set in hys Churche, to be broken after this sorte. For as the saluation of men oughte to be beare vnto vs: so the glory of God, whiche consisteth in that his orders be kepte, ought to be muche more deare, that if at any time the controuersie coulde be betweene his glory and our saluation, our saluation ought to fall that his glory may stande.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Yet the auoyding of that errour is no sufficient cause to debarre Infantes fromThere is necessitie of bap tisme, though the necessitie of saluation be not tyed to the sacramentes. baptisme: excepte you will therein ioyne with the Anabaptistes. The outwarde sacramentall signes, are seales of Gods promises, and whosoeuer refuseth the same, shall neuer enioy the promises, and althoughe the necessitie of saluation is not so tyed to the Sacraments, that whosoeuer hathe the externall signes, shall therefore be saued, yet is it so tyed vnto them, that none can be saued, that willingly and wittingly

is voyde of them, & not partakers of them. Circumcistō which is a figure of baptisme,Genes. 17. had that necessitie ioyned vnto it, that whosoeuer lacked it, was not counted nor reckenedMark. 16. amongst the people of God. It is not nothing that Chryst sayth: Qui crediderit & baptizatus fuerit &c. But your maner of doctrine is suche, that it maketh menThe doctrine tendeth to the de
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ogation of the sacramēts. thinke that the externall signes of the sacraments are but bare ceremonies, and in no sense necessarie to saluation, whiche muste in time bring in a contempte of the sacraments, and especially of baptisme for Infants.
                        
                           M. Zuinglius, Bucer, and Caluine as you heard before, although they doe not thinke children without baptisme to be damned, yet doe they iudge the baptisme of children to be necessarie, and that for iust causes, as is before declared. And what Christian would willingly suffer his childe to dye without the sacrament of regeneration, the lacke whereof (though it be not a necessarie) yet may it séeme to be a probable token and signe of reprobation.
                        What eyther order of God, or commaundement is broken in priuate baptisme? or where hath God appoynted that baptisme muste be ministred in the open congregation onely, and not vpon any cause in priuate families? Will you yet deale on this sorte without ground or proofe? In priuate baptisme vsed vpon necessitie there is neyther order nor commaundement of God broken. If there be, shewe it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     The Admonition.
                     And yet this is not to tye necessitie of saluation to the sacraments, nor to nousell men vp in that opinion. This is agreable with the scriptures, and therefore when they bring the baptised chylde they are receyued with this speciall commendation: I certifie you that you haue done well and according to due order. &c.
                     But nowe we speake in good earnest, when they answere this, let them tell vs howe this geare agreeth wyth the scriptures, and whether it be not repugnant or agaynst the worde of God?
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 187. Sect. 1.
                        And yet (you say) thys is not to tye necessitie of saluation to the sacramentes, nor to nousell men vp in that opinion. &c. No surely, no more than it is to teach, that children ought to be baptized, and not to tarry vntill suche time as they be able to answere for themselues.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 115. Sect. 1.
                     Now in the. 187. page, M. Doctor answereth heerevnto, that this implyeth no more, that the saluation is tyed to the sacraments, than when it is taught that Infants must be baptised, and not tarry vntyll they come to the age of discretion. The which how truely it is spoken, when as the one hath grounde of the scripture, the other hath none, the one approued by the continuall, and almost the generall practise of the Church, the other vsed onely in the corrupt and rotten estate thereof, let all men iudge.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This verifieth my saying, for if baptisme of children be grounded vpon the scriptures, as it is, then is the necessitie of baptising them, the more: so that if not for feare of damnation, yet bicause of Gods commaundement and institution, children are of necessitie to be baptized: and this is a receyued opinion in the Church, euen from the beginning, & therfore lay men in the time of necessitie, from the beginning haue béene permitted to baptise, as may appeare by the authors before alleaged.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 5. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 115. Sect. 1.
                     Therefore for so muche as the ministerie of the worde and Sacramentes goe togither, and that the ministerie of the worde may not be committed vnto women, and for that thys euill custome

hathe risen first of a false vnderstanding of the Scripture, and then of a false conclusion of that vntrue vnderstanding, which is, that they can not be saued whiche are not baptized, and for that the authors them selues of that errour dyd neuer seeke no remedie of the mischiefe in womens or priuate baptisme: And last of all, for that if there were any remedie, agaynst the mischiefe in suche kinde of baptisme, yet it ought not to be vsed, beeing agaynst the institution of God, and his glory. I conclude that the priuate baptisme, and by women is vtterly vnlawfull.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be all petitions of principles, or the moste of them: for I haue shewed before, that the administration of baptisme hath beene and may be committed to some, euen in the publike congregation, to whom the preaching of the word is not cōmitted: and nowe in lyke maner I haue proued, that laye men in the time of necessitie maye baptise: whiche bothe are denyed by you without any kinde of proofe. I haue also showed, howe that the necessitie of baptising Infants is vehemently defended of those, that be not of S. Augustines iudgement touching their damnation, if they he not baptized, and I haue set downe their wordes, whiche conteyne their reasons. Last of all, I haue put you to proue that Priuate baptisme in time of necessitie is agaynst any comma
                              〈1 line〉
                           dement or institution of Christs: for I denie it. So that notwithstanding I suspende my iudgement for baptizing by women: yet I am oute o
                              〈1 line〉
                            doubt for priuate baptisme.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Of priuate Communion, wherwith the Admonition chargeth the booke of Common prayer.
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Nowe they are bounde to the booke of Common prayer, in which a great number of thinges contrary to the worde of God are conteyeed. &c. as 1. Cor. 11. 18. priuate Communion. &c.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 81. Sect. 1. 2.
                        I knowe not what you meane by priuate Communion: if you
                              
                                 〈◊◊◊〉
                              . meane the receyuing of one alone, there is none suche allowed in the booke: if you meane bicause it is ministred sometime vpon occasion in priuate houses, I see not howe you can call it priuate in respect of the place, if the number of Communicants be sufficient. You must explicate your selfe before I can tell what you meane.
                        There is nothing in the communion booke touching the Communion, contrarie to the place of S. Paule by you quoted, to my1. Cor. 11. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . knowledge.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 105. Sect. 1.
                     There followeth the priuate Communion, whiche is founde faulte with, bothe for the place wherein it is ministred, and for the small number of Communicants, whiche are admitted by the booke of seruice. Touching the place before is spoken sufficiently, it resteth to consider of the number. But before I come to that, I wil speake something of the causes and beginning of receyuing in houses, and of the ministring of the Communion vnto sicke folkes. It is not to be denyed, but that this abuse is very ancient, and was in Iustine Martyrs time, in Tertullians and Cyprians tyme, euen as also there were other abuses crepte into the Supper of the Lorde, and that very grosse, as the mingling of water wyth wyne, and therein also a necessitie and great mysterie placed, as it may appeare bothe by Iustine Martyr, and Cyprian, whyche I therfore by the waye doe admonishe the Reader of, that the antiquitie of this abuse of priuate Communion, be not preiudiciall to the truthe, no more than the mingling of water with that opinion of necessitie that those fathers had of it, is or ought to be preiudiciall to that that we vse in ministring the cuppe wyth pure wyne, according to the institution.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is your accustomed maner (but it is besides all good maners) to wype awayThe vsuall answering of T. C. auncient and learned authoritie, by obiecting vnto the authors, some imperfection in their writings, or errours in their times. Is this a good reason, water was of necessitie required in Cypryans time in the administration of the supper, and that was an errour, therefore the communion at that tyme, and long before, ministred vnto the sicke, and carried to priuate persons béeing absent, was vnlawfull? Suche be your arguments, and this is your kinde of answering: which maye be plausible to the ignorant people, but nothing pleasaunt to suche as be learned. This one thingMore sinceritie in the mi nistratiō now than in the auncient Churche. I will desire the Reader to consider (that séeing our sacraments nowe be more sincerely ministred than they were in Iustines, Tertullians, and Cyprians tyme, béeing so neare the Apostles) what cause there should be for you, so bitterly to inu
                              〈1 line〉
                           ygh agaynst this Church in that respect.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 115. tovvardes the ende.
                     I say therfore that this abuse was auncient, and rose vpon these causes. First of all in the primitiue Churche, the discipline of the Churche was so seuere, and so extreme, that if any whiche professed the truthe, and were of the body of the Churche, dyd through infyrmitie denic the truthe, and ioyned hymselfe vnto the Idolatrous seruice, althoughe he repenting came agayne vnto the Church, yet was he not receyued to the cōmunion of the Lords supper any more. And yet lying in extremitie of sicknesse, and ready to depart this lyfe, if they dyd require the Communion in token that the Church had forgiuen the fault, and was reconciled altogither vnto that person that had so fallen, they graunted that he might be partaker of it, as may appeare by theEuscb. li. 6. cap. 4
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         story of Serapton.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        All this is true, for sometime they had thrée, sixe, or ten yeres space of repentance before they were admitted to the sacrament, and after that tyme was expired, they came as other dyd to the Communion, if they liued to it: if not, they receyued it on their death bedde. This is for my purpose, for it manifestly declareth, that then the Communion was ministred vnto the sicke, whiche is our question, it can by no meanes be drawne agaynst me.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 116. Lin. 2.
                     An other cause was that whyche was before alleaged, which is, the false opinion, whych they had conceyued, that all those were condemned, that receyued not the supper of the Lorde, and therfore when as those that were as they called them Cathecumeni, whych is yong Nouices in religion, neuer admitted to the supper, or yong chyldren fell sicke daungerously, they ministred the supper of the Lord vnto them, least they should want their voyage victuall (as they termed it) which abuse notwithstanding was neyther so auncient as the other, nor so generall.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This was the cause that moued some so to doe: howbeit, neyther was it the onely cause, neyther the generall and vsuall cause, but the generall and vsuall cause was the institution of Christe, and the fruites and effectes of that Supper, the whiche whosoeuer dothe consider accordingly, will neyther cease from requiring it, in tyme of extremitie, neyther withholde it from suche as faythfully and earnestly desire the same, and it is an easie matter to shewe, that this manner of communicating in priuate families, is of very great antiquitie, euen in Iustinus Martyrs time, as appeareth in his seconde Apologie, and is by you confessed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 6. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 116. Lin. 8.
                     And there wanted not good men, whiche declared their misliking, and dyd decree agaynst both the abuses, and agaynst all manner communicating in priuate houses. As in the Councell of Tom. 1. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           n. 58. Laodicea, it was ordeyned that neyther Byshop nor Elder, shoulde make any oblation, that was, minister any Communion in houses.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This Councell dothe speake agaynst the vsuall manner of celebrating the Communion in priuate houses, without any respect of necessitie: whiche abuse was growen in some places in the tyme of Hierome and Damasus, about whose time thysThe Cōmuniō ministred to the sicke. Councell was: but there is neyther Councell, nor learned Father, that euer opened their mouthes agaynst ministring the Communion to the sicke in pryuate families, or vpon any other vrgente or necessarie occasion. The In the Greeke it is the. 13. Canon. 12. Canon of the Councell of Nice, dothe determine directly, that the Communion oughte to be ministred to the sicke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 116. Lin. 12.
                     Besides therefore that I haue before shewed the vnlawfulnesse generally of ministring the Sacrament in priuate places, seeing that the custome of ministring thys Supper vnto the sicke, rose vpon corrupte causes and rotten foundations, and consydering also (God be praysed) in these tymes there are non dryuen by feare to renounce the truthe, wherevpon any suche excommunication should ensue, which in the extremitie of sicknesse should be mitigated after thys sorte (for no man nowe that is in extreme sicknesse, is cast downe, or else assaulted with this temptation, that he is cutte off from the Churche) I saye these things considered, it followeth, that this ministring of Communion in priuate houses, and to the sicke, is vnlawfull, as that whiche rose vpon euill grounds: and if it were lawfull, yet that nowe in these times of peace, and when the sicke are not excōmunicated, there is no vse of it. And so it appeareth how little the custome of the olde Church, dothe helpe M. Doctor in this poynt.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This was one cause, but not the only cause why the Communion was ministred to the sicke: the chiefe and principall cause was (as I haue sayde) the frutes and effectes of that Sacrament, whiche is remission of sinnes, peace of conscience, and effectuall applying of the death and passion of Christ vnto the Communicants, and an assurance of Gods promises, whereof that sacrament is an effectuall seale.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 81. Sect. 3.
                     The Communion exhibited vnto sicke persons, is allowed botheSick persons receyue the communion. of Peter Martyr, and Bucer, as in the other treatise I haue declared and consonant to the custome of Christes Churche, euen from the Apostles time, as is to be seene in the olde writers.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 116. Sect. 1.
                     And as for that he sayth Peter Martyr, and Bucer do allowé the Communion exhibited to the sicke persons, when he sheweth that, he shal haue answere. For where he sayth he hath declared it in an other treatise, eyther the Printer hath left out that treatise, or M. Doctor wonderfully forgetteth him selfe, or else he meaneth some odde thing, that he hath written, and layed vp in some corner of his studie, for surely there is no suche saying in all his booke before, nor yet after, as farre as I can finde.
                     
                        M. Bucer in his Censures vpon the Communion booke speaking of this parte ofBucer. it, sayth thus: And those thinges whiche are commaunded in this behalfe doe well inoughe agree with the holye Scriptures: for to receyue the Communion of the Lorde, and to be partaker of hys Table, dothe not a little auayle vnto the comforte of afflicted consciences, if it be receyued according to the Lords institution.
                     
                        M. Martyrs allowing of the same, is added in that place.
                     
                        M. Musculus in his Common places, Titul. de coena Domini, saythe that 
                           Priuata &
                           Musculus. 
                           extrema aegrotantium communio. &c. Priuate and last communion ministred to the sicke, is reteyned in dyuers reformed Churches, for this ende, that the sicke persons thereby maye be strengthned in fayth, made stronger agaynst the temptations of Sathan, and the better armed to beare the paynes of death. Neyther doe I sée any reason (if the superstitious opinion of the Papistes be rooted out) why any man in that case shoulde be depriued of these benefites.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 116. Sect. 2.
                     Nowe remayneth to be spoken of the number of communicantes, and that there is saulte in the appoynting of the Seruice booke, not onely for that it admitteth in the tyme of plague, that one wyth the Minister maye celebrate the Supper of the Lorde in the house, but for that it ordeyneth a Communion in the Churche, when of a great number whyche assemble there, it admytteth thrce or foure. The abuse and inconuenience whereof maye thus be considered. The holy Sacrament of the Supper of the Lorde is not onely a seale, and confirmation of the promises of God vnto vs, but also a profession of our comunction, as well with Christe our sauiour, and wyth God, as also (as 1. C
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 10 S. Paule teacheth) a declaration and profession that we are at one wyth our brethren: so that it is first a sacrament, of the knytting of all the body generally, and of euery member particularly wyth the head, and then of the members of the bodie one wyth an other. Nowe therefore seeing that euery particular Churche and body of Gods people, is a representation, and as it were a liuely portrayture of the whole Churche and body of Christ, it followeth that whyche we can not doe wyth all the Churche scattered throughout the whole worlde, for the distaunces of places whereby we are seuered, we ought to doe with that Churche wherevnto God hath raunged vs, as muche as possibly or conuentently maye be. The departing therefore of the rest of the Churche, from those three or foure is an open profession that they haue no communion, felowshippe, nor vnitie wyth them that doe communicate: and likewyse of those three or foure, that they haue none wyth the rest that ioyne not themselues therevnto: when as both by the many grapes making one cup, & cornes making one loafe, that whole Church beeing many persons, are called as to the vnitie whiche they haue one with an other, and altogether among them selues: so to the declaration and profession of it, by receyuing one wyth another, and altogither amongst themselues. And as if so be, that we do not celebrate as we may possibly and conueniently, the supper of the Lorde, we thereby vtter our wante of loue towardes the Lorde, whyche hathe redeemed vs: so if we doe not communicate togither wyth the Churche, so farre foorthe as we maye doe conueniently we betray the wante of our loue, that we haue one towards an other. And therefore S. 1. C
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 11 Paule driuing heerevnto, wysheth that one shoulde tary for an other, reprehending that when one preuenteth, and commeth before an other, saying: that that is to take euery man hys owne supper, and not to celebrate the Lordes Supper, not that so many men or women as there came, so many tables were, for that had not beene possible in so great assemblies, but that they sorted them selues into certayne companies, and that they came scattering one after an other, and that in steade of making one Supper of the Lorde, they dyd make dyuers.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You can not be ignorant, that the whole drifte of the Cōmunion booke, is to moueThe intent of the booke is to moue all men to communicate. all men to ofte communicating, and that togither, as it manifestly appeareth in the first exhortation in the booke prescribed to be read, when the Curate shall sée the people negligent in comming to the Communion, the which if you had well peruse
                              〈1 line〉
                            you would haue (as I think) cutte off much of this talke. If the booke should appoynt that thrée or foure should communicate togither, & no more, or if it did not allow that

Communion best wherein most of the Church doe participate: then were your reasoning to some ende: but séeing that it is appoynted that there shoulde not be fewer than thrée or foure, to the ende that it might be a Communion, and haue no similitude with the Papisticall Masse, there is no cause why you should take this paynes. And surely he that shal compare that exhortation in the booke with this discourse of yours, it will be no harde matter for him to iudge, how much more pithily and effectuallyThre or foure a sufficient number, if other will not communicate. this matter is there handled, than it is here by you. But that thrée or foure shoulde be a sufficient number to communicate if other will not, there is good cause: for séeing the holy Sacrament is a Seale and confirmation of Gods promises, and an effectuall applying of the death and passion of Christ vnto vs, and therefore a singular comfort and reliefe to the afflicted conscience and minde touched with the féelingThre or foure a cōgregation. Math. 18. of sinne, why shoulde those that be desirous of it béeing a congregation (as thrée or foure is, according to the saying of Christ, where two or three be gathered togither in my name, &c.) be debarred from their Godly desire, and that singular comfort, for the carelesnesse, securitie, negligence, or lacke of such féeling of others? Shall none communicate bycause all will not? Or shall not thrée or foure because the rest refuse? Or is it lacke of loue towardes our neighbour, or any token thereof if we resort to the Lordes table, when other will not? Where learne you that?
                        The place of S. Paule. 1. Cor. 11. is not aptly applyed. For the Apostle in that place, reproueth onely such as contemptuously or contentiously did separate themselues from other as well in the publike feastes called Loue feastes, and then vsed in the Church, as in the Supper of the Lorde. But he rather meaneth of the first than of theMartyr. in. 1. Cor. 11. latter, and therfore sayth M. Martyr vpon that place. The Supper is here called priuate: eyther bycause some did chalenge to themselues priuately that whiche belonged to all: or else bicause euerie one after the receyuing of the holy mysteries, did take againe to himselfe those things, which he had offered at the Lordes table, and made that his owne whiche by right belonged to all. And againe he sayth, that the Corinthians be there reproued, Bicause they pampered their bellie, and contemned their brethren. I tolde you before what M. Caluine thought of this place: it can in no respect tende to the disallowing of any order appoynted in the booke of common prayer, bicause no man is secluded from the Communion that will come, and those that come when other men will not, do it not of contempt or of contention, but of conscience and pietie. Moreouer, wée haue no such banquettes or feastes, eyther before or after the Communion, as the Corinthians had, and therefore in that respect, there can be no suche abuse as the Apostle there reproueth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Sixthly, in this booke three or foure are allowed for a fit number to receyue the Communion, and the Priest alone togither with one more, or with the sicke man alone, may in tyme of necessitie, that is, when there is any common plague, or in tyme of other visitation minister it to the sicke man, and if he require it, it may not be denyed. This is not I am sure, lyke in effect to a priuate Masse: that Scripture Mat. 26. 27 Mar. 14. 23 drinke ye all of this, maketh not agaynst this, and priuate Communion, is not agaynst the Scriptures.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Adm onition. Pag. 185. Sect. 1.
                        How vntruly these men charge the Church with priuate Communions I haue shewed before. The place of scripture here alledged to proue that three or foure be not a sufficient number to communicateNo number determined to be at the Cō
                              munion. is this, drinke ye all of this. Mat. 26. Mark. 14. which may as well be applyed to proue that ten, twentie, fortie, is no sufficient number: I know not what your meaning is except you thinke no number sufficient, vnlesse al do communicate togither, bicause Christ said drink ye
                           
                           all of this. This text proueth that all ought to be partakers of the Lordes Cuppe, but it doth not determine any certaine number of Communicants. I knowe there be some of the olde fathers as BasiliusBasill would haue. xii. at the least. Magnus, which would not haue fewer Communicants than. xii. But of the number of Communicants there is nothing determined in Scripture, neither is it materiall so that there be a number, that it may be a Communion.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 117. Sect. 1.
                     These things being considered, the reason which the Admonition vseth in the. 185. page, where this matter is spoken of, which is, drink you al of this, is not so ridiculous, as M. doctor maketh it. For although it do neyther proue that. 12. or. 20. or any other definite number must of necessitie receyue, yet it proueth that as all they which were present did communicate: so as many as in the Church are fit to receyue the Sacraments, or may conuetently receyue them togither, should follow that example in celebrating the supper togither.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The booke of common prayer doth greatly commend, and like the receyning of the whole Church togither, but if that can not be obteyned (as it cannot, and they will not haue men compelled vnto it) it secludeth not those that be well disposed: so they be a competent number. And the booke doth exhort those to depart which do not communicate, with a warning from whence they depart, so that you may well vnderstand, that the meaning of the Booke is, that all that be present should communicate. Neither can this place of scripture be drawne to improue the decrée of ye Church therin. For Christ had. 70. other disciples and his mother, with diuers other which followed him, that were not present at that Supper: as no doubt they should haue béene, if by that example he had ment to haue made a law, that there may be no Cōmunion vnlesse the whole congregation of euery particular Church do communicate togither.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 117. Sect. 1.
                     And it is probably to be thought, that if our Sauiour Christ had not beene restreyned by the lawe of God, touching the Passeouer vnto his owne familie being twelue, and therefore a competent number to eare vp a lambe by themselues, that he would haue celebrated his supper, not only amongst his. xii. disciples, whichThey were made Apostles before, and so called. afterward he made Apostles, but also amongst other of his disciples, & professors of his doctrine. But forsomuch as it was meete that he should celebrate his supper there and then, where and when he did celebrate his Passouer, for the cause before by me alledged, it pleased him to keepe his first Supper with twelue onely, for that the law of Communication vnto the Passeouer which was ioyned with the supper, woulde not admit any greater number of Communicants, they being sufficient and enough to eate vp the passeouer.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is onely a coniecture: but it ouerthroweth your argument: for by your saying, Christ had his twelue Apostles there at Supper, bycause the lawe touching the Passcouer did bind him thereunto, not bicause he would signifie that there should be no Communion except the whole Church do communicate.
                        The disciples were made Apostles before the institution of the Supper, and were so called, as it is euident. Math. 10. & Mark. 3. and therefore I maruell what you meaneMath. 10. Marke. 3. in saying, which afterwardes he made Apostles.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 117. Sect. 2.
                     And althoughe it be cleare and plaine, that when it is sayde drinke ye all of this, and ta
                           〈1 line〉
                        ie one for another, these sayings are ment of that particular congregation or assemblie whiche assemble themselues togither to be taught by one mouth of the Minister, yet I haue therefore

put this caution of (as much as may be possible) least any man shoulde cauill, as though I woulde haue no Communion, vntill all the godly through the world should meete togither. Likewise I haue put this caution (as much as may be conueniently) for although it be possible, that any particular Church may communicate at one table, in one day, and togither, yet may the same be inconuenient for diuerse causes. As if the number shoulde be verie great, so that to haue them all communicate togither, it would require such a long time, as the tary ng out of the whole action, would hazard eyther the life, or at least the health of dyuerse there. Againe forasmuch as other some being at the Church it is meete that other shoulde be at home vpon occasion of infantes and suche lyke things, as require the presence of some to tar
                           〈1 line〉
                        e at home. In these cases and suche lyke the inconueniences do deliuer vs from the gilt of vncharitablenesse and forsaking the felowship of the Church, for that we doe not here seuer onr selues, but are by good and iust causes seuered, whiche gilt we shall neuer escape, if besydes such necessarie causes we pretende those that are not, or hauing not so much as a pretence, yet notwithstanding separate our selues, as the dayly practise through the Church doth shewe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you be content to admit so many cautions, and exceptions, then is the question soone decyded, and you make it no such commaundement, but that vpon occasion it may be altered. In déede the wordes of Christ do signifie, that the cup of the Supper, and the whole Supper is common to all, as well of the laytie (as we terme them) as of the clergie, but it doth not prescribe what number shall be present at euery seuerall Communion. I doe not excuse those that withdrawe themselues from that Supper, except it be vpon necessarie and iust occasion, but I denie that the negligence or lawfull occasion of some ought to hinder or stay other from communicating: this you should haue proued, but you do not, and your cautions, and exceptions (which I verie well allowe) declare the contrarie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 117. Sect. 3.
                     But it may be obiected, that in this poynt the booke of common prayer is not in fault, whiche doth not onely not forbid that all the Church shoulde receyue togither, but also by a good and godly exhortation moueth those that be present, that they shoulde not depart but communicate altogither. It is true that it doth not forbid, and that there is godly exhortation for that purpose, but that (I say) is not enough, for neyther shoulde it suffer that three or foure shoulde haue a Communion by themselues (so many being in the Church meete to receyue, and to whome the Supper of the Lord doth of lyke right apperteyne) and it ought to prouide that those which woulde withdrawe themselues, should be by ecclesiasticall discipline at all tymes, and now also vnder a godly Prince by ciuill punishmentThis is clean
                              〈1 line〉
                            contrarie to the Admonition. pag. 109. brought to communicate with their brethren. And this is the lawe of God, and this is nowe and hath bene heretofore the practise of Churches reformed. All men vnderstande that the Passeouer was a fygure of the Lordes Supper, and that there shoulde be as straight bondes to binde men to celebrate the remembrance of our spirituall deliuerance, as there was to remember the deliuerance out of Egypt. But whosoeuer did not then communicate with the rest at that time, when the Passeouer was eaten, was excommunicated, as it may appeare in the Numbers,Num. 9. where he sayth, that whosoeuer did not communicate being cleane, This is not excommunication, but putting to death. his soule should be cut of from amongst the people of God, therefore this neglect or contempt rather of the Lordes Supper ought to be punished with no lesse punishment, especially when as (after the Church hath proceeded in that order which our Sauiour Christ appoynteth of admonishing) they be not sorie for their fault, and promise amendment. And that this was the custome of the Churches, it may appeare byConc. Apo. Can. 9. the. 9. of those Cannons which are fathered of the Apostles, where it is decreed that all the faythful that entred into the congregation, and heard the Scriptures read, and did not tarie out the prayers and the holy Communion, should be as those which were cause
                           〈1 line〉
                        s of disorders in the Church, separated from the Church (or as it is translated of an other) depriued of the Communion. Also in the councell of Braccara, it was decreed, that if any entring into the Church of God, heard the Scriptures,Con. 2. Bracca. cap. 83. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           om. 2. and afterwarde of wantonnesse or losenesse, withdrew himselfe from the Communion of the Sacrament and so brake the rule of discipline in the reuerend Sacraments, should be put out of the church, till such time as he had by good frutes declared his repentance.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I do not much disagrée from this, sauing that I sée no reason, that thrée or foure should be debarred from so comfortable and fruteful a Sacrament, either for the negligence or necessarie impediments of others: except also your misunderstāding of the 9. of Numbers: for delere animam eius de populis suis is there not to excommunicate, (as you

interprete it, but to put to death and to kill, which were a hard punishment for such as be negligent in comming to the Communion. Conuenient discipline I thinke very necessarie in this poynt, and therefore I will not stande with you in other circumstances of this portion, onely I will desire the Reader to note howe farre the AuthoursThe Admonition and the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               agr
                                 〈1 line〉
                               not. of the Admonition varie from you in this assertion, who Page 102. say, That we thrust them in their sinne to the Lordes table, and page 109. that it shoulde be prouided, that Papists nor other, neyther constraynedly nor customable communicate in the mysteryes of saluation, whiche cannot otherwise be ment, than that we compell them by punishments to come to the Lordes table. But howe much more cause shoulde they haue so to say: if we were as seuere in punishing as you here requyre. But the negligence of the common sort, in not oftner frequenting the Lordes supper is lamentable, the punishment appoynted for such, in all places not so well executed, and therefore as I sayde before, I thinke conuenient, discipline and due execution of the same, verie necessarie.
                        An other thing also I woulde haue the Reader to marke, that you here alledge for proofe the Canons of the Apostles; which are as much doubted of to haue béene the Apostles, as the Epistles either of Clement, or Anacletus.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 118. Sect. 1.
                     But here also may rise another doubt of the former wordes of Moses, in the boke of Numbers. For seeing that he maketh this exception (if they be cleane) it may be sayd that those that depart, do not feele themselues meete to receyue, and therefore depart, the other three or foure, or mo, feele themselues meete and disposed for that purpose, wherevpon it may seeme that it is neyther reason to compell those to come, which feele not themselues meete, nor to reiect them that feele that good disposition and preparation in themselues. For answere whereunto we must vnderstande, that the vncleannesse whiche Moses speaketh of was such as men could not easily auoyde. And whervnto they might fall sometymes, by necessarie duetie, as by handling theyr dead, which they were by the rule of charitie bounde to burie, sometymes by touching at vnwares a dead bodie, or by sitting in the place where some vncleane bodie had sitten, or by touching suche things, whiche the lawe iudged vncleane, which thing cannot be alledged in those that are nowe of the Churche: for as many as be of it, and withall of such discretion, as are able to proue and examine themselues, can haue no excuse at all if they may be at the Church, to withdrawe themselues from the holy Supper of the Lorde. For if they will say, that they be not meete, it may be answered vnto them, that it is their owne fault, and further if they be not meete to receyue the holy Sacrament of the Supper, they are not meete to heare the worde of God, they are not meete to be partakers of the prayers of the Church, and if they be for one, they are also for the other, for with that boldnesse, and with that dutie or lawfulnesse, (I speake of those which are of the Church, and of discretion to examine them selues) I say This is not true as shall be shewed. with what lawfulnesse they may offer themselues to the prayers, and to the hearing of the worde of God, they may also offer themselues vnto the Lordes Supper. And to whome soeuer of them the Lorde will communicate himselfe by preaching the worde vnto the same he will not refuse to communicate himselfe by receyuing of the Sacraments, for whosoeuer is of Gods householde and family, he neede not be afrayde to come to the Lordes table, nor doubt but that the Lorde will feede him there, and whatsoeuer he be, that is a member of the bodie of Christ, may be assured that he receyueth life from Christ the head, as well by the arteries and conduites of the Supper of the Lorde, as by the preaching of the worde of God: so that it muste needes followe, that the not receyuing of those which depart out of the Church, when there is any Communion celebrated, proceedeth eyther of vaine and supersticious feare, growing of grosse ignorance of themselues and of the holy Sacraments, or else of an intollerable negligence or rather contempt, of the which neyther the one, nor the other shoulde be either borne with or nourished, either by permitting three or foure to communicate alone, or else in letting them which depart go so easily away with so great a fault which ought to be seuerely punished.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte,
                        Neither do I differ from you in the substance of this that you here set down, which is (as I take it) to cut off friuolous and vaine excuses, vsed by such as eyther neglect or contemne the holy Communion, but in certaine circumstances here vsed, I do not altogither agrée with you. For first, the vncleannesse that Moses speaketh of is but ceremoniall and externall, and therfore may more easily be auoyded: but weakenesse of fayth, and vncleannesse of lyfe (which may and ought for a time withdraw men from the Communion) is naturall and inward, & therfore with greater difficultie shunned.
                        
                           Secondly a Christian man and a true member of the Church may take benefiteMē not mete to communicate, may be admitted to the hearing of the fro
                                 〈1 line〉
                               and pray
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . by prayer and hearing of the worde of God, whiche yet for diuerse respectes is not meete to receyue the holy Communion: and indéede praying and preaching bée meanes to prepare men, and make them apt to communicate: besydes this he that is weake in fayth, corrupt in iudgement, ignorant in the right vse of the Sacrament, may be admitted to prayer, and to the hearing of the worde, that he may be instructed (for 
                              fides ex auditu, fayth commeth by hearing) so may he not, to the receyuingRom 10 of the Supper: thirdely, no man may presume to receyue the Supper except he hath first tryed and examined himselfe: but he ought to come to the hearing of the worde of God, that he may first learne how to examine himselfe. Wherfore this is not true that with what lawfulnesse they may offer themselues to the prayers and to the hearing of theT. C. contrarie to himselfe, pag. 35. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              n. 10 & pag. 133. li
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . 19. worde of God, they may also offer themselues vnto the Lordes Supper. And you affirme the contrarie. Pag. 35. For there you say that the Magistrate ought to compell such as be Papistes and excommunicate persons to heare Sermons, and Pag. 133. you affirme the same in playner wordes, shewing a reason why suche may be admitted to the hearing of the worde, and yet not to the participation of the Lordes Supper. Lastly, I denie that any such perswasion is nourished in them, by suffering thrée or foure to communicate, but the contrarie rather, for the Godly example of these fewe may eyther prouoke the rest to the like diligence, or else confounde them and make them ashamed, especially if eyther that Godly exhortation conteyned in the booke, bée read vnto them, or they be otherwise put in minde of their slacknesse by a Godly and carefull Minister. These circumstances excepted, in the rest of the matter in this part I agrée with you.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 118. Sect. 1.
                     And vpon this eyther contempt or superstitious feare, drawne from the Papistes lenton preparation of fortie dayes, eare
                           〈1 line〉
                        hrift, displing, &c. it commeth to passe that men receyuing the Supper of the Lord but seldome, when they fall sicke must haue the Supper ministred vnto them in theyr houses, which otherwise being once euery weeke receyued before shoulde not breede any suche vnquietnesse in them, when they cannot come to receyue it, although as I haue before shewed, if they had neuer receyued it before, yet that priuate receyuing were not at any hand to be suffered. And thus hauing declared what I thinke to be faultie, in the Communion booke in this poynt, and the reasons why, and withall answered to that which eyther M. Doctor alledgeth in this place of the 80. and 81. and likewise in the 152. and 185. pages touching this matter, I come nowe vnto that which is called the Iewish purifying by the Admonition, and by the seruice booke afore tyme, the purifycation of women.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I sée not howe this in any poynt is true: for lenton fast was then vsed when the Communion was most diligently and often frequented, and indéede the rare and seldome receyuing, came in with priuate Massing, which had the beginning long after the lenton fast.
                        To receyue once euery weeke is a thing to be wished if it might conueniently bée, And yet notwithstanding were not the Communion to be denyed to the sicke: for it oftentymes commeth to passe, that men through infirmitie and sicknesse are not able to come to the Churche in whole monethes and yeares, whome this wéekely communicating coulde nothing helpe, and it were agaynst all reason to debarre them of this seale of Gods promises, this effectuall maner and kinde of applying of the death of Christ vnto themselues, this assurance of the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and this Sacrament of comfort, especially in tyme of extremitie and sicknesse, if they be desirous of it. And thus you haue declared what you thinke to be faultie in the Communion booke in this poynt, and the reasons why: but of what force your reasons are, and how iustly in this poynt you charge the booke, the Reader may now iudge.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of the Churching of women.
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 118. Sect. vlt.
                     Now to the churching of women, in the which title yet kept, there seemeth to be hid a great partLeuit. 12. of the Iewish purification: for like as in the olde law she that had brought forth a child was holdenSrife about wordes. vncleane, vntill such time as she came to the temple to shewe hirselfe, after she had brought forth a man or a woman: so this terme of churching of hir can seeme to import nothing else, than a banishment (and as it were) a certaine excommunication from the Churche during the space that is betwene the time of hir deliuerie, and of hir comming vnto the Church. For what doth else this churching implie; but a restoring hir vnto the Church, which cannot be without some barre or shutting forth presupposed. It is also called the thankes giuing, but the principall tytle whiche is the directorie of this part of the Liturgie, and placed in the top of the leafe, as that which the translator best lyked of, is (Churching of women.) To passe by that, that it will haue them come as nigh the Communion table as may be, as they came before to the high aultar (bicause I had spoken once generally agaynst such ceremonies) that of all other is most Iewish, and approcheth nearest to the Iewish purifycation, that she is commaunded to offer accustomed offrings, wherein besydes that the verie worde offering caryeth with it a strong sent and suspition of a sacryfice (especially being vttered symply without any addition) it cannot be without daunger that the booke maketh the custome of the Popish Churche (which was so corrupt) to be the rule and measure of this offering. And although the meaning of the booke is not, that it should be any offring for sinne, yet this maner of speaking, may be a stumbling stocke in the way of the ignorant and simple, and the wicked & obstinate thereby are confirmed and hardned in their corruptious. The best which can be answered in this case is, that it is for the reliefe of the minister, but then it should be remembred, first that the minister lyueth not any more of offrings: secondarily, that the payment of the ministers wages is not so conuenient, eyther in the Church, or before all the people: and thirdly, that thereby we fall into that fault which we condemne in Poperie, and that is, that besydes the ordinarie liuing appoynted for the seruice of the Priests in the whole, they tooke for theyr seuerall seruices of Masse, Baptisme, Burying, Churching, &c. seuerall rewardes, which thing being of the seruice booke, well abolished in certains other things, I cannot see, what good cause there shoulde be to reteine it in this and certaine other.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is the propertie of quarellers, and of men naturally bent to contention, to striueStryfe of wordes proper to quarellers. about wordes and termes, when they cannot reproue any thing in the matter it selfe. For in all these faults here pretended there is not one that toucheth the matter of the booke, onely the tytle in the top of the leafe, the cōming of women so neare to the Communion table, the paying of the accustomed offrings to the Curate, are in this place reproued, as matters of great importance, being all of themselues not worth the talking off: and yet béeing (as comely and decent orders) prescribed by the Church, may not be contemned and despysed, without the crime of stubbornnesse and disobedience. But that your quarelling may the rather appeare, I will answere your cauilles in as few wordes as I can, and first for the title which is this. The thankes giuing of women after childbirth, commonly called the Churching of women. Now sir you sée, that the proper tytleThe people hardly broght to leaue accustomed termes is this. The thankes giuing of women after Childebirth. The other is the common name customably vsed of the common people, who will not be taught to speake by you, or any man, but kéepe their accustomed names and termes: therefore they call the Lordes day Sunday, and the next day vnto it Monday, prophane and ethnicall names, and yet nothing derogating from the dayes and tymes. Lykewise they call the Morning and Euening prayer, Mattens and Euensong, neyther can they be brought to the contrarie, and yet the prayers be not the worse: so they call the day of Christes natiuitie Christmasse, &c. what is this to condemne the things themselues?
                        But you say this terme doth import nothing else than a banishment from the Church. &c. so might you say that these names Sunday & Monday do import yt we dedicate those days to the Sunne & Moone: and so likewise might you say of the other names reteyned in the cōmon and vsuall speache: but all men would then espie your folly euen as they may do nowe, if they be disposed. The absence of the woman after hir delyuerie,

is neyther banishment nor excommunication (as you terme it) but a withdrawingThe true cause of the absence of the woman after hir deliuerāce. of the partie from the Churche by reason of that infirmitie and daunger, that God hath layde vpon woman kinde in punishment of the first sinne, whiche daunger she knoweth not whether she shall escape or no: and therefore after shee hath not onelye escaped it, but also brought a childe into the worlde, to the encrease of Gods people, and after such tyme as the comelinesse of nature maye beare, she commeth firste intoThe cause of hir thankesgiuing. the Churche to giue thankes for the same, and for the deliueraunce by Christe from that sinne, whereof that infirmitie is a perpetuall testimonie. And this being done, not Iewishly, but Christianly, not of custome, but of duty, not to make the act of lawfull matrimonie vncleane, but to giue thankes to God for deliueraunce from so manifolde perilles, what Christian hearte can for the names sake, thus disallowe of it, as you doe?
                        The comming so neare the communion table, is a verye small matter to carpe at, it is thought to be the moste conuenient place, both for the minister & for the woman, especially if she be disposed to receiue the holy Communion. But such trifling quarrels argue an extreame penurie of good and substantiall reasons.
                        The paying of hir accustomed offrings which you séeme moste to mislike (as your selfe confesse the meaning of the booke to be) hath no such purpose and intent, as you would make the Reader to beleue, neither can it: for she neither offereth Lambe, Turtles, orLeuit. 12, yong Pigeons, as the lawe requireth, but payeth to the Curate his accustomed dutie, which both she may as lawfully giue, and he receiue, as the other tenthes may be payde and receyued. It is a portion of the Pastors liuing appointed and limitted vnto hym by the Churche, and therefore he may lawfully receiue it, as it is appointed vnto him. And all your obiections to the contrary, are hereby answered fully.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     In which booke a great number of things contrary to Gods worde are conteyned, as Iewish Act. 15. 10. purifyings. &c.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 81. Sect. 4.
                        The thirde is, the Iewishe purifyings (as you terme it) you cite for that purpose Act. 15. where Peter speaking against certeyne of the Pharisies, which beleued and taught that it was nedeful for the Gentiles which were conuerted, to be circumcised, and to obserue Moses lawe, saith on this sorte: Novve therefore vvhy tempte ye God,Act. 15. to laye a yoke on the disciples neckes. &c. Howe any thing here conteined, prohibiteth women after they be deliuered from the great danger and paynes of child bearing, to giue in the congregation thankes for their deliuerance, let the godly Reader iudge. Surely this is no Iewishe purifying, but Christian giuing of thankes, most consonant and agreable to the worde of God. But hereof also some thing more is to be spoken in an other place.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 119. lin. 24.
                     Nowe whereas M. Doctor sayth that the place of the 15. of the Actes alleaged by the Admonition, maketh nothing against this, he should haue considered, that if it be a Iewyshe ceremony (as they suppose it) it is to be abolished vtterly. For it being shewed there, that all the Ceremonial law of Moses is done awaye through our Sauiour Christe, this also a parte thereof muste needes be therein comprysed.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The place nothing perteyneth to this purpose, neither is giuing of thankes a

Iewysh Ceremonie, and therefore their supposition is but vayne.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 119. in the midst.
                     And whereas he sayth that it being nothing else but a thankesgiuing for hit deliuerance, cannot be therefore but Christian and very godly: I answere, that if there should be solemne and expresse giuing of thankes in the Churche for euery benefite, either equall or greater than this, which any singular persone in the Churche doth receyue, wee should not onelye haue no preaching of theTheod. li. 4 cap. 11. worde, nor ministring of the Sacramentes, but we shoulde not haue so much leysure, as to doe any corporall or bodely worke, but should be lyke vnto those heretykes, which were called of the Syriake worde Messalians or continuall prayers and which did nothing else but praye.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Truthe is neuer contrary vnto it selfe: before you reproued the booke of Common prayer for want of thankesgiuing for benefites receiued: and now you reproue it for appointing thankes to be giuen for deliuerance from sinne, from manifolde perilsPag. 108. Sect. 3. and daungers, and for the encrease of Gods people, all which things are publike, although thankes be giuen by a priuate person: for in dede the punishmēt and daunger layde vpon all womankinde, for disobedience is not onely common, but very notorious, and a perpetuall testimonie of our subiection vnto synne, and therefore requireth a solemne thankesgiuing at such time as it pleaseth God to shewe his mercie therein, and to deliuer from ill. And yet if it were not so, where reade you that any priuate persone is forbidden to giue thankes in the publike congregation, for some especiall benefit receiued, namely if the Churche thinke it conuenient, and agrée thervnto, as it doth to this?
                        
                           Theodoret sayth, that the Messalian heretikes had these errours: firste, they beingThe errors of the Messalians Theod. lib. 4. cap. 11.
                            possessed with a Deuill, which they thought to be the holy spirite, did condemne all bodily labour as wicked: secondly, they being giuen to much sleepe, did name the visions of their dreames prophesies: thirdly, they sayde that the supper of the Lorde and Baptisme, did neither good nor harme to any man: fourthlye, when they were charged with such things, they would not stande to them, but impudently deny them: last of all, they taught that euery man when he is borne, doth take of his parentes as the nature, so likewyse the seruitude of Deuils, which being driuen out by diligēt praier, the holy spirit entred in. &c. This is all that Theodoret in that place reporteth of those heretikes: the which howe much it maketh against either diligent or continual prayers,Luc. 18. Rom. 12. Epbe. 6. Coll. 4. or thankesgiuing for benefites receiued, the Reader may consider. Christ and the Apostle S. Paule, require continuall prayer and thankesgiuing, but not in the same sense and meaning that the Messalians did.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They should first proue that churching of women comming in vayles abusing the Psalme toPsal. 120. hir, I haue lifted vp myne eyes vnto the hilles. &c. and such other foolyshe things, are agreable to the written worde of the ainughty.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 155. for the vvhich T. C. hath noted. 153. Sect. 2.
                        The. 121. Psalme (for I thinke your printer was ouerseene in that quotation) I haue lifted vp myne eyes. &c. teacheth that all helpe commeth from God, and that the faythfull ought onely to looke for helpe at his handes, and therefore a moste meete Psalme to be sayde

at such tyme as we being delyuered from any perill come to giue thankes to God.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 119. somevvhat past the midst.
                     For the Psalme. 121. spoken of in the. 155. page, it being shewed that it is not meete to haue any such solemne thankesgiuing, it is nedelesse to debate of the Psalme, wherewith the thankesgiuing should be made.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        A short answere, and to small purpose: the Psalme is moste apt for that ende, and thankesgiuing in such cases moste godly, as I haue declared both in my Answere to the Admonition and to your Replie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The twelfte. Churching of women after chylde byrth, smelleth of Iewishe purification: their other rites and custome in their lying in, and comming to church, is foolish and superstitious, as it is vsed. She must lie in with a whyte sheete vpon hir bed, & come couered with a vayle, as ashamed of some folly. She must offer, but these are matters of custome, & not in the booke: but this Psalme (as is noted before) is childishly abused. I Psalm. 121. haue lifted vp myne eyes vnto the hiis, from whence commeth my helpe. The Sunne shall not burne thee by day, nor the Moone by night.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 155. and. 202. for the vvhich T. C. hath quoted. 101. and. 102. page.
                        In the hundreth fifty fiue, these be my wordes. That women should come in vayles is not conteined in the booke, no more in dede is the wafer cake, and therefore you might well haue left these twoo out of your reason being thrust in without all reason. To ye which nothing is answered.
                        In the. 202. page thus I saye. For their lying in, I can saye litle. I am not skilfull in womens matters, neither is it in the booke, no more is hir white sheete, nor hir vayle: let the women them selues answere these matters.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 119. lin. 38.
                     And whereas in the. 101. and. 102. pages vnto the Admonition, obiecting that the comming in the vayle to the church more then, than at other tymes, is a token of shame, or of some folly committed, M. Doctor iestingly leueth the matter to the womens answere, a little true knowledge of diuinitie, would haue taught hym, that the bringing in or vsurping without authoritie any ceremony in the congregation, is both an earnester matter than may be iested at, and a weightier than should be permitted vnto the discretion of euery woman, consydering that the same hath bene so horribly abused in the tyme of poperie.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The answere is fit for so friuolous an obiection: and a little true reason voydeThe womās vayle a ciuill custome, not a ceremonie of the Churche. of malitious carping, would haue taught you that this is rather a ciuill manner and custome of our countrey, than a ceremonie of the churche, and the wearing of newe gloues (as many at that time, and especally at the time of mariages do) is as much a ceremony as those: for the wearing of the vayle, first began of that weakenesse and sickenesse, that nature in that daunger doth bring most women vnto, thereby to kepe them the more from the ayre, and therefore (as I haue sayde) in this countrey it was taken vp as a custome of the people, and not as a ceremonie of the Churche. But I perceyue you wyll playe small game before you sitte out, and picke out very small trifles (though without the booke) to braule and barke at, rather than you woulde lacke matter.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Of holydayes Tract. 10.
            
               Ofholydayes in generall, that they may be appointed by the Churche, and of the vse of them.
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     In which a great number of thyngs are conteyned contrary to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        he worde of God as obseruing of Exod. 20. 9. holy days. &c. patched (if not altogether, yet the greatest pecce) out of the popes portuise.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 81. Sect. 5. 6.
                        Fourthly, you mislyke obseruing of holydays: And you alleadgeHolydayes. 
                           Exod. 20. Syxe dayes shalt thou labour and do all thy vvorke.
                        
                        To obserue any daye superstitiously, or to spende any daye vnprofitably, is flat against not this commaundement only, but others alsoGood vse of holydayes. in the holy scriptures. And I would to God it wer better looked vnto. But to absteyne any daie from bodily labour, that we may labour spiritually in hearing the worde of God, magnifying his name and practising the workes of charitie, is not either against this, or any other commaundement. For I thinke the meaning of this commaundement is not so to tie men to bodily labour, that they may not intermitte the same to labour spiritually. For then howe could wee preachers and studentes excuse our selues? Howe might the people lawfully come to our Sermons and Lectures in any of the syxe dayes? But of this thing also occasion will be ministred to speake more hereafter.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 119. Sect. 1.
                     The holy dayes followe, of which M. Doctor sayth that so they be not vsed superstitiouflye, or vnprofitably, they may be commaunded. I haue shewed before that they were, if they were so indifferent as they are made, yet being kept of the Papistes, which are the enemies of God, they ought to be abolished. And if it were as easy a matter to pull out the superstition of the obseruyng of those holydayes out of mens heartes, as it is to protest and to teache that they are not commaunded for any Religion to be put in them, or for any to make conscience of the obseruing of them, as though there wer some necessary worshippe of God, in the keping of them: then were they much more tollerable, but when as the continuance of them doth nourishe wycked superstition in the myndes of men, and that the doctrine whiche should remedy the superstition through the few
                           〈1 line〉
                        nesse and scarcitie of able ministers, cannot come to the moste parte of them which are infected with this disease, and that also where it is preached, the fruite thereof is in part hyndred whylest the common people attende oftentymes rather to that whiche is done, than to that which is taught, being a thyng indifferent (as it is sayde) it ought to be abolyshed, as that whiche is not onely not fyttest to holde the people in the syncere worshypping of God, but also as that which keepeth them in their former blyndnesse & corrupt opinions, which they haue conceyued of such holydayes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Things that be good and profitable and haue a necessarye vse, tending to theProfitable thyngs must not be refused for the abuse. edifying of the Churche, and the worshyppyng of God, are not to bée vtterly remoued for the abuses crepte in, but the abuse muste be taken awaye and the thing still remayne. If all things should bée abrogated bicause they were kepte of the Papistes,

there would bée a meruailous alteration, bothe in the Churche and in the common weale. But I haue shewed before howe farre this is from the truthe, euen in someTract. 7. ca. 5. things inuented by Popes, much more in suche things as were agréed vppon in the primitiue Church (as many of the holydays were) before the Popes tyranny, though afterwardes greatly abused.
                        Holydayes as they be nowe vsed, be rather meanes to withdrawe men, not onlyThe vse of our holydaies a stoppe to superstition. from superstition of the dayes them selues, but from all other kyndes of superstition whatsoeuer: for then is God in the publike congregation truly worshipped, the Sacramentes rightly ministred, the scriptures and other godly Homilies read, the worde of God faythfully preached: all whiche be the chiefe and principall meanes to withdrawe men, not onely from superstition, but all kynde of errour likewyse.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 120. Lin. 2.
                     And if they had bene neuer abused, neyther by the Papistes, nor by the Iewes (as they haue bene and are daylye) yet such makyng of holydayes is neuer without some greate daunger of brynging in some euyll and corrupt opinions into the myndes of men.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Imaginations and gheasses may not go for reasons, and I haue shewed before that the holydayes nowe obserued in the Churche of Englande, bée meanes to roote euill and corrupte opinions out of the heartes of men: so farre are they from ingendring the contrary.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 120. Lin. 5.
                     I wyll vse an example in one, and that the chiefe of holydayes, and most generally, & of longest tyme obserued in the Churche, which is the feaste of Easter, whiche was kept of some more dayes, of some fewer. Howe many thousandes are there, I wyll not saye of the ignoraunt Papistes, but of those also which professe the Gospell, which when they haue celebrated those dayes with diligent heede taken vnto theyr lyfe, and with some earnest deuotion in praying and hearing the worde of God, do not by and by thynke that they haue well celebrated the feaste of Easter, and yet haue they thus notably deceyued them selues. For Saint Paule teacheth the celebratyng of the feaste of the1. Cor. 5. Christians Easter, is not as the Iewes Easter was, for certayne dayes, but sheweth that wee must keepe this feaste all the dayes of our lyfe, in the vnleauened bread of sinceritie and of truthe, by which we see that the obseruing of the feaste of Easter for certayne dayes in the yeare, doth pul out of our myndes or euer wee bee aware, the doctrine of the Gospell, and causeth vs to reste in that neare consyderation of our duties for the space of a fewe dayes, whiche shoulde bee extended to all our lyfe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What? do you condemne the feast of Easter also? would you haue it abrogatedThe apostles obserued Easter. bicause it hath bene abused? do you not knowe that the Apostles them selues obserued it, and the Churche euer sithence their tyme? reade 
                              Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 23. and you shall finde it to be a tradition of the Apostles: per vse the. 24. and 25. chapter of the sameEuseb. lib. 5. cap. 23. 24. 29. booke, & you shall vnderstand by the testimony of Polycrates, & all the other byshops in Asia, that Philip the Apostle, Iohn the Euangelist, Polycarpus his scholler, & other byshops likewyse of greatest antiquitie, kept solēly the feast of Easter. But why should I labour to proue that, that all histories, all aunciēt fathers, al late wryters, al learned men confesse? and especially séeing that S. Augustine ad Ianu. 119. sayeth that the obseruation
                           
                           of Easter hath the authoritie from the scriptures, and séeing also that the same feaste with others is allowed by the confession of the Churches in Heluetia? The wordes of which confession be these. Moreouer if Churches, as they may by Christian libertieConfess. Helue. kepe religiouslye the remembraunce of Christe his birth, circumcision, passion, resurrection, ascention into heauen, and sending his holy ghoste vnto his disciples, wee well allowe it. Therefore I cannot but marueyle, that you so boldely without grounde, for abuse sake, condemne euen the feaste vsed and allowed by the Apostles, and continued in the Churche without contradiction, of any one worthy of credite, to this daye. Surely you may as well reason that the scriptures are not to be read, because that heretikes haue so greatly abused them.
                        Th place of S. Paule. 1. Cor. 5. is nothing to your purpose, for though he borrows a Metaphor of the Iewes passeouer, to moue the Corinthiās to purenesse and integritie of lyfe, yet doth he not abrogate the feaste of Easter: if he had ment any such thing (as he did not) yet must it haue bene vnderstanded of the Iewes passeouer, not of celebration of the memorie of Christes resurrection, whiche we commonlye call Easter. Dothe hée that sayeth the whole lyfe of a Christian man ought to bee a perpetuall faste, denye that there maye bée anye daye or tyme appoynted to faste in? A Christian man muste euer serue God and worshyppe hym, shall there not therefore be certayne dayes appoynted for the same? This is a verye symple argument. Saint Paule wylleth vs to purge out the olde leuen, that we maye be a newe lumpe. &c. also to kepe the feaste not with olde leuen, neither with the leuen of malitiousnesse. &c. therefore we maye not celebrate the feaste of Easter, once in the yeare. I denye this argument.
                        The obseruing of Easter, doth rather put vs in mynde of the doctrine of the Gospell, and drawe vs to a more nere consyderation of the benefites that wée haue receyued by the death, passion and resurrection of Christe, and I suppose that there are fewe godlye disposed Christians, that doe not thynke it moste conuenient and profitable, that such feastes especiallye shoulde bée in the Churche reteyned, neyther is euerye contentious persons imagination and surmyse what maye happen, to bée so greatlye regarded, that it shoulde bée sufficient to condemne anye thyng, that maye haue a profitable vse in the Churche, by whome so euer it is inuented, much lesse if it hath bene vsed of the Apostles them selues, and euer sythence theyr tyme continued in the Churche, as I haue shewed this feaste to haue bene. Th
                              〈1 line〉
                            weakenesse of man is greate, therefore as hée is continuallye to be taught that hée shoulde at all tymes remember his dutie, so is it verye necessarye to haue certayne feastes wherein by the readyng and hearyng of the Scriptures, men maye be particularlye styrred to the remembraunce and depe consyderation of the principall partes of our Religion, and the good and godlye examples of the Sainctes of God in doing their dutie therein.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 120. Lin. 18.
                     But besydes the incommodities that vyse of makyng such holydayes, and continuyng of those which are so horribly abused, where it is confessed that they are not necessary: besydes this I saye the matter is not so indifferent as it is made, I confesse that it is in the power of the Churche, to appoynt so many dayes in the weeke or in the yeare, in the whiche the congregation shall assemble to heare the worde of God, and receyue the Sacramentes, and offer vp prayers vnto God, as it shall thynke good, accordyng to those rules whiche are before alleadged. But that it hath power to make so manye holydayes (as we haue) wherein no man maye worke any parte of the daye, and wherein men are commaunded to cease from theyr daylye vocations, of Plowyng, and exercisyng theyr handye craftes. &c. that I denye to be in the power of the churche. For proofe whereof, I wyll take the fourth commaundement and no other interpretation of it than M. Doctor alloweth

of in the. 174. page, whiche is, that God lycenseth and leaueth it at the libertie of euery man to worke sixe dayes in the weeke, so that he rest the seuenth day. Seeing that therfore, that the Lord hathe lefte it to all men at libertie, that they might labour, if they thinke good sixe dayes: I say the Churche, nor You drawe from the Magistrate his law
                              〈1 line〉
                            authoritie, and giue to the people too muche carnall libertie. no man can take away this libertie from them, and driue them to a necessarie rest of the body.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The same God that gaue that libertie in that commaundement, did appoynt other solemne feast dayes besides the Sabboth: as the feast of Easter, of Pentecoste, of Tabernacles. &c. withoute any restraynte of this libertie. Therefore the interpretation giuen by me page. 174. of that place, dothe not leaue it to euery priuate mans frée libertie, agaynst the authoritie of the Magistrate, or of the Churche, but it giueth libertie rather to suche as be in authoritie, and to the Churche to appoynt therin what shall be conuenient.
                        The Magistrate hathe power and authoritie ouer his subiectes in all externallThe Magistrate hathe authoritie to abridge externall libertie. What libertie can not be taken away. matters, and bodily affayres: Wherefore he maye call them from bodily labour, or compell them vnto it, as shall be thought to him moste conuenient. The libertie that God giueth to man, whyche no man oughte to take from hym, nor can if he woulde, is libertie of conscience, and not of worldly affayres. In bodily businesse he is to be gouerned by Magistrates and lawes. This doctrine of yours is very licentious, and tendeth too muche to carnall and corporall libertie, and in déede is a very perillous doctrine for all states. Not one title in Gods worde dothe constrayne eyther the Magistrate, or the Churche from turning carnall libertie to the spiritual seruice of God, or bodily labour to diuine worship, as those doe that cause men to abstayne from corporall labour, that they maye heare the worde of God, and worship him in the congregation.
                        And whye maye not the Churche as well restrayne them from working anye parte of the daye, as it maye doe the moste parte of it, for you confesse, that it is in the power of the Churche to appoynte so many dayes in the weeke, or in the yeare, in the whiche the congregation shoulde assemble to heare the worde of God, and receyue the Sacramentes, and offer vp prayers vnto God, as it shall thinke good, according to those rules whiche are before alleaged: and this it can not doe, vnlesse in the same dayes during all that tyme, (whiche is no small portion of the daye) it restrayne them from bodily laboure.
                        Wherefore this béeing no commaundement, that they shall labour sixe dayes in the wéeke, but a signification that so many dayes they maye labour: as the same God that gaue this commaundement hathe done before in the olde lawe, so maye the Churches likewyse for the encrease of godlinesse and vertue, and edification, appoynt some of those sixe dayes, to be bestowed in prayers, hearing the worde, administration of the sacraments, and other holy actions.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 120. about the middest.
                     And if it be lawfull to abridge the libertie of the Churche in this poynte, and in steade that the Lorde saythe: Sixe dayes thou mayest labour if thou wilte, to saye, Thou shalte not labour sixe dayes: I doe not see why the Churche maye not as well, where as the Lorde saythe, thou shalt rest the seuenth daye, commaunde, that thou shalte not rest the seuenth day: for if the Church maye restrayne the libertie that God hathe giuen them, it maye take away the yoke also that God hathe put vpon them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Churche is not abridged of hir libertie in thys poynte, but vseth hir libertie in appoynting some of these dayes to the worshipping of GOD, and the

instruction of his people: whiche shoulde not be counted a bondage or seruitude to any man.
                        To rest the seuenth daye is commaunded: to labour sixe dayes is but permitted: he that for biddeth rest on the seuenth daye, dothe directly agaynst the cōmaundement: so dothe not he that restrayneth men from bodily labour in any of the sixe dayes, and therefore the reason is not lyke. And yet the commaundement of bodily rest vpon the seuenth day, in sundrie cases maye of a mans selfe, muche more at a lawfull commaundement of a Magistrate in necessitie be broken.
                        In thinges indifferent priuate mens willes are subiect to suche as haue authoritie ouer them, therefore they ought to consent to their determination in such matters, except they will shewe them selues to be wilfull, whiche is a great faulte, and deserueth muche punishment.
                        But hitherto you haue not replied to any Answere made to the Admonition.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 173. in the latter ende.
                     This is no restraynt for any man from seruing of God any daye in the weeke else. For the Iewes had diuers other feastes, whiche they by Gods appoyntment obserued, notwithstāding these words, Sixe dayes. &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 120. Sect. 1.
                     And where as you say in the. 173. page, that notwithstanding this fourth commaundement, the Iewes had certayne other feasts whych they obserued: In deede the Lorde which gaue this generall lawe, mighte make as many exceptions as he thoughte good, and so long as he thought good: but it followeth not bycause the Lorde dyd it, that therefore the Churche may doe it, vnlesse it hath commaundement and authoritie from God so to doe. As when there is any generall plague or iudgement of God, eyther vpon the Churche, or comming towards it, the Lorde commaundeth in suche a case, that they shoulde sanctifie a generall faste, and proclayme ghnatsarah, whiche signifieth2. Ioel. a prohibition or forbydding of ordinary works, & is the same Hebrue worde wherwith those feast days are noted in the law, wherin they should rest: the reason of which comaundement of the Lorde was, that as they abstayned that day, as much as myght be conueniently from meate, so they myght abstayne from their dayly workes, to the ende they might bestowe the whole day in hearing the worde of God, and humbling them selues in the congregation, confessyng their faultes, and desiring the Lorde to turne away from his fearce wrath. In this case the Churche hauing commaundement to make a holyday, maye and oughte to doe it, as the Churche whiche was in Babilon dyd, during the time of their captiuitie. But where it is destitute of a commaundemente, it may not presume by any decree to restrayne that libertie which the Lorde hath giuen.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        When you are conuinced by manyfest Scripture, as you are in this matter, then you flye to your newly deuised distinctions, as you do in this place, saying: The Lord whiche gaue this generall lawe, might make as many exceptions as he thought good, but to no purpose, for you can not shewe in the whole Scripture, where God hath made any lawe or ordinance agaynst his owne commaundement. And surely in this poynte you haue greatly ouershotte your selfe, béeing content rather to graunt contrarietie to be in the Scripture, than to yéelde to a manyfest and knowne truthe. The Church in appoynting holydayes, dothe followe the example of God him selfe, and thereforeTract. 2. hath sufficient ground and warrant for hir doings, and of the authoritie of the ChurchNo mans libertie restreyned. in such matters I haue spoken in an other place: And I haue also a little before declared, what kinde of libertie the Church may not restrayne: and I adde that euery priuate mans consent, is in the consent of ye Church, as it is in the consent of the Parliament,The Replyer bringeth authoritie against hym selfe. & therfore no mans libertie otherwise restrained than he hath cōsented vnto.
                        That in the seconde of the Prophet Ioell maketh agaynst you directly: for it sheweth that vpon iuste occasion, the Churche maye inhibite men from labour euen in

the sire dayes, notwithstanding it be sayde, Sixe dayes thou shalte labour. &c. And toThe Iewes aponynted to them selues holy dayes▪
                            the intente no man shoulde doubte of the libertie of the Churche héerem, or of the practise of this libertie, let the nynthe chapter of Esther be perused, and therein it will appeare that in remembrance of their great deliuerie from the treason of Haman, the Iewes by the commaundement of Mordecai, did solemnize and kéepe holydaye the fourtenth and fyftenth daye of the moneth Ader, euery yeare. But if neyther the ordinances of God himselfe, nor the wordes of his Prophetes, nor the examples of hys Apostles, nor the practise of his Churche from the beginning wil take any place with you, you are no man for me to deale with.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Of Sainctes dayes.
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 120. Sect. vlt.
                     Nowe that I haue spoken generally of holydays, I come vnto the Apostles and other saincts dayes, whiche are kepte wyth vs. And thoughe it were lawfull for the Churche to ordayne holydayes to our sauiour Christe, or to the blessed Trinitie, yet it is not therefore lawfull to institute holydayes to the Apostles and other Samctes, or to their remembrance. For althoughe I confesse as muche as you saye in the. 153. page, that the Churche of Englande dothe not meane by this keeping of holydayes, that the Saincts shoulde be honoured, or as you alleage in. 175. and 176. pages, that with vs the Saincts are not prayed vnto, or that it dothe propounde them as meritorious, yet that is not inoughe. For as we reason agaynst the Popishe purgatorie, that it is therefore naught, for as much as neyther in the olde Testament, nor in the newe, there is any mention of prayer at any tyme for the dead, Argum. ab auth ritate nogatiue. so may it be reasoned agaynst these holydayes ordeyned for the remēbrance of the Saincts, that for so much as the olde people dyd neuer keepe any feast or holyday for ye remēbrance eyther of Moses, or Daniel, or Iob, or Abraham, or Dauid, or any other howe holy or excellent soeuer they were: nor the Apostles, nor the Churches in their time neuer▪ instituted any, eyther to keepe the remembrance of Stephen, or of the Uirgin Mary, or of Iohn Baptist, or of any other notable and rare personage, that the instituting and erecting of them now, and this attempte by the Churches whiche followed, whiche haue not suche certayne and vndoubted interpreters of the will of God, as the Prophetes and Apostles were, whiche liued in those Churches, is not without some note of presumption, for that it vndertaketh those things whiche the Primitiue Churche in the Apostles times (hauing greater giftes of the spirite of God, than they that followed them had) durst not venter vpon.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Purgatorie is made a matter of saluation or damnation, as all other doctrines of the Popes be: and therfore a negatiue reason (suche as you vse) is sufficient inoughe to improue it: But holydayes in our Churche haue no suche necessitie ascribed vnto them, onely they are thought very profitable to the edifying of Gods people, and therefore suche negatiue reasons preuayle not agaynst them, no more than they doe agaynst other constitutions of the Church perteyning to edifying, order, or comelynesse, wherof there is no mention made in the worde of God. And therefore nothing that is héere spoken by you can take any holde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 175. Sect. 1.
                     Neyther are they called by the name of any Sainct in any otherWhy ye name of Sainctes are giuen to our holidays. respecte, than that the Scriptures whiche that daye are read in the Churche, be concerning that Sainct, and conteyne eyther hys calling, preaching, persecution, martyrdome, or suche like.
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 121. Sect. 1.
                     Moreouer, I haue shewed before, what force the name of euery thyng hathe, to cause men to thinke so of euery thing, as it is named, and therefore althoughe you saye in the. 175. page that in calling these holydayes the dayes of suche or suche a Saincte, there is nothyng else inent, but that the Scriptures whiche are that daye read concerne that Saincte, and conteyne eyther his calling, preaching, persecution, Martyrdome. &c. yet euery one dothe not vnderstande so muche. For besides that the corrupte custome of Popery hathe carryed their myndes to an other interpretation, the very name and appellation of the daye teacheth otherwyse. For seeing that by the dayes dedicated to the Trinitie, and those that are consecrate to our sauiour Christe, are in that they be called Trinitie daye, or the Natiuitie daye of our sauiour Christe by and by taken to be instituted to the honour of our sauiour Christe, and of the Trinitie, so likewyse the people when it is called sainct Paules daye, or the blessed Uirgin Maries daye, can vnderstande nothing thereby, but that they are instituted to the honour of sainct Paule, or of the Uyrgin Mary, vnlesse they be otherwyse taughte. And if you saye, let them so be taught, I haue answered, that the teaching in this lande, can not by any order whiche is yet taken, come to the most parte of those whiche haue dronke this poyson, and where it is taughte, yet were it good that the names were abolished, that they shoulde not helpe to vnteache that whiche the preaching teacheth in this behalfe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue so dismembred my booke, in taking héere a péece and there a péece, to answere as it pleaseth you, and in leauing oute what you liste, that you rather make a newe discourse of your owne, than a Replie to anye thyng that I haue set downe.
                        Touching the names of the holydayes (whiche you mislike) I haue tolde the cause why they be so called, whiche cause you can not improue, and therefore you fall agayne to your accustomed coniectures, and suppositions, whiche are but very simple and slender argumentes. What if euery one dothe not vnderstande so muche? muste the Churche alter hir decrées and orders, for euery particular mans abusing or not vnderstanding them? He that is moste ignorant maye learne and knowe why they be so called, if he be disposed: if he be not, the faulte is his owne, the name of the day is not the worse to be lyked. You might muche better reason agaynst the names of Sunday, Monday, and Saterday, whiche be Heathenishe and prophane names, yet I suppose that there is no man so madde, as to thinke that those dayes be instituted and vsed of Christians to the honour of the Sunne, of the Moone, and of Saturne. This is but to play the parte of a quareller (as I haue sundry times tolde you) to cauill at the name, when you can not reproue the matter. Those dayes be rather reteyned in the Churche, to roote out suche superstitious opinions, by the preaching of the worde, and the reading of the Scriptures: Neyther can any man that vnderstandeth Englishe, and frequenteth the common and publike prayers, in those holydayes (except he be wilfull) be so affected as you séeme to suspect.
                        Trinitie sunday, the Natiuitie of our Sauiour Christe, and suche lyke, althoughe we honour the Trinitie, and our Sauiour Christe in them, as we doe in all other, yet haue they their names especially, bicause the Scriptures then read in the Churche, concerne the Trinitie, and the Natiuitie of our Sauiour Christe. Augustine ad Ianuar. 119. sayth thus of the daye of the Natiuitie of Christe: Heere firstAugust. it behoueth that thou knowe the daye of the Natiuitie of the Lorde, not to be celebrated in a Sacrament or figure, but onely that it is called backe into remembraunce, that he is borne, and for this there needeth nothing, but that the day yerely be signified by solemne deuotion, wherein the thing was done.
                        
                        There is no place in this lande so destitute of instructions, eyther by preaching or reading, that any man can iustly pleade ignorance in suche matters, and therefore séeing you haue no other arguments agaynst holydayes, but coniectures, and surmises, and they false and vntrue, or at the least not sufficient to alter a profitable order in the Churche, holydayes maye still remayne and stande in their former force and strengthe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 121. Sect. 2.
                     Furthermore seeing the holydayes be ceremonies of the Churche, I see not why we may not heere reuue Augustiues complaynte, that the estate of the Iewes was more tollerable than ours is (I speake in thys poynt of holydayes) for if their holydayes and ours be accounted, we shall be founde It will be sound otherwyse. to haue more than double as many holydayes as they had. And as for all the commodities which we receyue by them, whereby M. Doctor goeth about to proue the goodnesse and lawfulnesse of their institution, as that the Scriptures are there read & expounded, the patience of those Sainctes in their persecution and martyrdome, is to the edifying of the Churche remembred, and yearely renued. I saye that we mighte haue all those commodities without all those daungers whiche I haue spoken of, and without any keeping of yerely memorie of those Saincts, and as it falleth out in better and more profitable sorte. For as I sayde before Very absurdly. of the keeping of Easter, that it tyeth, and (as it were) fettereth a meditation of the Easter to a sewe dayes, whiche shoulde reache to all our age and tyme of our lyfe: so those celebrations of the memories of Sainctes and Martyrs, streyghten our consideration of them vnto those dayes whych should continually be thought of, and dayly as long as we lyue. And if that it be thoughte so good and profitable a thing that this remembraunce of them shoulde be vpon those dayes wherein they are supposed to haue dyed, yet it followeth not therefore, that after thys remembraunce is celebrated by hearing the Scriptures concernyng them, and prayers made to followe their constancie, that all the rest of the daye shoulde be kepte holy in suche sorte, as men should be debarred of their bodily labours, and of exercising their dayly vocations.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Augustine speaketh not of holydayes in that place, but of other vnprofitable ceremoniesEpist. ad la. 119. vsed in particular Churches, neyther grounded of the Scriptures, determined by Councels, nor confirmed by the custome of the whole Churche. But the holydayes that we reteyne, béeing not onely confirmed by the custome of the whole Churche, but also profitable for the instruction of the people, and vsed for publike prayer, administration of the Sacramentes, and preaching the worde, can not be called burdens, except it be a burden to serue God in praying, in celebrating his sacraments, and in hearing his worde.
                        And whereas you say, that if theyr holydays & ours be accounted, we shal be found to haueThe Iewes had me holydayes than we. more thā double as many holydays as they had, you speake that whiche you are not able to iustifie. In the. 23, of Leuiticus there is appoynted vnto the Iewes the feast of Easter: the feast of vnleuened bread: the feast of first fruites: Whitsontide: the feast of trumpets: the feast of reconciliation, and the feast of Tabernacles: whereof the feast of vnleuened bread, and the feast of Tabernacles had eche of them seuen dayes annexed vnto them. And if you wyll adde to these, Iudiths feast, chap. 16. the Machabies feast. 1. Macha. chap. 4. whiche continued eyght dayes togither, and Hesters feast, chap. 9. whiche continued two dayes, you shall finde that our holydayes be some what short in number of theirs: so far are we from hauing more than double as many as they had. But your spirite is acquaynted with suche vntrue assertions.
                        But you saye, we mighte haue all these commodities without all those daungers. &c. and why not as well this waye whiche the whole Churche hathe from tyme to tyme allowed, as that way whiche certayne particular persons, of their owne heades haue deuysed? There is nothing that you haue to saye agaynst these dayes, but onely their names, and that those memories of Martyrs strayghten our consideration of them vnto those dayes, &c. and that men be inhibited from bodily labour, to serue God: al which I haue answered before, and the latter in parte you confesse: for you woulde haue certayne dayes appoynted for publike prayer, the celebration of the sacraments, & hearing the worde, and you seeme not to deny but that the remembrance of Saincts and Martyrs may be kepte, onely you mislike, that in the rest of the day men should be debarred from their bodily labours, & exercising their dayly vocations. Wel I perceeue that something

you woulde finde faulte with, if you knewe what. They are not so bounde from labour (as it appeareth in the lawes of this Churche) but that they may doe their necessarie businesse: and in déede they are so farre from scrupulositie in thys poynte, that all the punishmentes appoynted can not kéepe a number of them from their worldly affayres, not in the very time of publike prayers, and preaching of the worde: and yet I sée no cause why they maye not iustly be wholly debarred (excepte some vrgent occasion require sometime the contrarie) from their bodily labours in suche dayes: for are not the housholders bounde of duetie as well to instruct their families, as the Pastor is bounde to instructe them? and when is there a more conuenient tyme than in suche dayes? If you haue suche a regarde to their worldly affayres, is it not more commodious for them to abstayne wholly from worke vpon these Holydayes, when they fall, than twice or thrice euery wéeke halfe the daye? Therefore this reason of yours as it is worldly, so is it weake, bothe in the respect of God, and of the worlde also.
                        Your imagination that the kéeping of Easter dothe fetter the meditation of Easter to aA bayne reason. fewe dayes. &c. and so likewyse the reste of the Holydayes, I haue answered before, it is a moste vayne reason, and you mighte as well saye, that there oughte to be no certayne tymes appoynted for the receyuing of the holy Communion, bycause the meditation of the death and passion of Christe, and the application of the same, is fettered to these certayne dayes, whiche shoulde continually be thoughte of, and dayly as long as we lyue. The same mighte you saye likewyse of the Sabboth daye. But you oughte to knowe that the especiall celebrating of the memorie of Christes resurrection, once in the yeare, is no more a fettering of our meditation thereof to that daye onely, than the receyuing of the Communion once in the moneth, is a strayghting of our consideration of the deathe and passion of Christe, to that time onely, wherein we receyue the holy Sacrament: By this reason of yours we muste eyther haue suche memories celebrated at all times, or at no time. But wyse men can consider howe farre you wander for want of reason.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 176. Sect. 3. 4. 5.
                     Ierome writing vpon the. 4. chap. to the Galatians, sayth on thisIerome. sorte: If it be not lavvfull to obserue dayes, moneths, times, and yeres, vve also fall into the like fault vvhich obserue the passion of Christ, the Sabboth day, and the time of Lent, the feasts of Easter, and of Pentecoste, and other times appoynted to Martyrs, according to the maner and custome of euery nation, to the vvhich he that vvill ansvvere simply, vvill say, that our obseruing of dayes is not the same vvith the Ievvish obseruing, for vve doe not celebrate the feast of vnleuened bread, but of the resurrection & death of Christe. &c. And least the confused gathering togither of the people should diminishe the fayth in Christ, therfore certayne dayes are appoynted that vve might all meete togither in one place, not bicause those dayes be more holy, but to the intent that in vvhat day soeuer vve meete, vve may reioyce to see one another. &c.
                     Augustine in lyke manner Lib.
                         18. de ciuitate Dei, cap. 27. sayth, That vve honorAugustine. the memories of Martyrs, as of holy men, and suche as haue striuen for the truthe, euen to death. &c.
                     
                        
                        The same Augustine in his boke Contra Adamantum Manachaei Discip. ca.
                         16. expounding the woordes of the Apostle: Ye obserue dayes, yeares and tymes, wryteth thus. But one may thinke that he speaketh of the Sabboth: do not vvee say that those tymes ought not to be obserued, but the thinges rather that are signified by them? for they did obserue them seruilely, not vnderstanding vvhat they did signifie and prefigurate, this is that that the Apostle reproueth in thē, & in all those that serue the creature rather than the Creator: for vve also, solemnly celebrate the Sabboth day, and Easter, and all other festiuall dayes of Christians: but bycause vve vnderstand vvhervnto they do appertayne, we obserue not the times but those thinges vvhich are signified by the tymes, &c.
                  
                  
                     T. C Pag. 122. Sect. 1.
                     Nowe whereas M. Doctor citeth Augustine and Ierome to proue that in the Churches in theyr times, there were holy dayes kepte besides the Lordes day, he might haue also cyted Ignatius, and Tertullian, and Cyprian, which are of greater aunctencie, and would haue made more for the credite of his cause, seing he measureth all his truthe almoste through the whole booke, by the crooked measure and yarde of tyme. For it is not to be denied but this keeping of Holydayes (especially of the Easter and Pentecoste) are very auncient, and that these holydayes, for the remembraunce of Martyrs were vsed of long tyme, but these abuses were no auncienter than other were, grosser also than this was, as I haue before declared and were easie further to be shewed if neede required, and therefore An vnlearned shifte. I appeale from these examples to the Scriptures, and to the examples of the perfectest Churche that euer was, which was that in the Apostles tymes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I knowe that I might haue alleaged many other authorities for the proofe ofThe Repliee appealeth itō auncient authoritie. this matter, but I thought these two sufficient (as they be in déede) in such a matter as this is, and your lightly reiecting of them will winne no credite to your cause, among wise and learned menne. You may easilie perceyue by the woordes of bothe these Authours that these dayes in their tyme were rightly and without all superstition vsed. But you do well to appeale from these examples, and from all other auncient authoritie of learned menne: for you knowe full well your lacke of abilitie to maynteyne this and other your opinions by the testimonies of auncient wryters: nay you can not but confesse that the olde learned Fathers are vtterly agaynst you, which is the cause why you appeale from them: but it is an vnlearned shirt.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag▪ 122. Sect. 1.
                     And yet also I haue to say that the obseruation of those feastes, firste of all was much better than of later tymes. For Socrates confesting that neyther our Sauiour Christe, nor the Apostlesli. 5. ca. 22. did decree or institute any holydayes, or laye any yoke of bondage vpon the neckes of those which came to the preaching, addeth further that they did vse firste to obserue the holydayes by custome, and Socrates wordes vntruly reported. that as euery man was disposed at home: which thing if it had remayned in that freedome, that it was done by custome and not by commaundement, at the will of euery one, and not by constraynt, it had bene much better than it is now, and had not drawne such daungers vpon the posteritie, as did after ensue and we haue the experience of.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely they were neuer better, nor more pure from al supersticion, and other errours than they be nowe in this Churche: and therefore in that respecte there is no cause to complaine.
                        You do not truely reporte Socrates words, nor yet his meaning, for he doth not saySocrat. Lib. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Cap▪ 22. that euery man at home kepte those dayes as he was disposed: but thus he sayth, VVherefore
                           
                           neyther the Apostle, nor the Gospell, do at any tyme laye a yoke of bondage vpon them, whiche come vnto the preachyng of the Gospell, but menne themselues euery one in theyr countrie, according as they thought good, celebrated the feast of Easter, and other holydayes of custome, for the intermission of theyr laboures, and remembrance of the healthfull passion: his meaning is not, that euery priuate man in his owne house kepte Easter, and the other feastes as him lysted: but that euery Churche appoynted such an order and tyme for the same, as it thought conuenient: and that this is his meaning, that whiche followeth in that Chapter, and expresseth his owne opinion of this mater, dothe euidently declare. His woordes be these: Surely I am of this opinion, that as many other thinges in diuerse places haue bene brought in of custome, so the feaste of Easter had a priuate or peculiar obseruation with euery particular people of custome, bycause none of the Apostles (as I haue sayde) did make any lawe hereof, &c. For his whole drifte is to proue that the feast of Easter concerning the daye and tyme, was diuersly obserued in diuers Churches and Countries: but he neyther can proue, nor goeth aboute to proue, that there was any Churche wherein it was not obserued. And I haue before declared that the feast of Easter was obserued by the Apostles, and sithence that tyme continued.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 177. Sect. 1. & Pag. 178. Sect. 1. &c.
                     
                        Other reformed Churches also haue dayes ascribed to SainetsBullinger. aswell as we, as it may appeare by these wordes of Bullinger writingObseruing of holydayes in other reformed churches vpon the. 14. to the Rom. In the auncient vvriters, as Eusebius and Augustine, thou mayste finde certayne memorials appoynted to certayne holy menne, but after an other manner, not muche differing from oures vvhich vve as yet reteyne in our Churche of Tigurie, for vvee celebrate the natiuitie of Christe, his Circumcision, Resurrection, and Ascention, the comming of the holy Ghost, the feastes also of the virgin Mary, Iohn Baptiste, Magdalene, Stephen, and the other Apostles: yet not condemning those vvhich obserue none, but onely the Sabboth daye. For perusing olde Monumentes, vve finde that this hath alvvayes bene left free to the Churches, that euery one should follow that in these things, that should be most best and conuenient.
                     M. Bucer in his Epistle to master Alasco, speaking of holydayes,Bucer. sayeth: That in the Scriptures there is no expresse commaundement of them: it is gathered notvvithstanding (sayeth he) from the example of the olde people, that they are profitable for vs, to the encrease of godlinesse, vvhich thing also experience proueth.
                     To be shorte, Illyricus writing vpon the fourth to the Galat. makethObseruing of dayes considered foure wayes. this diuision of obseruing dayes and times.
                     
                        The first is naturall, as of somer, spryng time, winter, &c. tyme of planting, tyme of sovvyng, time of reaping, &c.1
                        
                        The second is ciuill.2
                        
                        The third Ecclesiasticall, as the Sabboth daye, and other dayes, vvherein3 is celebrated the memorie of the chiefe histories or actes of Christe, vvhiche be profitable for the instruction of the simple, that they may the better remember vvhen the Lorde vvas borne, vvhen he suffred, vvhen he ascended vp into heauen, and be further taught in the same.
                        
                           The fourth superstitious, vvhen we put a necessitie, vvorshipping, merite4 or rightuousnesse in the obseruing of tyme: and this kinde of obseruing dayes and tymes is onely forbidden in this place.
                     
                     Thus you see by the iudgementes of all these learned menne, that dayes ascrybed vnto Sainctes, is no suche matter, as ought to make menne separate themselues from the Churche, and absteyne from allowing by subscription, so worthie and godly a booke, as the booke of common prayer is, much lesse to make a Schisme in the Churche for the same.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 122. Sect. 2. 3.
                     As touching M. Bucers, M. Bullingers, and Illyricus allowance of them, if they meane such a celebration of them, as that in those dayes the people may be assembled, and those partes of the Scriptures which concerne them whose remembraunce is solemnised, redde & expounded, and yet men not debarred after from their dayly workes, it is so much the lesse matter: if otherwise that good leaue they giue the Churches to dissent from them in that poynte. I do take it graunted vnto me, being by the grace of God one of the Churche.
                     Although as touching M. Bullinger, it is to be obserued, since the time that he wrote that vpon the Romanes, there are aboute. 35. yeares, sithence which time although he holde still that the feastes kept vnto the Lorde, as of the Natiuitie, Easter and Pentecoste, dedicated vnto the Lord may be kept, yet he demeth flatly, that it is lawfull to keepe holy the dayes of the Apostles, asConfessio Ecclesiae Tigur. & alianim Eccles. cap. 24. it appeareth in the confession of the Tiguryne Church ioyned with others.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        How perfect an Answere this is, to these learned mennes authorities, lette the learned Reader iudge. You are not a Churche, but a member of the Churche, and therefore seing the matter is such as the Churche may take an order in, you ought to submitte your selfe to the determination of that Churche in such matters, whereof you are a member.
                        What M. Bullinger hath in any other place consented vnto, I knowe not, but certayne it is that these be his owne woordes, And that when he writte them he was of the same opinion that we are at this tyme in this Church of England.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 177. Sect. 2.
                     Caluine in lyke manner writing vpon the fourth to the Galatians,Caluine. doth not disallow this kinde of obseruing dayes, his wordes be these: VVhen as holynesse is attributed to dayes, vvhen as one day is discerned from an other for religion sake, vvhen dayes are made a peece of diuine vvorship, then dayes are vvickedly obserued, &c. But vvhen vve haue a difference of dayes, laying no burden of necessitie on mens consciences, vve make no difference of dayes, as though one vvere more holy than an other, vve put no religion in them, nor vvorshipping of God, but onely vve obserue them for order and concorde sake, so that the obseruing of dayes vvith vs is free, and vvithout all superstition. And agayne vpon the. 2. to the Colloss. But some vvill say, that vve as yet haue some kinde of obseruing dayes: I ansvvere that vve obserue them not, as though there vvere any religion in them, or as though it vvere not then lavvfull to labour, but vvee haue a respect of pollycie & orders, not of dayes. And in his Institutions vpō the fourth commaundement, Neyther do I so speake of the seuenth daye, that I vvould binde the Church onely vnto it, for I do not condemne

those Churches vvhich haue other solemne dayes to meete in, so that they be voyde of superstition, vvhich shall be if they be ordeyned onely for the obseruing of discipline and order.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 122. Sect. 4.
                     As for M. Caluine, at the practise of him and the Churche where he lined was and i
                           〈1 line〉
                        , to admitte no one holy day besides the Lordes day, so can it not be shewed out of any parte of his workes (as I thinke) that he approued those holy dayes which are nowe in question. He sayeth in deede in his Institution: that he will not condemne those Churches which vse them: no more do we the Churche of Englande, neyther in this nor in other thinges whiche are meete to be reformed. For it is one thing to mistike, an other thing to condemne, and it is one thing to condemne some thing in the Churche, and an other to condemne the Churche for it. And as for the places cited out of the Epistle to the Galatians, and Collossians, there is no mention of any holydayes eyther to Sainctes, or to any other, and it appeareth also that he defendeth not other Churches, but the churche of Geneua, and answereth not to those which obiecte against the keping of Sainctes dayes, or any holydayes (as they are called) besides the Lordes daye, but against those whiche woulde not haue the lordes day kepte still as a day of reste from bodily labour, as it may appeare both by his place vpon the Collossians, and especially in that which is alleaged out of his Institutions: and that he meaneth nothing lesse, than such holydayes as you take vpon you to detende, it may appeare first in the place of the Collossians, where he sayeth, that the dayes of reste whiche are vsed of them are vsed for pollicie sake. Nowe it is well knowne, that as it is pollycie and a way to preserue the estate of thinges and to keepe them in a good continuance and successe, that as well the beastes as the menne which labour sixe dayes should rest the seuenth: so it tendeth to no pollicie nor wealth of the people, or preseruation of good order, that there shoulde be so many dayes, wherein menne should cease from worke, beyng a thing which breedeth idlenesse, and consequently pouertie, besides other disorders and vices, which alwayes go in companie with idlenesse. And in the place of his Institutions he declareth himselfe yet more playnely when he sayeth, that those odde holydayes, then are without superstition, when they be ordeyned onely for the obseruing of discipline and order, whereby he giueth to vnderstande, that he would haue them no further holydayes, than for the tyme which is bestowed in the exercise of the discipline and order of the churche, and that for the reste, they should be altogither as other dayes free to be laboured in. And so it appeareth, that the holydayes ascribed vnto Sainctes by the seruice booke, is a iuste cause why a man cannot safely without exception subscribe vnto the seruice booke.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What soeuer M Caluines practise was in the Churche of Geneua, yet in these places dothe his iudgement euidently appeare, neyther doth a man alwayes vse that himselfe, which he alloweth in an other: for there may be circumstances to make that commendable in one place, that is not so in an other.
                        He that condemneth the thing as vnlawfull, muste also condemne the Churches that vse the same, though not wholly, yet in that poynt. For as muche therefore as M. Caluine did not condemne other Churches for obseruing suche dayes, it is a manifest argument that he condemned not the obseruing of those dayes in those Churches. In déede it is one thing to mislike, an other thing to condemne, but he that maketh suche a sturre in the Churche for these matters, as you do, and that so disorderly, can not be sayde onely to mislyke, but also to condemne.
                        The place of M. Caluine, out of the Epistle to the Galat. is not mente onely of the Lordes daye, but of other dayes also obserued in other reformed Churches, and in that place he maketh a generall answere as it were for them all, as it is soone perceyued by suche as will reade that place. He also that shall per vse his woordes vpon the seconde chapter to the Collossians, shall finde the lyke sense in them. In that he sayeth they be vsed for order and pollicie, wee do not dissent from him, but thinke so in lyke manner, howbeit wée vnderstande as he doth Ecclesiasticall order and pollicie, for in the wordes that go before the place to the Galatians, he sayeth, that the obseruing of dayes dothe also perteyne, ad Regimen Ecclesiae, to the gouernmentCaluin. in 4. Gal. of the Churche. What better order and pollicie can there be, than to haue certayne dayes appoynted wherein the people may reste from bodily labour, to labour spiritually, to heare the worde of God, &c. whiche M. Caluine called order and pollicie, and not the externall rest of the Sabboth daye, which is a commaundement of

God, and no constitution of the Churche, neyther hath the Churche any respect to worldly pollicie in appoynting of Holydayes, but to Ecclesiasticall pollicie, whiche consisteth in hearing the wordes, ministring the Sacramentes, publike Prayers, and other such lyke godly actions.
                        The place in his Institutions, conuince all your shifting coniectures of mere follie, for therein he playnely declareth his allowing in other Churches of 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o Holydayes than the Sunday, whiche you haue denied to be his opinion in the former two places. I haue tolde you what he meaneth by discipline and order or pollicie: whereby he giueth to vnderstande nothing lesse than that whiche you woulde conclude, beyng but your owne deuise to serue for a poore shifte at a néede. And although the matter is not greate, whether they labour or no, yet the lawe of the Prince, and the order of the Churche is to be obserued. And so it appeareth that there is no reasonable cause as yet proued, why you ought not to subscribe to the seruice Booke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 82. Sect. 1. 2.
                     
                        In the ende you adde: (patched if not altogither, yet the greatest peece out of the Popes Portuis.)
                     To this I answere briefely, it maketh no matter of whome it was inuented, in what Booke it is conteyned: so that it be good and profitable, and consonant to Gods worde. Well sayeth Ambrose, Omne verum à quocunque dicitur à spiritu Sancto est. All truth, of vvhome soeuer it is spoken is of the holy ghost.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 123. Lin. 6.
                     Nowe whereas M. Doctor sayeth, it maketh no matter wither these thinges be taken out of the Portuis, so they be good &c. I haue proued first they are not good, then if they were yet beyng not necessarie, and abused horribly by the Papists, other beyng as good and better than they, ought not to remayne in the churche.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your reasons be not sufficient to proue them not to be good: the abuse hath not bene suche, but that it beyng remoued, the thing may still remayne as profitable andThe 
                                 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉
                               be 
                                 〈◊〉
                               to 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               iudgement. conuenient: the iudgement of the Churche in determining what is best and moste fittest in matters of order, pollicie, and gouernment (not beyng agaynst the worde of God) is to be preferred before any priuate mans opinion, and imagination.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 123. Lin. 10.
                     And as for Ambrose saying, all truth of whome soeuer it be sayde, is of the holy ghoste: if I were disposed to moue questions, I coulde demaunde of him which careth not of whome he haueMark. 1. the truth, so he haue it, what our Sauiour Christe ment to refuse the testimonie of Deuils, when they gaue a cleare testimonie▪ that he was the Sonne of God, and the holy one? And what S. Paule ment to be angrie, and to take it so grieuously, that the Pithonisse sayde, he and his companionAct. 16. were the seruantes of the highe God, which preached vnto them the way of saluation? Here▪ was truth and yet reiected, and I would knowe whether M. Doctor would saye, that these spake by the spirite of God. Thus whilest without all iudgement, he snatcheth here a sentence and there another out of the Doctoures, and that of the worste, as if a man should of purpose choose out the brosse, and leaue the siluer, within a while he will make no great difference, not onely betwene the Prophetes and Apostles, and prophane wryters, as Aristotle, and Plato, but not betwene them and those, which speake not by the conduyte and leading of the holy ghoste, but by the violent thrusting of the wicked spirite.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Christe liked not the truth beyng vttered of the Diuell, bycause he spake it of an euill meaning: but he liked very well the same testimonie of truth afterwardes vttered by Peter sincerely. Math. 16. Mar. 8. Neyther did he mislike the woordes bycause they were abused by the Diuell before. But I will leaue Diuels, and speake of men, of whome I thinke Ambrose mente, although the truth is truthe of whome soeuer it is vttered: but to Answere for Ambrose: he hath sayde nothing in that sentence which may not be iustified.
                        M. Caluine (vpon these woordes, 1. Corinth. 12. And no man can saye that Iesus is theCaluine. Lorde, but by the holy Ghost) sayeth thus. It may be demaunded, whether the wicked haue the Spirite of God, seyng they sometime testifie playnely and well of Christe. I answere that there is no doubte but that they haue, so much as concerneth that effect: but it is an other thing to haue the gifte of regeneration, than to haue the gifte of bare vnderstanding, wherewith Iudas was indued, when he preached the Gospell.
                        M. Martyr also vpon the same woordes, after he hath recited the opinions of other,P. Martyr. maketh this resolution. But when I weygh this matter with my selfe, I perceyue that the Apostle here dothe speake, not of the Spirite whiche doth regenerate, or of that grace which iustifieth, but of the giftes which are freely giuen whiche may happen as well to the good as to the euill. Therefore I thinke that Paule spake simply, that he might declare, that by what meanes soeuer we speake well of Christe, it is of the holy Ghost, of whomeOmne verum à spiritu sancto est. commeth all truthe, as all vntruth proceedeth of the Deuill who is the father of lyes. You sée therefore that Ambrose is not of this iudgement alone, and that his saying is verie true.
                        
                        The Doctoures that I haue vsed, in this cause, be Ierome and Augustine, whiche be not the worst, but comparable with the best. I haue rehearsed out of them whole sentences, and perfite, the which you are not able to answere: the rest of your opprobrious woordes, wherewith you conclude this question of holy dayes, I leaue for other to consider of, as notes of your spirite.
                        And to the intent that the Reader may vnderstande, that it was not for naught, that you set not downe my Booke togither with your Replie, I will here set downe such portions of my booke touching this matter, as you haue not answered vnto, but closely passed ouer, not thinking that any man should haue espied your lacke of abilitie to answere them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They should first proue that holy dayes ascribed to Sayncts, prescript seruices for them, &c. are agreeable to the written worde of the Almightie.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 153. Sect. 4. & Pag. 154. Sect. 1.
                        
                           Holy dayes ascribed to Sainctes, wherein not the Sainctes, but God is honoured, and the people edified, by reading and hearing suche stories and places of Scripture, as perteyne to the martyrdome, calling▪ and function of such Sainctes, or any other thing mentioned of them in Scripture, must needes be according to Gods worde. For to honor God, to worship him, to be edified by the stories and examples of Sainctes out of the Scripture, cannot be but consonant to the Scripture. The prescript secuice for them is all taken out of Gods worde, and not one peece thereof, but it is moste consonant

vnto the same. If ther be any that is repugnant, set it down, that we may vnderstande it.
                        I tolde you before, that touching the dayes and times and other Ceremonies, the churche hath authoritie to determine what is most cōuenient, as it hath done from time to time. S. August. in his epistleAugustine. 
                           ad Ian. in ye place before of me recited saithe, that the passion of Christe, his resurrectiō, his ascētion, & the day of the cōming of the holy ghost (which we cōmonly call Whitsontide) is celebrated, not by any cōmaundement written, but by the determination of the church. And it is the iudgement of al learned writers, that the church hath authoritie in these things so that nothing be done against the word of God. But of this I haue spoken partly before, and intende to speake more largely thereof in the place folowing, where you agayn make mention of it.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     In this booke days are ascribed vnto saincts, & kept holie with fastes on their euens, & prescript seruice appointed for them, which beside that, they are of many superstitiously kepte and obserued, and also contrarie to the commaundementExo. 20. 9. Exo. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           3. 12. Deu. 5. 13. Esa. 1. 10. 13 14. Leuit. 23. 3. 2. Esd. 1. 13. Rom. 14. 6 Ga. 4. 10. 11 of God, Six days thou shalt labour: and therfore we for the superstition that is put in them, dare not subscribe to allow them.
                     
                        Answer to the Admo. pag 173. sect. 2. &. pa. 174. 175. &. pa. 176. sect. 1. 2.
                        Your collection hāgeth not together, for how foloweth this: these holidays be superstitiously obserued of some, therfore you may not allow thē? why should other mēs superstition hinder you from lawfully vsing a lawful thing? The saboth day is superstitiously vsed of some:Abuse of thin ges doth not condemne the things. so is ye church, so is ye crede, & the Lords praier, & many things else, and yet I hope you wil subscribe to thē. You heap vp a nūber of places in the margent to proue yt which no mā doubteth of, yt is, this portion of the comandemēt, Six days shalt thou labour. &c. the meaning of which words is this, that seing God hath permitted vnto vs six days to do our own works in, we ought the seuenth day wholly to serue him.
                        Euery mā hath not bodily labour to do, but may serue God aswell in these six dayes, as in the seuenth. And certainly he doth not by any meanes breake this cōmaundement, which absteineth in any of these six days from bodily labour to serue god▪ For this is the cōmandemēt, Remember that thou kepe holy the Sabboth day: as for this (Six days thou shalt work) is no cōmandement, but tendeth rather to the constitution of the Saboth, thā to the prohibiting of rest in any other day appointed to the seruice of God: And it is asmuch as if he should say: Sixe days thou mayst worke: & so do some translate the Hebrewe worde.
                        The place alleaged out of the first of Esay is far from the purpose, ther is not one word there spokē of any holy days dedicate to saints, but only the Lord signifieth, that their sacrifices & feast days wer not acceptable vnto him, bicause they were done in hypocrisie, & withoutEsay cōdemneth the maner of sacrificing. fayth: so that he reproueth modum, not factum, their maner of sacrificing (that is) their hypocriticall kynde of worshipping him.
                        In the seconde of Esdras. 1. in the place by you quoted. I see not one worde that may serue for your purpose, the wordes you quote be these: I haue led you through the sea, and haue giuen you a sure wayUaine quotation. since the beginning, I gaue you Moses for a guide, and Aaron for a Priest.
                        
                        
                           In the. 14. to the Ro. the apostle speaketh nothing of our holydays, but of suche as were obserued among the Iewes, and abrogated by the commyng of Chryste. And yet in that place the Apostle exhorteth, that wee whyche bee strong, should not despyse them that are weake, nor condemne them, though they vse not the christian libertie in dayes and meates.
                        That in the fourth to the Galat. Ye obserue dayes, moneths, and tymes, and yeares. &c. Sainct Augustine 
                              ad Ianuar. Episto. 119. expoundethAugustine. on this sorte. Eos inculpat qui dicunt non proficiscar, quia posterus dies est, aut quia luna sic fertur, vel proficiscar vt prospera cedant, quia ita se habet positio syderum, non agam hoc mense commertium, quia illa stella mihi agit mensem, vel agam quia suscepit mensem. I know there be other that do otherwise expounde that place (and that truly) euen as they doe also that in the. 14. to the Rom. of certain Iewish feastes, as Sabboths, newe Moones, the feastes of Tabernacles, the yeare of Iubilie, and such like abrogated by the gospell, and yet superstitiously obserued of some. But these places cā by no means be vnderstode of the days obserued by vs, & called▪ by the names of saintes dayes, for they were ordeined since the writing of this epistle.
                        And that you may vnderstād the differēce betwixt the festiual daysDifference betwixte the Papists holidays & ours. obserued of the Papists, & the days allowed now in this Churche: it is to be considered, 

                              First, that their Saints days were appointed for the honoring and worshipping of the Saints, by whose names they were called: oures be ordeined for the honoring of God, for publike prayer, and edifying the people by readyng the Scriptures, and preachyng.
                              2 The Papistes in their Saincts dayes prayed vnto the Sainctes: we only pray vnto God in Christes name.
                              3 They had all things done in a strange tong without any edifying at all: we haue the prayers and the Scriptures red in a tongue known, which can not be without great commoditie to the hearers.
                              4 To be shorte, they in obseruing their dayes, thinke they merite therby something at Gods handes: We in obseruing our days, are taught farre otherwyse.
                           
                        
                        The Church euen from the beginning hath obserued such feastes, as it may appeare in good writers.
                     
                  
                  
                     Pag. 179 Sect. 1.
                     Touching fastyng on the euens of suche feastes, or rather absteyning from fleshe, you know it is not for religion, but for policie, and as I thinke, the same is protested in that Act, where suche kynde of absteyning is established: And therfore these be but slender quarels picked to disalowe suche a booke.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        All this haue you ouerskipped: for what cause, you know best your selfe.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶ What kind of preaching is moste effectual. Tract. 11.
            
               The firste Diuision.
               
                  Admonition.
                  The fiftenth and sixtenth. Then 1. Pet. 5. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        . feeding the flocke diligently, nowe teachyng quarterlye:

then preachyng 1. Tim. 4. 2. in season and out of season, nowe once in a moneth is thought sufficient, if twice, it is iudged a worke of supererogation▪
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 82. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 83. & Pag. 84. Sect. 1.
                     These be but wordes of pleasure: God bee thanked there bee ministers (and suche as you mislyke of) whiche feede their flocks diligently, and preache in tyme, and out of tyme, according bothe to S. Peters and S. Paules meaning.
                     But you must vnderstande, that he doth not always feede theWho teacheth best. best, nor take the greatest paines, which preacheth most often, but he that preacheth most learnedly, most pithyly, most orderly, most discretely, moste to edifying.
                     It may be that he which preacheth but once in the moneth, takethOne learned sermon better than many vnlearned. more paynes for his sermon, hath more pithe and learnyng in hys sermon, edifieth more by his sermon, than you doe for all your sermons, in all your sermons, or by al the sermons that you make in the whole yeare, be they neuer so many. For what is it to preache eueryFriuolous and contentious sermons▪
                         day, and to spend the time with words only, or with bytter inuectiues against certain trifles, and against superiours? Such sermons do not edifie, but destroy, do not worke in the heartes of the hearers faith & charitie, but either cōtempt of religion, or else contempt of superiors, cōtempt of good orders, yea hatred, malice, vndiscrete wrath, coloured with a pretēce of zeale. Truly such sermōs seldome or neuer worke any good effect: many womē in London could on that sort occupie the tyme. Wherfore I am fully persuaded, that he cōmeth nerer to the fulfilling of the mynd of the Apostle, which diligētly studying & labouring continually for knowledge, doth orderly, learnedly, and effectually preach once in the moneth, thā such as backbiting at other mens tables, running all the day long vp and downe the stretes, seldome or neuer studying, do negligently, vnorderly, verbally (if I may so terme it) preach euery day twice. And yet I know the oftner a man doth preach (the former circumstances being considered) the better it is. But of euery one it will be required according to his talent: & not he that speaketh most, but laboureth most to speak, not he that preacheth most often, but that preacheth moste painfully, truly, and diligently, shall in that day be beste accepted.
                     That learned and auncient father M. Whithead hath sundry times lamented in my hearing (and I thinke there be other of his frendes hathe hearde the same) the loose, friuolous, and vnprofitable preaching of diuers ministers in London. And I would to God it were better looked vnto: then I thinke verily we shoulde haue lesse contention and more religion.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 123. Sect. 1.
                  Here M. Doctor would faine (as it seemeth) if he durste, interprete diligent preaching & preaching in season, and out of season, to be preaching once a moneth. But bicause he dare not say so directly, he compasseth it about, and first putteth the case of one preaching twice a day, verbally, and wyth small substance of matter, and of an other preachyng but once in a moneth, and doth it pythyly, and orderly, and discretely, and concludeth, that suche a Sermon once in a monethe, is nearer the mynde of the Apostle, than all those other Sermons made twice euery daye: and yet the case is not so cleare, as he maketh it. For grauntyng that those (which he calleth verball sermons) haue some goodnesse and edifying, it must be very simple & slender meate, which is not better

beyng giuen euery day, than the best and dayntiest meate once onely in a moneth. For with the one a man may liue although he be not lyking, with the other he being once fed, is afterward fai
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                     shed. But how if the case be put, that the monethly and long laboured sermons, as they are called, haue as little, and lesse good wholsome doctrine in them, than the sermons whiche are preached euery daye. Assuredly for the moste of those that goe so long with a Sermon, and whyche I knowe and haue hearde: when they come to bryng it foorthe: bryng foorth oftentymes more wy
                        〈1 line〉
                     e, and vnprofytable matter, than any good and tymely frute, or holesome substantiall doctrine. And no maruell, for therein the worde of God is fulfilled, whiche declareth that the talentes of Gods gifts and grace, are encreased by co
                        〈1 line〉
                     tinuall vse, and laying out of them, and of the other side diminished, and in the ende taken quite away, when as they are suffered to lie so long rusting, as it were digged in the ground.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Doctors wordes hée playne: youre dealyng wyth them can not obscure them: That whyche I haue spoken of verball Sermons, is notoriously knowneThere is not the like reason of externall and spirituall foode. to bée true. What I haue sayde of monethly Sermons, I referre to other mens iudgemente. The similitude betwixte the externall meate that féedeth the bodie, and the woorde of God that féedeth the soule, dothe fayle in manye thyngs, and especially in these: that the meate of the bodie remayneth not in the stomacke, but passeth thorough: the worde of God continueth and indureth in the mynde for euer. The meate of the bodie, the better it is digested, the lesser whyle it dothe continue: The worde of God the better it is vnderstoode and remembred, the longer it remaineth. The meat of the bodie once taken, serueth but for ye present time, bée it neuer so good and holesome: The worde of God once preached, and faythfully receyued, dothe nourishe and féede continually: therefore one learned, effectuall, orderly Sermon, preached once in a Moneth, conteyneth more nouryshemente in it, feedeth longer, woorketh more in the heartes of the hearers, edifyeth more, than all the vnorderlye, and verball Sermons, I myght also adde contentious, that some preache in one whole yeare. But you compare the worde of God, and the nutriment of the body togyther in most grosest manner, and in that wherein they are nothing like.
                     What you thinke of those monethly, and long laboured sermons (as you call them) it skilleth not much, for you are in a heate, which hindreth true iudgemente. But I woulde haue you, and all other to vnderstande, that this whiche I speake of monethly sermons, I speake it in compar
                           〈1 line〉
                        son, and not that I woulde haue a man that is otherwise able, to preach but once in a moneth. I haue shewed the contrary in my Answer. Euery man shall render an accompt of his laboure according to his talent. Wherefore you and your company which are so greatly delighted in spreading false rumors of other men, and séeke to win credite vnto your selues, by diffaming of them, shall answer one day, to God and to me, for the great iniurie you haue done me in that behalfe. If it were lawfull for me to boast of my selfe, I might iustly saye and proue it, that I haue preached as many sermons as the most of you: God forgiue me for my boasting, but you compell me. Well I confesse that I haue done no more than I ought to haue done: And I beséech God to graunt me no longer life, or ioy in this worlde, than I desire to be vigilante and profitable in his Churche. I woulde not be dumbe and without a function as you are, and vppon that occasion, for all the goodes in Englande: For surely if those that preache not being able and once called therevnto, shall haue an hard iudgement: what shall become of suche, as not onely not preache themselues, but deface other men that preache, by backbiting and slaundering, and spreading abrode false rumours vpon them, to discredite both their persons, and doctrine: and with sectes & schismes rent in péeces the Church of Christ, and violently plucke downe whatsoeuer other men haue builded. O. T. C. these things would be considered in time.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The seconde Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 123. Sect. 2.
                  And heere M. Doctor taketh occasion to vtter his stomacke agaynste London▪ flynging of one syde agaynste the women, of the other syde agaynste the Ministers, whose diligence bycause it maketh M. Doctors negligence more to appeare, as a darke and dus
                        〈1 line〉
                     she colour, matched with that whiche is cleare and lightsome, he doth goe aboute to deface, with the vntrue and slaunderous surmyse, of loose, negligente and vnprofitable preachyng. If there be some one such or two in London, 
                        〈1 line〉
                     t is too greate iniurie therefore, to charge indefinitely the companye of the ministers of London. Besydes that, M. Doctor dothe not see howe fyrste he accuseth the▪ Bishop or euer he beaware, bothe in ordeyning suche ministers, and not in reforming them, beyng so farre out of order, and then the Archbishop, whiche doth not require this disorder at the Bishops hande, 
                        〈◊〉
                      (as he sayeth) this is so godlie and heauenly an order, to haue one Bishop ouer many ministers, and one Archebishop ouer dyuers▪ Bishops, and if we shall esteeme the pythinesse and fastnesse of preachyng▪ by the frutes, as by the knowledge and sear▪ of God in the people of London, and by faythfull and true hearts toward the Prince, and the Realme, I thynk that that which he termeth 
                        〈◊〉
                     , loose, and vnprofitable preachyng, wit fal out to be waightyer, and to leaue a deeper printe behynde them, than those monethly sermons, whyche he speaketh of. And tte Ministers of London better ministers, whiche preache twice a day, than those whiche make the words of God nouell and daynties, and as M. Latimer pleasantly sayd, Strawberies commyng only at certayne tymes of the yeare.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I speake fyrste of the Authours of the Admonition. Then I reporte M. Whithead his saying of dyuers preachers in London: whiche if you coulde haue improued, I thynke you woulde.
                     I knowe there be manye graue, learned, wyse and go
                           〈1 line〉
                        re Preachers in London, whyche haue greately profited that place, and as instrumentes haue wroughte those good effectes you speake of, in the heartes of many
                           〈1 line〉
                        . But I knowe also, there be some others farre vnlyke vnto them in all respects, who by their vndiscreate and loose dealyng, haue as muche as 
                           〈1 line〉
                        yeth in them, wroughte the contrarie.
                     If they haue bene suffered eyther throughe the negligence of Archebishop, or Bishop, I excuse neyther of them: I thinke they haue good cause to take better héed hereafter.
                     Touching the women of London, I haue not sayde any thyng to their disprayse, I knowe a number verie honeste and godlie, and I knowe none that is euyll. Onely I require that modestie in some of them, that beséemeth sober matrones, and women pro
                           〈1 line〉
                        essyng the Gospell. It is not séemely for a woman to speake in the Churche, no not that whiche is good: muche lesse comely is it for hir to sc
                           〈1 line〉
                        lde openly in the streates, or to be a common deprauer of others at tables, and other meetings.
                     There is no cause why I shoulde beare a stomacke 
                           〈◊〉
                         London, whiche place I haue alwayes honoured, where I haue many friendes, to the whych I haue shewed as many tokens of good will, as any one man of my abilitie: But if I admonishe some of the Citezens, and bidde them take héede, that they abuse not the Gospell to serue theyr affections, that they make it not a cloke for theyr contentions, that they waxe not wearie of it, and desire straunge Doctrines, that they heape not vp suche Preachers vnto themselues, as maye serue theyr humours, that they shewe themselues more thankfull for the Gospell, the whyche they haue so long receyued, that they studye for peace and quietnesse, that they grieue not the Prince in séekyng alterations, by whome they enioy the pure worde of God, true vse of his Sacramentes, and syncers woorshyppyng of hym: To be shorte, if I moue them to brotherly loue, true obedience to theyr Superiours, and hatred of sectes, and schismes, whervnto diuers of them be too much drawne by such as you are: Do I vtter my stomacke agaynst them? If eyther they or you take it so▪ then I answere that I must obey God rather than man: and preferre my Prince, before all my friendes: But this is a péece of your Rhetorike, to drawe into hatred: which I doubt not the godlie will easyly espie, and iudge of your spirite accordingly.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The thirde Diuision.
               
                  Admonition.
                  Nay some in the fulnesse of their blasphemie haue sayde it, that muche preachyng bryngeth the worde of God into contempt, and that foure preachers were inough for all London, so farre are they from thinking it necessarie, & seeking that euery congregation should haue a faithfull pastor.
                  
                     Answere to the Admonition. Pag. 167. Sect. 2. 3.
                     If any haue mislyked often preachyng, or hane sayde, that mucheUerball preachers. preachyng bryngeth the worde of God into contempte, or that foure preachers were inough for all London, they are to be blamed, (and that iustely) and not the booke, for it willeth no man to say so.
                     But if any hath sayd, that some of those which vse to preach often, by their loose, negligente, verball, and vnlearned Sermons, haue brought the worde of God into contempte, or that foure godlie, learned, pithy, diligent and discreete preachers, might do more good in London, than fortie contentious, vnlearned, verball, and rashe Preachers, they haue sayde truely, and their saying myghte well be iustifyed. Howbeit take heede that you slaunder no man, or vniustly seeke the discredite of any, whylest you seeke to vtter youre malice against that godlie booke. None that fauoureth Gods word (as I thinke) denyeth that hearing the worde of God, is the vsuall and ordinarie meanes, whereby God vseth to woorke faythe in vs, And that therfore Preachers be necessarie.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Page. 124. Lin. 10.
                  Of this thing M. Doctor speaketh agayne in the. 167. page, but to this effect altogether, and almoste in the same wordes.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     And yet is there somthing there, that would haue bin answered, but I take that as graunted whiche is not answered.
                  
               
            
            
               The fourth Diuision.
               
                  Admonition.
                  The seuententh and eightenth. Then nothing taught but Gods word, now princes pleasures, mēs deuises, Popish ceremonies and Antichristian rites in publike pulpits defended. Then they sought Phil. 2. 20. 21. them, now they seeke theyrs.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 84. Sect. 3. 4. 5.
                     It had bin wel to let vs vnderstand what those Princes pleasuresThe Churche of Englande slaundered by the Admonitors. be, what mens deuises, what Popish ceremonies, what Antichristiā rites, for nowe you haue but slandered both the Prince & the whole state of religion, in this Churche by publike authoritie established: wherfore vntil you shew some particulars, this shal be my answere, that 
                           Spiritus Dei ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               est mendax, ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               mordax, The spirite of God is neyther a lyer, nor a slaunderer.
                     
                     It is but your pleasure thus generally to say: That then pastors soughte their flocks, now they seeke theirs: for it is well knowne that there bee Pastours which seeke their flockes, and not theirs.
                     Hitherto (thanks be vnto God) in al this discourse, ther is not one peece of false doctrine of any substance ascribed to this Churche of England by these libellers, & therfore it hath (as God will) the fyrst note of the true church of Christ, that is, puritie of doctrine.
                  
               
               
                  
                  T. C. Pag. 124. Lin. 12.
                  To the next section being the rest of the. 84. page. I minde to say nothing, hauing before spoken of the faults, of the ceremonies and rites which are vsed with vs.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     The Admonition saith, that then nothing was taught but Gods word, now Princes pleasures, mens deuises, popishe ceremonies, and Antichristian rites, in publike pulpits defended, and will neyther you, nor they tell vs, what those Princes pleasures. &c. be? well, it is true yt followeth in that part of my Answer: for there is nothing said to the cōtrary.
                  
               
               
                  Admonition.
                  These and a greate many other abuses are in the ministerie remayning, which vnlesse they be remoued, and the truth broughte in, not onely Gods iustice shall be poured foorthe, but also Gods Church in this realme shal neuer be builded. For if they which seeme to be workinē, are no workmen indeede, but in name, or elfe worke not so diligently and in such order as the workmaster commaundeth, it is not only vnlikely that the building shall go forward, but altogither impossible that euer it shall be perfited. The way therefore to auoid these inconueniences, and to reforme these deformities, is this: Your wisedomes haue to remoue Aduousons, Patronages, Impropriatiōs, and Byshops authoritie, clayming to themselues thereby right to ordeyne ministers, and to bring in that old and true election, which was accustomed to be Act. 1. 26. &. 6. 2. 3. 14. 13. made by the cōgregation. You must displace those ignorant and vnable ministers already placed, and in their roomes appoynte suche as both can and wil by Gods assistance 1▪ Pet. 5. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        . feede the flocke. You must plucke downe and vtterly ouerthrow without hope of restitution, the Court of Faculties, from whence not only licences to enioy many benefices are obteyned, as pluralities, Trialities, Totquots. &c. but all thinges for the most part, as in the Court of Rome are set on sale, licences to marrie, to eate flesh in times prohibited,1. Pet. 5. 2. to lie from benefices and charges, and a great number beside, of such like abhominations. Appoint to euery congregation a learned and diligēt preacher▪ Remoue Homilies, Articles, iniunctions, a prescript order of Seruice made out of the Masse booke. Take away the lordship, the l
                        〈1 line〉
                     ytering, the pompe, the idlenesse, & liuings of byshops, but yet employ them to such endes as they were in the old Church appoynted for. Let a lawfull and a godly scigniorie looke that they preache, not quarterly or monethly, but continuallie: not for filthy lucre sake, but of a ready mind. So God shall be glorifyed, your consciences discharged, and the flocke of Christe (purchased Acts. 20. 28 with his owne bloud) edifyed.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 86. & 87. Sect. 1. 2.
                     What these great abuses by you hitherto alleadged be, I trust youDiscipline necessary. do now fully vnderstand, surely except such factious libellers, suche stirrers vp of schismes, such disturbers of the peace of the church, such contemners of those that be in authoritie, be not onely remoued, but repressed, God will not only of his iustice punish the magistrates of this Realme for their carelesnesse in this behalfe, but also Gods gospell will therein be as much defaced with factions, schismes, and heresies, as euer it was in the Popes time, with superstition and idolatrie. For surely these men that would be compted such perfect builders,Libellers be vnderminers▪ not builders. be but vnderminers and destroyers, and instruments of some greedy guttes, and lusty toysters, who to maynteyne their pride, and ioylitie, seeke for the spoyle of the Churche, and indeede the vtter ouerthrow both of learning and religion.
                     For take from Byshops their lands and their authoritie, let eueryConfusion. parish elect their owne minister, remoue Homilies, Articles, Iniunctions, appoynt no prescript order of seruice (that is to say) let there be no order prescribed to any man, no law to direct him or controll him, but let euery minister do what he list, speake what he list, alter what he list, and so oft as him list: to be short, let euery minister be King and Pope in his owne parish, and exempted from all controlemente of Byshop, Magistrate, and Prince, and you shall haue as many kinds of Religion, as there is Parishes, as many sects, as ministers, and a Church miserably torne in peeces, with mutabilitie and diuersitie of opinions.
                     
                        Do you not see what they shoote at? would they not be free from al
                           Anabaptisme feared. Ambition in the Admonitors. magistracie? do they not most ambitiously desire that themselues, whiche they condemne in other? that is, Lordship and superioritie. For who thinke you shoulde be chiefe in euery parish, and direct the rest? Surely euen the minister: The Pope neuer required greater authoritie ouer al Christendom, than they seke to haue ouer their parish. The Pope and his Clergie did neuer more earnestly seeke, and desire to be exempted from the iurisdiction of ciuil magistrates, than these men do both from ellesiasticall and ciuill Princes, nobles: and magistrates were neuer brought into greater seruitude & bondage, than these men seeke to lay vpon them.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 124. Sect. 1.
                  After a number of words without matter, sayings without proofes, accusations without any grounds, or likelihoode of grounds, as that they be instruments of greedy gutts, 
                        〈1 line〉
                     nd lusty roysters to maynteyn
                        〈1 line〉
                      them in theyr ioylitie, whych notwithstanding speake ageynst Patron 
                        〈1 line〉
                     ges, and would haue the liuings of the Church, which are idlely and vnprofitably spent (for the most p
                        〈1 line〉
                     rt) applyed to the right vses of the poore, and of ministers and schollers, and that they would be discharged from ciuill and ecclesiasticall subiection, whiche humbly submitting themselues to the Queenes maiestie, and all those that are, sente of hir, would deliuer the Churches and themselues for the Churches sake, from the vnla
                        〈1 line〉
                     ull dominion of one, to the end that they might yeld themselues with their Chruches subiect to the lawfull ecclesiasticall gouernment of those which▪ God hath appoynted in his word. After I▪ s
                        〈1 line〉
                     y a number of such and like accusations, mixt with most 
                        〈1 line〉
                     itter and reprochfull words, vnto all which, it is sufficient answer, that▪ 
                     Quod verbo dictu mest, verbo sit negatum▪
                      As easily denyed as sayd.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     For proofe of all that I haue here sayde, I referre my selfe to common experience, and the like pract
                           〈1 line〉
                        ses in other Churches, by persons of much like disposition, as the notes in the beginning of the second edition of my Answer to the Admonition doth more 
                           〈◊〉
                         large declare.
                     What that lawfull eccles asticall gouernment of those which (you say) God hath appoynted in his word, is▪ and whether it verifyeth my saying or no, shall be séene, whē we come to that part of your Replie. Certain it is that you would transferre both the authoritie of the Prince, Archbyshop, and Bishop, to your selues, and your seniors▪ for that is the lawfull ecclesiasticall gouernment you meane. And those be the persons whome you thinke God to haue appoynted in his word, as it will fall out more euidētly hereafter.
                  
               
               
                  Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag. 87. Sect. 2.
                  Wherefore you that be in authoritie, if you loue the peace and prosperitieAn exhortation to those that be in authoritie. of the Church of Christ, if you desire the good successe of the Gospell if you will preserue the state of this Realme, if you thinke it necessary to haue good magistrates, to haue good lawes and orders in a common wealth, if you esteeme learning, and seeke to preferre it, if you hate anarchian, confusion, Anabaptisme, if you allowe of your owne condition▪ and like of a kingdome better than of a popular state: Then prouide betime some speedy remedy, for these and suche like kind of men: and if the religion you haue established be good, if the orders and lawes you haue made be conuenient, let them not be written against, spoken against, nay openly contemned and broken, withoute sharpe and seuere punishment: suffer not suche as execute them to be contemned, hated, discouraged, and oftentimes frumpedLawekeepers contemned. by some superiours. Either let your lawes be mainteined as lawes,

or else deliuer vs from our dutie in executing and obeying of them.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 124. Sect. 2.
                  He turneth him self to those that be in authoritie, whom he would make beleue, that it standeth vpon the ouerthrow of the church, of religion, of order, of the Realme, of the state of Princes, of Magistrates, which are by this meanes established, and whose estates are made this way most sure, when as the true causes of these clamors, and outcries, that M. Doctor maketh, is nothing else, but the feare of the ouerthrow, of that honoure which is to the dishonor of God, and ignomune of his Church, and which maketh to the good dispensing of these goodes, for the ayd
                        〈1 line〉
                      and helpe of the Church, which now serue to oppresse it.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     It shall be sufficient to referre the consideration of this your answer to such as be in authoritie, who can best consider of both our meanings.
                  
               
               
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 88. Sect. 1.
                  Touching the Court of faculties I cannot say muche, for I haue no great experience of it, and lesse knowledge in the lawe, notwithstandingThe Court of faculties. bycause by lawful authoritie, it is allowed in this Realme, I cannot but reuerently iudge of it, for in such matters I thinke it a poynt of modesty to suppose the best, and to absteine from cōdemning of that gouernment, whiche is allowed as conuenient. If there be faultes in the officers, they may be corrected.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 124. Sect. 2.
                  As for the Court of faculties, the corruptions thereof, being so cleare that all men see them, and so grosse that they which cannot see, may grope them. M. Doctor answereth that he knoweth not what it meaneth, and therefore is moued of modesty to thinke the best of it, whiche is but a simple shift. For besides that that the Admonition speaketh nothing of it, but that the streates, and high wayes talke of: if there had bin any defense for it, it is not to be thought that M. Doctor woulde haue bin so negligent an aduocate, as to haue omitted it, seeing if he were ignorant, he mighte haue had so easily, and with so little cost, the knowledge of it. As for his modesty, his bolde asseueration of things which are doubtfull, which are false, which are altogyther vnlikely, which are impossible for him to know, doth sufficiently bewray, and make so well knowne, that no such visard, or paynting can serue to make men beleeue, that meere modesty shut vp his mouth, from speaking for the Court of faculties, which hath opened his mouth so wide, for the defense of those things, wherein as it falleth out, he hathe declared himselfe, to haue lesse skill and vnderstanding than he hathe of that Court.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I haue spoken my cōscience of that Court, neither did I cōferre with any to giue me any instructions concerning it. And surely as I thought then, so do I think now. I haue affirmed nothing which I will not stand to, except you can conuince me by better reasons, than I haue heard any as yet. That Court hath the original and authoritie from the Prince: it is established and confirmed by Parliament: it medleth nothing with that, that perteyneth to the office eyther of Byshop or Pastor. The principall officers be the Lord Chauncellour and the Archbyshop. It maynteyneth the Quéenes prerogatiue in causes ecclesiasticall, and was erected the. 25. reare of King Henry the eyght by authoritie of Parliāment, to the suppressing and vtter abolishing of the Byshop of Romes iurisdiction. It medleth not (for any thing that I know) with matters, that by learning can be proued to be against the word of God: and in some poynts it cannot without inconuenience be missed. But this is a matter of pollicie, and therefore I leaue the further consideration of it, to suche as God hathe committed the gouernmente of thys realme vnto, to whome it dothe especially apperteyne.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Of preaching before the administration of the Sacramentes. Tract. 12.
            
               The first Diuision.
               
                  Admonition.
                  Now to the second point which concerneth ministration of sacraments. In the olde time the word was Math. 3. 12. preach
                        〈1 line〉
                     d before they were ministred, now it is supposed to be sufficient if it be read.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag. 89. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                     The second external note of the true Church of Christ is ministringThe second externall note of the church. of the Sacraments sincerely: you would proue that this Church of England hath not the Sacraments sincerely ministred: first by three generall reasons perteyning to both the sacramēts: then by certaine abuses which you find seuerally in either of them.
                     The first generall reason is this: In olde time the worde was preached before the Sacraments were ministred, now it is supposed to be sufficient, if it be red.
                     
                     To proue that the word was preached before the Sacramentes were ministred, you alleadge the third of Matthew, vers. 12. VVhich hath his fanne in his hand, and vvill make cleane his flovver, and gather his vvheate into his garner, but vvill burne vp the chaffe vvith vnquenchable fire. I vnderstand not how you can of this place conclude, that there must be of necessitie preaching and not reading before the administration of the Sacramēts: If you say, Iohn preached vnto such as came vnto his baptisme, and read not vnto them, therefore of necessitie there must be preaching and not reading: I denye the argument, forA general doctrine may not he concluded of a singular example. it is a common rule, that we may not conclude a generall doctrine, of a singular or particular example: and I am sure it is against all rule of Logicke.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 124. Sect. vlt.
                  Whereas vnto the Admonition prouing out of the third of S. Mathew, that preaching must go before the ministring of the Sacramēts, you answer first, that it is against al logicke to cōclude a generall 
                        〈1 line〉
                     ule vpon a particular example: you shall vnderstand that that whiche Iohn did in that poynte, he did it not as a singular person, or as the sonne of Zacharie, but as the minister of the gospell, and therefore it apperteyneth as well to all other ministers, as vnto him. For as it is a good conclusion, that for so much as Peter in that he is a man is borne to haue, and by common course of nature hath two legges, therefore Iohn, & Thomas, and al the rest haue so: euen so, for so muche as Iohn by reason of his ministerie, had neede first to preach, then to baptise, it followeth that all others, that haue that ministerie committed vnto them, must do the like.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     So did Iohn not as a priuate man, but as a minister of the Gospell preach in the wildernesse, baptise in Iordan, must therefore all other ministers of the Gospell do the same? This is no orderly kind of reasoning to saye, Peter in that he is a man is borne to haue two legges, Ergo euery man hathe two legges: but the due forme of reasoning is this: Euery man by nature hath two legges, Peter is a man and therfore by nature hath two legges. Therefore if the argumente had bin framed on thys sort, it is the office of euery minister of the Gospell to preach before baptisme: Iohn, Peter, and Thomas be ministers of the Gospell, Ergo they ought to preach before baptisme. It had bin in some good order touching the forme, though in the matter ther had bin some fault. But you must thinke that to preach before the administration of baptisme, is not so natural to a minister of the Gospell, nor so much of the substance of his office, as to haue two legges is to a man. For he may be a true, faithfull, and perfecte minister of the Gospell, though he neuer preache before the administration of Baptisme: But he cannot be a perfecte man, touching his body, that lacketh the one or bothe of his legges. It is an vndoubted rule in the Scriptures, that

a generall doctrine, may not be concluded of particular examples, except the same examples be according to some generall rule or commaundement.
                     The Apostles in that they were ministers of the worde, preached in all places, cured diseases, wrought miracles. &c. But it doth not therefore follow that all other ministers must do so likewise. Howbeit if the case were now with other ministersWhen preaching before baptisme is necessary. of the Gospell, as it was then with Iohn, that is, if they had to baptise only men of yeares and discretion, and such as beléeued not in Christ, as Iohn had: then it were most necessary that they should preach before they did baptise. But séeing the case is cleane altered and there is now no occasion to minister the sacrament of baptisme to any but to yong infants, that vnderstand not the word preached, I cannot perceyue how that example of Iohn can be aptly applyed, for he preached to such as were yet to be baptised. But the Reader may note, that you are content to passe ouer the vnapt allegation of the Scripture, vsed by the authors of the Admonition in this place.
                  
               
            
            
               The second Diuision.
               
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition Pag. 90. Sect. 1.
                  But how if it may be proued that Iohn did baptise some withoutBaptising distinct from preaching. preaching vnto them? In that third Chap. of Matthew vers. 5. and. 6. we read that all Ierusalem and al Iudea, and all the region round aboute Iordan, wente out to be baptised of him, and that they were baptised of him in Iordan, confessing their sinnes: but we reade not, that he did immediatly before preach vnto them.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 125. Lin. 5.
                  Secondarily you saye that it doth not appeare, that he preached immediatly before he baptised them with water, And yet S. Mathew after that he had shewed, that he preached repentaunce, (which the other Euangelists call the baptisme of repentance) he addeth, that then the people were baptised of him, whiche also may appeare by the. 19. of the Acts, vers. 5. where S. Paule noteth this order to haue bin kept. For although betweene the story of his preaching, and that whiche is sayde, of his baptising, there is enterlaced a description of his dyet, and of his apparrell, yet these wordes (then came vnto him. &c.) must needes be referred vnto the time whiche followed hys preaching.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I doubt not but that Iohn preached vnto them oftner than once, or twice before he did baptise them: for else should he haue baptised them being infidels: but it may wel be gathered by those places of Sainct Mathew, that he did not immediatly preache vnto them before baptisme, which is that that I affirme. For the authors of the Admonition séeme to condemne the administration of our sacramentes, bycause the word is not always preached immediatly before they be ministred.
                     I vnderstād not how you can gather any such order out of that. 19. of Actes, vers. 5. except you cal questioning preaching. For S. Paule there doth question with them, asking them whither they had receiued the holy Ghost, or no, and vnto what they were baptised? there is no mention of any sermon preached, for any thing that I can espie. Moreouer it is daungerous to vnderstand that place of the Sacrament of baptisme,The place. 19 Act. may not be interpreted of ye sacrament of baptisme. least we should séeme to admitte rebaptisation, and to fal into the heresie of the Anabaptists, who vse this plars for that purpose or else thinke that there is so greate difference betwixt the baptisme of Iohn, and the baptisme of Christ, that suche as were baptised with the baptisme of Iohn, had néede againe 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         baptized with the baptisme of Christ, which opinion some hold being deceiued by this place: Therefore that it may appeare how vnaptly you haue alleadged this place for your purpose, and what suspition you haue giuen either of the Anabaptisticall rebaptisation, or Papisticall difference betwixte the baptisme of Iohn, and the baptisme of

Christ, I will recite vnto you the iudgement of some learned men concerning thys place. M. Caluine vpon the same verse and sentence writeth thus: But now it may be asked whether it be lawfull to reiterate baptisme, and furious men of our time vsing thys testimonie, haue gone about to bring in Anabaptisme. Some men by the name of baptisme vnderstand a new institution: vnto whome I do not assent, bycause their exposition as it is enforced, sauoureth of a shift. Others denie that Baptisme was reiterated, bycause they hadCaluin in. 19. Acto. bin baptised, of some folish imitator of Iohn. But bycause their gheasse hath no coloure of truth, nay rather the words of Paule do testify that they wer the very true disciples of Iohn, and Luke very honorably calleth them the disciples of Christ: I do not subscribe vnto thys sentence, and yet I denie the baptisme of water to haue bin reiterated, bycause the wordes of Luke do sound nothing else, but that they were baptised with the spirit. First it is no newThe name of baptisme transferred to the gifts of the spirit. thing to transferre the name of baptisme to the gifts of the spirite, as we haue seene in the first and. 11. Chap. where Luke sayd that Christ, when he promised to the Apostles the visible sending of the holy Ghost, called it baptisme, and agayne when the holy Ghost descended vpon Cornelius, that Peter remembred the wordes of the Lord, you shall be baptised with the holy Ghost. Then we see that it is here namely intreated of the visible gifts, and that they are conferred and giuen with baptisme. But wheras it followeth immediatly, that when he had layd his hands vpon them, the holy Ghost came. I interprete that to be put in the way of exposition, for it is the vsuall and familiar manner of speaking in the scripture, to propound a matter briefly, and after to explicate it more plainly. That therfore which for breuitie was somewhat obscure, Luke doth better expresse, and more largely expound, saying, that the holy Ghost was giuen them by the imposition of hands. If any man obiecte, that the name of baptisme, when it is vsed for the gifts of the holy Ghost, is not put simply, but with addition, I answer that the meaning of Luke is euidēt enough by the text. And further, that Luke alludeth to baptisme, wherof he had before made mentiō. And surely if you should take it for the externall signe, it will be absurd that it was giuen vnto them, without any better instruction. But if metaphorically of the institution, the phrase would yet be more hard, and the story would not agree, that after they were taught, the holy Ghost descended vpon them.
                     
                     But be it as other some learned men also interprete thys place, that in the former parte of the Chapter, the baptisme of Iohn is taken for the doctrine of Iohn, and in this place for the sacrament of baptisme: and that Paule preached before he did administer the same, yet doth it not follow, that of necessitie there must be preaching before the administration of baptisme. The Anabaptists abused this place to the same effect, but M. Bullinger doth answer them in this manner. VVhereas the Catabaptists
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ullin. in. 19. Acto. obiect here, Therefore doctrine goeth before baptisme: no man denyeth it, but yet in those that be of yeares of discretion, and with whome the name of Christ hath not bin published. But agayn whereas the name of Christ hath bin heard of, no man can denie, but that there the parents being carefull for the saluation of their children, do offer them vnto holy baptisme, bycause they heare that God is also, the God of infants: but baptisme 
                              〈◊〉
                            selfe to be nothing else, but the signe of the people of God.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The third Diuision.
               
                  Ansvver to the Admonition Pag. 90. Sect▪ 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     .
                  And verses. 13. 14. 15. it is manifest, that he did baptise Christ without preaching. This is buta slender proofe you vse, thereby to condemne the sinceritie of our sarramentes, and administring of them in this Church.
               
               
                  
                  T. C. Pag. 125. Lin. 13.
                  And whereas you say that it is manifest that our sauiour Christ was baptised without preaching, I would know of you, what one worde doth declare that, when as the contrary rather doth appeare in S. Luke, which seemeth to note playnely, that our Sauiour Christe was baptised, whenLuke. 3. the people were baptised. But the people as I haue shewed were baptised immediatlye after they heard Iohn preache, therefore it is lyke, that our sauiour Christ was baptised after yt he had heard Iohn preach. And it is very probable, that our sauiour Christ which did honor the ministery of God by the hand of men so far, as he would vouchsafe to be baptised of Iohn, would not neglect or passe by his ministery of the word, being more precious than that of the Sacramente, as it appeareth by Iohn, that our Sauiour Christe was present at his sermons, for so much as S. Iohn doth as hee was preaching to the people, point hym out with the fynger, & tolde them that he was in the middestIohn. 1. of them which was greater than he.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     First S. Mathewe maketh no mention of it, neither can it be gathered by any circūstance of the place. Secondly, Luke doth not say that Iohn preached immediatly before he baptised. But the contrary rather appeareth, if S. Luke wryte the story orderly. Thirdly, to what purpose should he preache to Christe before he baptised him? Lastly, in the first of Iohn, there is not one sentence to proue that Christe was present at any of Iohns sermones, for those wordes (But there standeth one among youIohn. 1. whome you know not. &c.) do not signifie that he was in that company at that present, 
                           Sed quod inter eos versabatur, that he was conuersant amongst them. But if he had bin present, doth it therefore followe that the sacramentes may not be ministred without preaching? do you make preaching immediatly before the administration of the sacramentes, 
                           De substantia Sacramentorum, of the substance of the Sacramentes?
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The. 4. Diuision.
               
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 90. Sect. 2. 3.
                  There is no man I thinke which doth not allowe of preaching beforePreaching be fore the sacramentes not disalowed. the administration of the Sacraments: but it is not therewith ioyned, 
                        tanquam de necessitate sacramenti, as of the necessitie of the Sacramente, neither is there any thing here alledged for preaching before the administration of the lords supper. Indeede we reade not that Christ did preach immediatly before the distribution of the Sacrament of his body & bloud to his disciples, only he told them, that some of them should betraye him, & that he had greatly desired to eate ye passeouer with thē.
                  This I write to shewe your blynde and vnlearned collections, not to disalowe preaching in the administration of the Sacramentes.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 125. Lin. 25.
                  And there is no doubt, but those wordes which our Sauiour Christe sayd before his supper, although they are gathered by the Euangelistes into short sentences, were notwithstanding long sermons touching the fruite of his death, and vse and ende of that Sacrament.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     But if it had bene so necessary a matter as you make it, and of the substance of the sacramentes, it would haue bene expressed by one meanes or other: seing therefore it is not, the wordes and order of the holy Euangelistes must bée credited before your bolde coniectures.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 5. Diuision.Act. 2. Act. 8. 12. Vers. 38. Act. 9. Act. 10. Act. 16. Vers. 15. 33. Act. 20.
               
               
                  T. C. Page. 125. in the midst.
                  And this order of preaching immediatly before the ministring of the Sacramentes is continually noted of S. Luke, throughout the whole story of the Actes of the Apostles.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     It is not denied but that men must first be conuerted to Christe by preaching of the worde, before the Sacramentes be ministred vnto them, and therevnto tende all

those places of ye Acts which be noted in ye margent. But our questiō is whither preaching be so necessarily ioined with ye administratiō of ye sacramēts, ye neither ye faithful which wel vnderstand ye vse of thē, neither infantes whose capacitie wyll not serue to learne, may be made partakers of ye sacraments, without a sermon preached before.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 6. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Page 125. about the midst.
                  But I wyl not precisely say, neyther yet do ye authors of ye Admonition affirme (as M. doctor surmiseth of them) that ther must be preaching immediatly before the administration of the sacramēts. This I saye that when as the An vntrue and soule error. life of the sacramentes, dependeth of the preaching of the worde of God, there must of necessitie the worde of God be, not read, but preached vnto the people, amongst whome the sacramentes are ministred.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     What do you saye then, or wherefore contende you? no man euer denied preaching to be very conuenient. But the Authours of the Admonition saye: That in the olde tyme the worde was preached before the sacramentes were ministred, nowe it is supposed to be sufficient, if it be read. To what purpose be these woordes spoken, except their meaning be to haue the worde preached at all times, when the Sacramentes be ministred? so that you would séeme to saye something in their defense, & when you haue done, you make a doubt of the matter, and begin to halte, saying that you wil not precisely saye. &c.
                     This saying of yours, that the life of the sacramentes dependeth of the preaching of theThe life of ye sacramentes dependeth not of preaching. The absurdities of the assertion of the Replier. worde of God. &c. is moste vntrue: and in mine opinion a foule error, for the lyfe of the Sacramentes depende vpon Gods promises expressed in his worde, and neither vpon preaching nor vpon reading. If this doctrine of yours be true, then be the sacramites dead sacramentes, and without effect, except the worde be preached when they be ministred. And so in déede do some of your adherentes in playne termes affirme, saying that they are seales without writing, and playne blankes. Whiche doctrine sauoureth very strongly of Anabaptisme, and doth depriue those of the effectes and fruites of the Sacramentes, which haue bene partakers of them without the worde preached when they were ministred, and so consequently euen your selfe, for it is not like that there was a sermon at your Christening. And therefore this doctrine must of necessitieThe doctrine of the Replier tēdeth to plain Anabaptisme. bring in both rebaptisation, and condemne the baptisme of infantes, which is flat Anabaptisticall. For if that baptisme be without life, at the which the woorde of God is not preached, then can it not regenerate or be effectuall to those that were therwith baptised? And therefore must of necessitie be iterated, that it may be liuely.
                     Againe isbaptisme be dead, at the which the word of God is not preached, then can it do no good to such as haue no vnderstanding of the worde of God preached, that is, to infantes. For if the preaching of the worde be so necessarily ioyned with the administration of the Sacramentes, it is in the respect of those that are to receiue the sacraments, & then must it needes folowe ye the saramēts may be ministred to none, but to such as be able to heare the word of God: whereby infantes must be secluded from baptisme. And in déede this is one of the strongest arguments that the Anabaptistes vse against the baptising of infantes, as shal hereafter apeare. For of this the Reader shall vnderstand more, by yt which straightway I will set down out of Zuinglius.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The. 7. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 125. somevvhat past the midst.
                  And forasmuch as I haue proued before, that no man may minister the sacraments, but he which is able to preach the word, although I Belike you are in doubt of your doctrine. dare not affirme that there is an absolute necessitie, that ye word should be preached immediatly before ye sacramēts be ministred, yet I can imagin no case wherin it is either meete, or cōuenient, or els almost sufferable that the sacramentes should be ministred without a sermon before them, for the minister being (as he ought of necessitie to be) able to preach, ought so to do. And if it be said that his health or voyce wil not serue him sometimes to preach, when he is able enough to minister the sacraments. Ergo one may preache out of his own cure, which is cōtrary to your doctrine I say that either he ought to beg ye help of an other minister harde by, or else there is lesse inconuenience in deferring ye celebration of the sacrament, vntil he be strong enough to preach, than ministring it so maymedly and without a sermon: wherby it is seene how iust cause M. Doctor hath to call these blynde and vnlearned gatherings, which he with his Egles eye, & his great learning, can not scatter, nor once moue.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.Tract. 6. cap. 1 & Tract. 9. cap. 1. diuis. 15
                     
                     I haue sufficiently proued that the administration of the Sacramente of Baptisme may be committed to those which be not preachers of the worde.
                     
                        If the life of the sacrament depende of the preaching of the worde, as you haue said before: then there is an absolute necessitie that the worde be preached immediatly before the sacramentes be ministred, and therefore in making this doubt, you doe but declare a wauering mynde, and an vncerteyne iudgement.
                     Howe can he begge helpe of an other minister, seing no man may preache in an other mans cure?
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            in the 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                     
                     You greatly forget your self, and the absurditie of your doctrine appeareth by your owne contrarieties.
                     
                        But nowe that it may be knowen, howe neare in this point you approche to Anabaptisme,The 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               approcheth to 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                              ▪
                            I will note one or two places out of Zuinglius, touching this matter. In his booke De baptismo, speaking against this selfe same assertion of the Anabaptistes, he saith thus: The disciples did minister the baptisme of water in times past without any doctrine, and without giuing the holy Ghost, for they baptised when as Christ taught and did not baptise, as we haue before shewed out of the. 4. of Iohn, and out of the: 1. Cor. 1. for PauleZuinglius. sayth, Christe sent me not to baptise, but to preache, therfore some taught, and other baptised. But we may gather out of the sixt of Iohn, that baptisme was vsed before that men being indued with true faith, did sticke vnto the doctrine, for there we reade that many forsooke Christ, whom notwithstanding no man doubteth to haue bin before baptised. Again intreating of these wordes. (Euntes docete omnes gentes. &c. Math. 28. which the Anabaptistes vse for an argument to improue the baptisme of infantes, bicause Christe sayd there Docete, before he said Baptizate, whereof they gather your assertion, that preaching must go before baptisme, and therefore conclude that infantes may not be baptised bicause they can not be taught) saith thus: By these wordes they which deny baptisme vnto infantes do not only seduce them selues, but drawe others also into great errors, and Laberinthes: for vrging of the bare order of the wordes of Christe, they haue nothing else in their mouthes but onely this: Docete & baptizate, teache and baptise. Beholde saye they the commaundement of Christe. In the meane tyme, they do not marke (nay in deede they will not marke) that the same thing that they so much crie vpon, doctrine, is afterwarde also set after, when as he sayth, Docentes eos seruare. &c. teaching them to obserue all those thinges, vvhich I haue commaunded you. By the which wordes, it is manifest that baptisme is a signe whereby we giue our names, and haue our firste entrance vnto Christ, the which being giuen and receiued, yet notwithstanding those thinges are to be taught and to be learned, which Christ would haue vs to keepe: but these men vrging the bare letter, Crye still, that Christe sayd, Docete & baptizate, teache and baptise. VVherfore I will also vrge the same bare letter, but for their causes onely, if by any meanes I might withdrawe them from their desire to contende. Sirs you vrge that saying, Go and teache al nations, baptizing thē in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost: and I say this, Baptise them in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to obserue all things, vvhatsoever I haue commaunded you. VVherefore nowe I aske, whither of vs hath the worde more plaine and apert, that concerneth doctrine? you verily bring the worde of God, whiche proueth that men should be taught, but what kinde of doctrine that is, is not in those your wordes expressed. But wee haue the worde of God more cleare and playne than yours, which is, Teaching them to obserue all those things, vvhatsoeuer I haue commaunded you, and these wordes are put after, and not set before baptisme. And a little after. Although we graunt that this order of wordes hath some force in this place, yet these things perteine nothing vnto young children and infantes, that they should not be baptised before doctrine: for these wordes perteine vnto those that are instructed in doctrine and the outward worde: but it is manifest that infantes are not taught, therfore these wordes can not so be referred vnto children, that they ought not to be baptized.
                     
                        And in the same booke, speaking of this. 3. chap. of Mathewe by you alleadgedWhen preaching is necessary before 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . and vsed of the Anabaptistes to the same purpose, he graunteth that Iohn did preache before he did baptise, For necessitie so required, that by teaching he should expounde to

the people the causes of baptisme. For except doctrine were preached, no man woulde in these our dayes haue their children baptized. But after they were of yeares of discretion, and had receiued faith through the ministerie of the doctrine, (as we reade that it was done of them in olde time) they brought their children also to be baptised. And in the ende he concludeth thus: In the meane time, we do willingly graunt this vnto them, that doctrine and instruction ought to go before, if at any time we come vnto infidels, for none of the Heathen ought to be baptised, but he which hath heard and beleued that doctrine, which was before vnknowen vnto them and theirs.
                     Thus then you sée, howe nere your opinion of the necessitie of preaching before the administration of the Sacramentes, approcheth to the heresie of the Anabaptists. If you would shifte off the matter, as though you required not this necessitie of preaching before the administration of the Sacramentes alwayes in respecte of those whiche are ro receiue them, but in respect of the rest which are present, as this would be but a shifte, so can it not agrée with your assertion: for the lyfe of the sacramentes, perteyneth not to those that bée present, but vnto those that are partakers of them. Wherefore M. Doctor néedeth not his egles eyes to espye your errors (that I saye no worse) but with dimmer sight than he hath, might easely sée, that you in this doctrine haue playnely ioyned handes with the Anabaptistes.
                     And yet I would not haue any man thinke that I mislyke preaching in the administrationPreaching be fore the ministration not disalowed. of the sacramentes, which can be vnprofitable at no tyme: but this only I affirme, that it is not so necessarily ioyned with the administration of the sacramentes, but that they may be rightly administred, though the woorde be not at the same tyme preached.
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Of Reading of the Scriptures. Tract. 13.
            
               A comparison betvvene reading of scriptures and preaching
               
                  Chap. 1. the first Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 125. Sect. vlt.
                     After this M. Doctor accuseth the authors of the Admonition, as though they simply condemned reading the scriptures in the church, and this accusation he foloweth in many wordes, and in diuers places, wherein as in a number of other places of their booke, the authours of the Admonition haue cause to renew that olde complaynt of Theodorus, which is that whensoeuer any thing is sayde that is vnpleasant, that is by and by expounded otherwyse than it is ment of hym that speaketh it: so that that which is giuen with the right hande, is receyued with the lefte. For the authors of the Admonition declaring their vtter mislikyng, that there shoulde be in steade of a preaching minister A daungerous parenthesis. (if I may so call hym) and in steade of preachyng reading, are vntruely expounded of M. Doctor, as though they condemned all reading in the churche. And here he maketh himselfe worke, and picketh a quarell to blot a great deale of paper, and to proue that which no man denieth, for besydes this treatise, he speaketh afterward of it in halfe a score pages, euen from the. 159. page vntill the. 170. page, & so lighteth vs a candle at noone dayes. Herein you haue aptly described your own nature. It is a token of at nature disposed to no great quietnesse, whiche rather than he would not striue, striueth with himselfe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Whither I accuse them iustly or no, I shall referre it to the Reader to iudge, after I haue set downe their very wordes, which indéede no Christian cares can paciently heare: pag. 157. they say thus: Reading is not feeding, but it is as euill as playing vpon a stage, and worse to. Which wordes if they be well marked and ioyned with the reason that followeth: for players yet learne their partes without booke. &c. must néedes signifie a mer
                              〈1 line〉
                            contempt of reading the scriptures, and a mynde that thinketh lesie edifying to come by reading, than by playing vpō a stage, which is an vntolerable blasphemy. Pages. 164. and. 165. their talke of reading the scriptures tendeth wholy to this purpose, to make the same altogether vnprofitable: and surely no man can excuse them

of this crime, but he that is bent without respect to assent vnto them in all thinges, though they be moste manifestly false, and moste absurde.
                        But I would haue the Reader marke this one thing, that speaking of a reading minister, you saye, It I may so call hym, whereby you giue playne signification that you may not call nor esteeme them to be ministers which cannot preache. Whiche if it be true, then haue they not in your doctrine delyuered any of the sacramentes, &The marke that the Replier shoteth at so consequently so many not baptized as haue bene baptizedby thē, to the proofe wherof your doctrine tendeth wholly. The like he hath after warde, pag. 128. Sect. 1.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 126. Lin. 4.
                     And although the cause beiust and good, which he defendeth, yet I wyll note in a worde or two, howe as though there were pitche or some worse thing in his handes, he defileth whatsoeuer he toucheth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        A token of a modest and quiet nature to impeache a knowne truthe, for the persones sake that doth defend it. 
                              Nunquid sic factitabat Paulus? Did Paule so? or did Peter dally in that manner? Paule was content to allowe the truthe preached, euen by false Prophetes. But what should I compare the mylde, modest and louing spirite of the Apostles, with the contentious and scoffing spirite of T. C?
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 90. Sect. 4.
                     But I would gladly learne why you do so greatly mislike of readingZvvingfildians mislike reading of scriptures. the scriptures, I hope you be not Zvvingfildians: is not the word of God as effectuall when it is read, as when it is preached? or isReading is preaching. not reading preaching?
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 126. Lin. 6.
                     First therfore he asketh, and so, that he doth most boldly and confidently affirme it, whither the worde of God is not as effectuall when it is read, as when it is preached? or whether reading bee not preaching? In which two questions, although the one of them confuteth the other (for so much as if reading be preaching (as he sayth) then the comparison of the profit and efficacie betweene one and the other is absurde) yet I wyll answere to both. I say therefore that the worde of God is not so effectuall read as preached. For S. Paule sayth, that faith commeth by hearing, and hearing of the worde preached, so that the ordinary and especiall meanes to worke faythe by, is preaching,Rom. 10. and not reading.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue affirmed nothing so boldely, which I haue not as strongly by good authorities, and reasons cōfirmed, to the which you haue not answered, but in this manner of brawling. If you did vnderstande that there are diuers kindes of preachings (as M. Bucer declareth) vpon the. 4. to the Ephes. and that reading of the scriptures is one of them, which also the same Bucer there affirmeth, then would you haue absteyned from giuing this sentence. That if reading be preachyng, than is the comparison of the profitte and efficacy betweene one and the other absurde: for one kynde of preaching may be compared to an other, without any absurditie.
                        I say that S. Paule in that chapter to the Romains, by preaching doth generallyPreaching for publishing the Gospell by voyce generally. vnderstand, all kindes of publishing the Gospel by the external voyce, which comprehendeth reading, as well as it doth that which you call preaching, and it is greatlye

against the dignitie and maiestie of the scriptures, it also greatly confirmeth the error of the Papistes, touching the obscuritie of the scriptures and debarring the people from reading them, to saye, that fayth commeth not by reading, for that is to make them dumbe and vnprofitable.
                        M. Bucer vpon the. 4. to the Ephes. setteth foorth the cōmoditie of reading the scripturesThe commoditie of reading the scriptures in the churche. Bucer.
                               in this manner. Reading of the holy scriptures was appointed to this end, that both the phrase, and manner of speaking of the scripture, and the scripture it self, might be more knowen and more familiar to the people, when as they which did interprete the scriptures, could not finish one little part thereof in one whole yeare. In the meane time by the onely reading of the scriptures, the people were maruelously confirmed in the knowledge of all the pointes and doctrine of saluation. For they be in euery booke oftentimes repeated, and expounded with diuers wordes, that the people of that which followed might vnderstande many things, which in that that went before, they could not sometime perceiue: and by that meanes, the iudgement of the people was confirmed in all pointes of religion, so that they were able to iudge of the interpretation of the scriptures, and of all doctrine whiche was taught them by their owne Curates and teachers, or by any other. And therfore in auncient Churches, this bare reading of the scriptures was greatly esteemed. Of reading of scriptures (God be thanked) it is very well appointed in the Churche of Englande. &c. Thus farre M. Bucer. Surely I maruell what is ment by this your straunge kinde of doctrine, except you would haue the people through ignorance of the scriptures, brought againe to this point, that they must only depende vpon the mouth of the Pastor.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 126. Lin. 14.
                     And although reading do helpe to nourish the fayth, which commeth by preaching, yet this is gyuen to the preaching, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         that is by excellency, and for that it is the excellentest, and most ordinary meanes to worke by in the heartes of the hearers. The beholding of the creatures, and the consideration of the makyng of the worlde, and of Gods wisdome, and wonderfull loue appearing in them, doth nourish and strengthen fayth, and yet may it not therefore in efficacie be compated to the preaching of the worde of God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Reading of the scriptures doth not only nouryshe fayth, but ingendreth faith also:Reading doth not only nourish fayth, but 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              gēdreth also. as I haue proued in my Answere to the Admonition, both by the scriptures and other learned writers. If it were otherwyse, then were the power of persuasion to be ascribed to the preacher and manner of teaching, not to the worde which is against that saying of Christe, 
                              Scrutamini scripturas. &c. searche the scriptures, for in them you thinke to haue eternall life. &c. and of the Apostle. The whole scripture is giuen by inspiration ofIohn. 5. 2. Tim. 3 God, and is profitable to teache, to improue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God may be absolute &c.
                        
                        I denie not but that preaching is the most ordinary and vsuall meanes, that God vseth to worke by in the heartes of the hearers, bicause the people be for the mostPreaching ye most ordinary meanes: and why. part ignorant, and dull of vnderstanding, and therfore haue néede of scholemaisters & teachers to open and declare the scriptures vnto them, and to deale with them according to their capacitie: but this doth nothing derogate from the might and power of the woord of God being read of them, or to them that vnderstande it, & set their heart vpon it. If reading were so simple a thing and so little profitable as you would make it, why was the Gospell committed to writing? why is it thought so expedient to haue it in a toung knowen to the people? why do men printe their sermons, which they haue preached? why did God by Moses commaunde the lawe to be read? why did the Prophete Ieremy wyll Baruch to wryte out his sermons, and to reade them 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o the people?
                        
                           Do you thinke that there commeth no more knowledge or profit by reading the scriptures, than doth by beholding of Gods creatures? Then let vs haue Images againe, that they may be lay mens bookes, as the Papistes call them: no doubt attributing as much to the externall and visible creature, as they did to the reading of the eternall worde of God, wherein you ioyne with them, for any thing that I yet sée.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 126. Lin. 20.
                     And to know that the word of God preached, hath more force, and is more effecuall than when it is read, it is to be obserued, wherunto the preaching is compared. It is called a lifting or heauingIohn. 3. vp of our Sauiour Christ. Like vnto the displaying of a banner, as the Serpent was lift vp in the wildernesse. As therefore that which is lifted vp on high is better and easilyer seene of a greater companie, than when it standeth or lyeth vpon the grounde, or in some valley or some low place: so the preaching of the gospell, doth offer sooner, and easilyer the truth thereof vnto the fayth, (which is the eye of the hearer) than when it is read.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Where is there any such comparison in that third Chapter of Iohn? If you meane these wordes, 
                              Et nem
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  ascendit in caelum, &c. Et sicut Moses exaltauit Serpentem. &c. As MosesIobn. 3. lifted vp the Serpent in the wildernesse. &c. as you can meane no other, then I think you were not well aduised or little cared for your credite, when you abused them for this purpose, to proue that the worde of God is more effectuall when it is preached, than when it is read, Surely if you fetch your similitudes so farre, and imagine that which was neuer ment, and make the scripture a nose of ware as the Papists do, you may conclude what you list. For how hangeth this togither: No man ascendeth vp into heauen, but he that discended downe from heauen, the sonne of man which is in heauen. Ergo
                            sayth commeth by preaching of the worde of God, and not by reading of it? Or this. As Moses lifted vp the Serpent in the desert, so must the sonne of man be lifted vp, that all that beleeue in him. &c: Therefore the worde of God hath more force when it is preached, than when it is read. This geare is to profound for me, I cānot vnderstand it, except I wil imagine that which is not: and it may be that you were in some other déepe meditation when you wrote it, and so applied this text to a wrong matter: for in that place, Christ foretelleth of his death and passion, whereof the lifting vp of the SerpentNum. 21. in the wildernesse was a figure. And although I am not ignorant that some do allegorie vpon this place, saying that Christ is lifted vp, by the preaching of the Gospell, yet that maketh nothing agaynst me, who no where denie this effect of preaching. And it is a verie harde collection to say: Christ is lifted vp by preaching, therefore reading letteth him lye on the grounde, as though by reading the Gospell, Christ is not also lifted vp, and made manifest vnto the eyes of the faythfull.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 126. in the middest.
                     It is called also a sweete Sauour, and therefore as the spyces being brayed and 
                           〈◊〉
                        , smell2. Cor. 2 sweeter and stronger, than when they be whole and vnbroken: so the worde by interpretation being broken and bruysed, caryeth a sweeter sauour vnto the vnderstanding, than when it is by reading giuen grosse, and whole, the same also may be sayde in that the preaching is called a cutting of the worde of God, for as when the meate is cut and shred, it nourisheth more than when it is not2. Tim. 2. so: so likewise it is in preaching and reading.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Saint Paule speaking of himselfe, and of the ministers of the worde, sayth thus. For we are vnto God the sweete sauour of Christ in them that are saued. &c. and 2. Tim.2. Cor. 2. 2. Tim. 2. he admonisheth Timothie to cut the worde of truth rightly, that is prudently, and according to the capacitie of the hearers. What conclude you of this? Or what one worde is there in eyther of those places that derogateth any thing from reading? Do you thinke that the prayse of preaching, is the disprayse of reading? As though they were one contrarie to an other, and not rather both of them most profitable. Is not the worde of God when it is read, a sweete sauour? Is there not prudencie and discretion required in reading the Scriptures? Surely I am sorie that the Papists shall haue so iust cause to iest at your so vnapt alledging of the Scriptures, and that they shall be animated in their ridiculous applications of the same, by these and such like vntowarde allegations of yours.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 126. somevvhat past the midst.
                     And that which is brought by the Authours of the Admonition, and so scornefully hurled away of M. doctor, that Saint Paule compareth the preaching vnto pianting and watering, is a1. Cor. 3. very Surely you will make a notable conclusion notable place to proue that there is no saluation, without preaching. For as the husbande man receyueth no frute, vnlesse he both plant, and water that which is planted: Euen so there is no saluation to be looked for, where there is no preaching. It may be that God doth sometymes worke sayth by reading onely, especially where preaching cannot be, and so he doth sometymes without reading, by a wonderfull wor
                           〈1 line〉
                        e of his spirite: but the ordinarie wayes, whereby God regener
                           〈1 line〉
                        teth his children, is by the worde of God, which is preached. And therefore Solomon sayth,Prou. 29. that where prophecie, (which is not a bare reading, but an exposition and application of the Scriptures) fayleth, there the people perish.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Saint Paule sayth, I haue planted, Apollos watered, but God gaue the increase.1. Cor. 3. ver. 6. 
                              Erg
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 
                              
                            there is no saluation without preaching: is not this good stuffe, and a strong argument to builde a matter of saluation vpp
                              〈1 line〉
                           n? Saint Paule there declareth, that the preaching of the worde is not effectuall, except God giue the increase, and that wée ought not to attribute our saluation to the Ministers of the worde but onely to God. He maketh no comparison betwi
                              〈1 line〉
                           t reading and preaching, neyther is there anie thing there spoken, eyther of tilling, or watering, which may not also be applyed to attentiue and diligent reading. If your distinction of quoting Scriptures, some tymes for the matter, sometymes for the phrase, serue at any tyme to excuse the vnskilfulnesse of the Authours of the Admonition, it must eyther serue nowe or n
                              〈1 line〉
                           uer: else I vnderstande not to what purpose it can be alledged. It may be that God doth not onely worke fayth by reading, but it is commonly so, especially in such as reade with vnderstanding. And yet this derogateth nothing from preaching, for God worketh by both.
                        Solomon sayeth. That where there is no vision the people decay. And most tru
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 29. it is. For where there is no true doctrine, nor faythfull Ministers to preache the same, there the people must néedes decay in Godlinesse, and true knowledge: but this derogateth nothing from reading.
                        Both reading and preaching be necessarie in the Churche, and moste prof
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           table, the commendation of the one doth not take anie thing from the other. ButPreaching profiteth m
                                 〈1 line〉
                               than reading, and why? preaching doth profit mo than reading doth, bicause it is more apt sor the ignorant & vnlearned: & if in this respect you preferre preaching to reading, bicause it doth more cōmōly profit, & serueth more to ye instructiō of those which are ignorāt, bicause it more

plainly expresseth the meaning of the Scripture and applyeth the same, then haue you also bestowed a great tyme in prouing that which is not denyed of any, whiche 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ult you founde with me before (though vniustly) euen in this treatise. But we mayMany conuer
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ed by 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              ding. not make so light of reading, whereby so many haue come to the knowledge of the truth, whereby also dayly mo are conuerted, euen such as very seldome or neuer heare the worde preached: both preaching therefore and reading be meanes whereby God doth call to saluation those that be his, he vseth them both, ioyntly and seuerally as it pleaseth him, and where the one is publikely receyued, there is the other neuer refused.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 126. tovvards the ende, and Sect. vlt.
                     It is true, the worde both preached and read is all one, as the fire couered with ashes, is the same when it is discouered. But This 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            of 
                              〈◊〉
                           . as when the fyre is stirred vp and discouered, it giueth more heate, than when it is not: so the worde of God by preaching and interpreting (as it were stirred vp and blowne) maketh a greater 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ame in the heartes of the hearers, than when it is read. The reason whereof is not in the worde, which is all one read and preached, but in that it pleaseth the Lorde to worke more effectually with the one, than with the other, thereby approuing and authorising that meanes and wayes, whiche he especially ordeyned for vs to be saued by.
                     Of infinite examples take one of the Eunuch, which although he had beene at Ierusalem, andActes. 8. returning home, was reading of the Prophete Esay, yet he bel
                           〈1 line〉
                        eued not vntill Philip came and preached vnto him, which I neither say to disallow reading of the scriptures (whiche is ver
                           〈1 line〉
                        e profitable) nor yet to strengthen the handes of the Papistes, which to banish the reading of the Scriptures, obiect the hardnesse and difficultie of the Scriptures, as Maister doctor doth most slaunderously, and vnbrotherly surmise of the Authours of the Admonition: but that it may appeare what a grosse and a palpable errour this is, that the reading of the Scripture shoulde be as effectuall as the preaching of it, which God hath appoynted to be the especiall and singular meanes, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        o saue those whom he hath appoynted to saluation.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What is this else but togither with the Papistes to condemne the ScripturesT. C. 
                                 〈◊〉
                               with the Papists. of obscuritie: as thoughe all things necessarie to saluation were not plainly and clearely expressed in them? I graunt you that euerie man vnderst andeth them not, for it is the spirite of God that openeth the heart of man, both to vnderstande the Scriptures read and preached: and to him that vnderstandeth them, they are as hote and as lightsome read as preached: neyther shall you euer bée able to proue the contrarie. And the places that you haue hythertoo alledged, béeing so farre from the purpose, conuince you of a maruellous great scarcitie of proofes.
                        One example of infinite, is as fewe as may bée. But if that one make not for your purpose, then must you be faine to séeke some other, séeing you haue such store. The Eunuche did not vnderstande the Scripture, that he read, as it appeareth in the same place of the Actes: but I speake of suche as vnderstande that which they reade, and therefore this place is soone answered. Neyther doe I speake of suche in the commendation of reading, to disproue in any respect, the necessitie and vtilitie of preaching. But neyther you, nor the Authours of the Admonition can auoyde the strengthning the handes of the Papistes in their erroneous opinions, not onely of the hardnesse and difficultie, but also of the vnprofitablenesse of the Scriptures. Howe palpaple an errour it is that I defende, may appeare by your mightie reasons agaynst it, and your learned answere to those proofes that I haue brought for it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 127. Lin. 3.
                     And although this be verie grosse, yet in the. 163. page, where he goeth about to shewe the profite of reading the Scriptures in the Church, he 
                           〈1 line〉
                        s yet more absurde. For there he sayeth that it may be, that some men be more 
                           〈1 line〉
                        difyed by the simple reading of the Scriptures, than by Sermons. In deede if a man sleepe the Sermon time, and wake the reading time, or be otherwise deafe at the one, and attentiue and heed
                           〈1 line〉
                        e at the other. I will not denie but he may be more edisyed at the simple reading, than at the Sermon, vnlesse it be in this and such like case, I knowe not howe it may be true that M. Doctor sayth. And indeede it is as much to say that it may be, that the meanes that God hath ordeyned to be the fittest and meetest, to call men to saluation, is not the fittest and meetest meanes, which a man shoulde not once so much as thinke of, without trembling and shaking euery ioynt of him.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        As absurde as it is, Musculus doth affirme it in his common places. titu. de Lectio. sacrae script. And as his saying, I report it in mine answere: beléeuing it to be moste true. And therefore (if your malice had not béene wholy bent agaynst me) you should haue ascribed this absurditie to him, or at least haue deuided it betwixt vs, and so my backe should haue béene somwhat eased of the burden of absurdityas, wherewith you would so gladly ouercharge me.
                        God worketh by reading the Scriptures as well as he doth by preaching, andGod vseth reading as a meanes aswell as preaching. vseth that also as a meanes to call men to saluation. Read Augustine. lib. con. 8. cap. 12. and you shall sée that God vsed reading as a meanes to conuert him. And surely I maruell that you professing the Gospell, can without trembling and shaking speake so basely of reading the worde of God, being a thing so precious, and so singular a meanes of our saluation: but for the thing it selfe, I referre it to the iudgementReading somtune preuayleth more than preaching. of those, that haue not drunke so déepely of the cuppe of contention as you haue, whither it may not sometymes so happen. Or whither they whiche are quietly affected may not receyue more edifying by the simple reading of the Sciptures which they vnderstande, than by the Sermons of diuerse contentious preachers, whose hote and bitter inuectiues, (which sauour more of malice, than of loue: of contention, than of peace the frute of the Gospell) may bréede in the heartes of those that are studious of peace, and quietly minded, some suspition of the truth of their doctrine. Or lastly, whither some misdoubting the truth of the doctrine of the preachers of the Gospell, and conceyuing a preindicate opinion agaynst them (as diuerse Papistes doe) may not be more edifyed, by diligent reading of the Scriptures, of whose authoritie they doe not doubt, than by hearing of the Preacher, whose wordes they doe eyther mistrust, or not regarde, by reason of theyr preiudicate opinion agaynst all Preachers: and in the ende perceyuing by reading of the Scriptures the truth of their doctrine, may bée thereby established, which were not by the Sermons once mooued. And for this cause Christ sayde. Iohn. 5. Searche theIohn. 5. Scriptures. &c.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               That Reading is Preaching.
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 127. Lin. 13.
                     And nowe I thinke by this tyme M. Doctor knoweth his answere to his seconde question, which is whether reading be not preaching▪ And if this be not sufficient that I haue sayde, I woulde aske gladly of him, A mere cauil. whether all Readers be Preachers, and whether whosoeuer readeth, preacheth, for if it be true (which he sayth) that reading is preaching, then that is lykewise true, that all those which reade, preache, and so a childe of. 4. or. 5. yeares olde, is able to preach, bycause he is able to reade.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I know an answere in déede, such as it is: but it is much more fit for a Papist or Atheist, than for a professor of the Gospell. If preaching be taken generally for euerieHow reading is preaching. kinde of instructing or teaching by the worde of God, as it is 
                              ad Rom. 10. then is reading preaching. But if it be taken in the vsuall signification, for him that interpreteth the Scripture, teacheth, and exhorteth in the Congregation, by discoursing vpon the scriptures, and applying them as occasion serueth, then it is not so: and yet no lesse profitable to edifying, to such as vnderstande that which is read, than preaching. To reade the Scriptures is not to preach, or teache, in respect of him that readeth, but in the respect of Gods spirite, whiche thereby worketh knowledge in the heart of the Reader or Hearer. For we must thinke it to be true that Cyprian sayth. VVhen we reade the Scripture God speaketh vnto vs: and in this sense a childe that can read, may preach, that is, God by his worde read of a childe, may, and doth oftentimes teach vs. And hereof we haue (God be thanked) many examples in Englande, of those which béeing not able to reade themselues, by the meanes of their children reading to them at home, receyue instruction and edifying. And if you had béene disposed to haue called to remembrance, that which you say you haue so diligently read in M. Foxe, you might haue knowne that diuerse in the beginning came to the light of the Gospell onely by reading, and hearing the newe Testament in English read: which I am sure you will confesse to haue bene to them a preaching and instruction.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     By the worde of God it is an office of preaching, they make it an office of reading.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 159. Sect. 1.
                        But where doth the booke make the ministerie an office of reading onely? Or what contrarietie is there betwixt reading and preaching? Nay what difference is there betwixt them? If a manA written sermon is preaching. shoulde write his Sermon, and reade it in the booke to his flocke, doth he not preach? Is there no Sermons but such as be sayde without booke? I thinke to preache the Gospell is to teache and instruct the people, in fayth and good maners, be it by wryting, reading or speaking without booke: and I am sure the spirite of God, doth worke as effectually by the one of these wayes, as it doth by the other. Did not Saint Paule preache to the Romaines when he writte to them? Was not the reading of Deuteronomie to the people a preaching? 2. Reg. 23. Will you so scornefully and so contemptuously speake of the reading of Scripture, beeing a thing so frutefull and necessarie?
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 127. Lin. 18.
                     And least he shoulde seeme to be thus euill aduised, without some reason in the. 159. Page, he asketh whether (if a man wryte his Sermon and after reade it in the booke) that reading be preaching. Here is hard shift, what if I graunted that it is preaching, yet I denie that therefore he that readeth an other mannes Sermon preacheth: and further I say, that if there be any such, as beeing able to preache for his knowledge, yet for fault eyther of vtterance or memorie, can not doe it, but by reading that whiche hee hath written: It is not conuenient that hee shoulde bee a Minister in the Churche. For Saint Paule doth not require onely, that the1. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 3. Bishoppe or Minister shoulde be learned in the mysteries of the Gospell, and such a one as is

able to set downe in wryting in his studie, the sense of the Scripture, but one whiche is apt and fitte to teache. And the Prophete Malachie sheweth, that he must haue the lawe, not in his papers,Mal. 2. but in his lippes, noting thereby that it is necessarie to haue the gifte of vtterance: And Esay the Prophete saying that God had giuen him the tongue of the learned, doth thereby declare,Esay. 50. that it is not sufficient that he be well instructed in the mysterie of saluation, but that he haue also the gift of vtterance.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And why doth not he which readeth an other mans Sermon preache, as well as hée doth when he readeth his owne? What if he pronounce another mans Sermon in the Pulpit without booke, doth he not preache, bicause it is not his owne? I do not speake this to defende any such ignorant Pastor, that should néede so to depende vpon other mens labours: I doe but put a case. It may be that a learned Pastor hauing both memorie and vtterance, sometime vpon occasion may reade a Sermon. And I nothing doubt, but in so doing he preacheth. And surely he shall the more redily haue the lawe in his lippes, if he haue it first in his Papers. And yet if he reade, he must vse his lippes. Ieremie the Prophete as it appeareth in the. 36. Chapter, was commaunded to write that which the Lord had commaunded him to say to the people ofIere. 36. Iuda, and of Ierusalem, and to cause it to be read vnto them, and so it was in the open congregation, and in the house of the Lorde, in the hearing of all the people. And so did Baruch in like maner write that which he had to say to Iechonia, and toBar. 1. all the people, and read the same in the open congregation Bar. 1. and surely both these bookes were Sermons.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 127. about the middest.
                     Afterward M. Doctor asketh whether S. Paule did not preach to the Romaines, when he wrote vnto them. No forsooth, his writing to the Romaines, was no more preaching than S.Rom. 1. Paules hande, or his pen. which were his instruments to write with, were his tongue, or his lightes, or any other partes, which were his instruments to speake with. And S. Paule himselfe writing to the Romaines, putteth a difference betwene his writing & his preaching, when although he wrote vnto them, yet he excuseth himselfe that he coulde not come to preach vnto them, saying, that he was readie, as much as lay in him to preach vnto them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Forsooth and I thinke verely, that the same Epistle did them more good, and wrought more with them, than if the selfe same matter, had béene preached vnto them, and not written. And if you will but peruse the. 15. and. 16. vers. of the. 15. Chapter of that Epistle, I thinke that you shall heare the Apostle call this written Epistle in effect, preaching. I do not perceyue that in the first Chapter of this Epistle, he maketh any such difference betweene his wryting vnto them, and hys preaching. If you meane the. 15. verse, he therein onely signifieth, that so much as lyeth in him, he is readie personally to preach the Gospell among them, as well as he doth it nowe by his letters: and therefore to say that this his wryting is no more preaching than his hande or his pen, was his tongue or his lightes, is a proper iest, but not so apt for the purpose, nor so fitte for your person. A mans minde is commonly much better expressed by wryting than by worde, and that which is written continueth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 127. somevvhat past the middest.
                     But sayeth he was not the reading of Deuteronomie preaching? No more than the reading

of Exod. Here be good proofes. It is generally denied, that readyng is preaching, and M. Doctor without any proofe, taketh it for graunted, that the readyng of 
                           〈◊〉
                         is preaching, al men see how pitifull reasons these be.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And why then did God by Moses Deut. 31. commaunde the Priestes and Leuites, that they should reade The wordes of this lawe before all Israell, that they mightDeut. 31. heare it and learne, and feare the Lorde God, and keepe and obserue all the wordes of the lawe? Why did Iosiah after he had founde this booke, cause it to be read, before all the people? if readyng had not bene effectuall, and of as great force to persuade as preaching, that is, if readyng in effect had not bene preaching. If the eight chapter of Nehemias
                           Nehem. 8. be well considered, and the true meaning of the. 4. and. 7. verses, according to learned and godly interpreters weyghed and pondered, this controuersie will soone be at an ende, & it will there appeare in expresse wordes, that readyng is preaching.
                        These pitifull reasons so disquiet your patience, that it woulde pitie a man to see how of a diuine, you are become a scornefull iester.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 162. Sect. 2.
                     Act. 15. it is thus written: For Moses of old tyme hath in euery citie them that preach him, seyng he is read in the Synagogues euery Sabboth day. Where he also seemeth to call reading preaching.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 127. Tovvardes the ende.
                     And in the. 162. page, he alleageth that in the. 15. of the Actes. S. Luke seemeth to meane by readyng preaching. But what dealing is this? vpon a If your seemings and coniectures were taken away, there would be few reasons left. seeming and coniecture, to set downe so certainely, and vndoubtedly, that reading is preaching, and then there is no one letter nor syllable that vpholdeth any suche comecture. For S. Iames sayeth that Moses (meaning the lawe) read euery Sabboth thorough out euery towne in the Sinagogue, was also preached, or had those that preached it, setting forth the order which was vsed in all the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        hurches amongst the people of God: that alwayes, when they mette vpon the Sabboth dayes, they had the scriptures first read, and then preached of and expounded, which is that the Authours of the Admonition do desire, and therefore complayne, for that after readyng followeth no preaching, which any indifferent man may easily vnderstande, by that that they saye: In the olde tyme the worde was preached, nowe it is supposed to be sufficient if it be read.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely the place of it selfe is euident, neyther can I reade any interpreter, that doth otherwise vnderstand it, than of reading, & the occasion of vttering these wordes importeth the same. For S. Iames doth vse this for a reason, why the ceremonies of the lawe could not by and by be abolished among the Iewes, bycause Moses was of so great authoritie with them, beyng read euery Sabboth day in their Churches. Therefore hauing the wordes of the Scripture with me, I must rest in my opinion, vntill I heare some proofe or authoritie to the contrarie. Howbeit the waight of the cause lieth not vpon this text, this is but one reason among diuerse.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 127. Sect. vlt.
                     But M. Doctor heareth with his left eare, and readeth with his lefte eye, as though his right eye were pulled out, or his right 
                           〈1 line〉
                        are cut of. For otherwise, the other wordes which they haue touching this matter, might easily haue bene expounded, by the argument and matter whiche they handle.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        How doth it then happen that you haue not salued the matter, by setting downe theyr wordes, and declaring how I haue mistaken them? seyng you haue omitted that, men may well thinke that this is not vttered of you in good earnest. Now that you haue sayde all in this matter, you must giue me leaue, to let the Reader vnderstande, what you haue lefte vntouched in my booke concerning the same, whither it be bycause you consent vnto it, or that you cannot answere it, I referre to his discretion.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The profite of Reading Scriptures in the Churche.
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 90. Sect. 5. 6. & Pag. 91. Sect. 2. 3.
                     
                        Isidorus sayth that reading bringeth great profit to the hearers.Isidorus. Tertul. in Apologet.
                     
                     
                        Tertullian. sayth, when we come togither to the reading of the holy Scriptures, we feede our fayth with those heauenly voyces, we rayse vp our affiance we fasten our hope. And agayne he calleth the reading of the Scriptures, the feeding of our fayth. But what neede I speake any more of a matter so manifest? you 
                           〈1 line〉
                        atly ioyneHardinges opinion of reading scripture with the Papiste in this, for in the confutation of the Apologie of the Church of England, M. Harding calleth reading of the Scriptures to the people in the Churche, a spirituall dumbnesse, and a thingParte. 5. and in the. 15. Arti. of the Replie. vnprofitable, &c. That to reade the Scriptures in the Churche is no new thing, but most auncient, and grounded vpon Gods worde, it is manifest by that which is written in the. 4. of Luke, where the Euangelist sayeth, that Christe on the Sabboth daye, going into the SynagogueLuc. 4. according to his accustomed manner, rose vp to read, and there vvas deliuered vnto him the booke of the Prophete Esay, and as soone as he opened the booke, he founde the place vvhere it vvas vvritten. Spiritus Domini super me. &c. The spirite of the Lorde vpon me. &c. Likewise in the thirtenth of the Actes, we reade that Paule and other of his company, beyng in the Synagogue on the Sabboth day, was sent vnto by the rulers of the Sinagogue, 
                           Post lectionem legis & Prophetarum. After the readingAd. 13. of the lavve and the Prophetes. To knowe if they would make any exhortation to the people.
                     Iustinus Martyr Apolog. 2. pro Christianis, sayth, that in his time the mannerIustinus Mar
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              yr. was, on the Sabboth day vvhen the people vvere gathered togither, to haue the scriptur
                           〈1 line〉
                        s read in the publike congregation, and in the time of publike prayer, for the space of one vvhole hovver.
                     Origen writing vpon Iosua Homil. 15. sayeth, that the bookes of theOrig
                              〈1 line〉
                           n. olde Testament vvere deliuered by the Apostles to be read in the Churches.
                     Cyprian lib. 2. Epist. 5. sayeth. The Reader soundeth out the high andCyprian. heauenly vvordes: he readeth out the Gospell of Christe. &c.
                     
                        Chrysostome vpon the Actes Homil. 19. The minister and common minister standeth vp, and crieth vvith a lovvde voyce, saying: Keepe silence,Chrysostome. Augustine. after that the Reader beginneth the prophesie of Esay. Augustine speaking to the people, sayeth: Yee heard vvhen the Gospell vvas read. Ye heard erevvhyle, vvhen it vvas read, if ye gaue eare to the reading, dearely beloued vve haue heard in the lesson that hath bene read.
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     And that this is not the feeding that Christe spake of, the Scriptures are playne. (For reading ministers vievv these places. Mala. 2. 7. Esay. 56. 10 Zach. 11. 15 
                              〈1 line〉
                           at. 15. 14. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Tim. 3. 3) Reading is not feeding, but it is as euill as playing vpon a stage, and worse too: for players yet learne theyr partes without booke, and these a mayny of them can scarcely read within booke. These are emptie feeders (Math. 6. 22) darke eyes (Math. 9. 38 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 3.) ill workemen to hasten in the Lordes haruest, (Luc. 14. 17) messangers that can not cal. (Mat. 23. 34) Prophers that can not declare the will of the Lord, (Math. 5. 13) vnsauerie salt, (Mat. 15. 14) blind guides, (Isay. 36. 10) sleepie watchmen, (
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Cor. 4. 1. Luc 16. 1. &
                              〈1 line〉
                           .) vntrustie dispensers of Gods secretes, (2. Tim. 2. 15) euill deuiders of the worde, (
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 1. 9.) weake to withstande the aduersarie, (2. T
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 3. 15. 16. not able to confute: And to conclude, so farre from making the man of God perfect to all good workes, that rather the quite contrarie may be confirmed.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 161. Sect. 2. 3.
                        For reading ministers you bid vs viewe these places. Mala. 2. vers. 7. Esay. 56. 10. Zachar. 11. 15. Matth. 15. 14. 1. Timoth. 3. 3. The Prophete Malachie in the seconde chapter, and seuenth verse, sayeth on this sorte: For the Priestes lippes shoulde preserue knovvledge, and they shoulde seeke the lavve at his mouthe. For he is the messenger of the Lord of hostes. In whiche wordes the Prophete doth signifie, that the Priestes ought to be learned in the lawe and able to instruct, which no man denieth, and if there be any crepte into the ministerie, whiche a
                              〈1 line〉
                            not able so to do, it is to be ascribed, eyther to the negligence of t
                              〈1 line〉
                            Bishop, and such as haue to do therein, or to the necessitie of theReading is profitable. t
                              〈1 line〉
                           me. But here is nothing spoken agaynst reading, for any thing that I can gather: and if any man shoulde come vnto me, and demaunde of me, any question touching the lawe of God, I thinke I shoulde better satisfie him, if I did reade the wordes of the lawe vnto him, than if I should make a long tedious discourse of myne owne, to litle or no purpose. It is the worde it selfe that pearceth and mou
                              〈1 line〉
                           th the conscience.
                        I speake not this agaynst interpreting of the Scriptures, or preachingPag. 162. Sect. 1. 2. (for I know they be both necessary) but agaynst such as be enimies to the reading of them.
                        The places in the. 56. of Esay, and in the eleuenth of zacharie, tende to the same purpose, they all speake agaynst ignorant, foolish, slouthfull gouernours and pastours, there is nothing in them that condemneth or disaloweth readyng of the Scriptures, or reading of Prayers: No more is there in the fiftenth of Matthew, nor. 1. Timo. 3. reade the places and you shal soone see, with how litle iudgement they be quoted agaynst such ministers, as vse to reade the scriptures and prayers to the people. If you had sayde agaynst dumbe & vnlearned ministers, viewe these places, you had sayde something.For Reading ministers. 1. Tim. 4.
                            For reading ministers that is, for reading the Scriptures publikely in the church by ministers, view you these places. 1. Tim. 4. Til I come
                           
                           giue attendance to readyng, to exhortation, to doctrine. In the whiche wordes as Musculus sayeth: 
                              Exprimit ordinem Ecclesiasticum, quo primùm ex
                              Musculus. 
                              sacris Scripturis aliquid legebatur, deinde exhortatio & doctrina subijciebatur. He expresseth the Ecclesiasticall order, vvherein firste there is some thing reade out of the Scriptures, then follovveth exhortation and doctrine. Luke. 4. Where wee learne that Christe beyng at Nazareth, as his customeChriste read the scripture. was, wente into the Sinagogue on the Saboth day, and stoode vp to reade. &c.
                        
                           And yet you saye, Reading is not feedyng, but it is as euill as playingPag. 163, Lin. 2. & Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4. vpon a stage, and vvorse to, for players yet learne theyr partes vvithout booke and these a many of them, can scarcely reade vvithin booke.
                        That reading is feedyng, Musculus giueth these reasons: Firste,Reading is feeding. Musculus.
                               bycause it maketh the people experte and cunning, in the Scriptures, so that they can not be so easily deceyued with false teachers. And therefore Iosephus Lib. 2. contra Appion. speakyng of this commoditie of hauing the Scriptures read, sayeth on this sorte: In vnaquaque septimana ad legem audiendam conueniunt vniuersi. Nostrorum quilibet de legibus interrogatus, facilius quam nomen suum recitat. vniuersas quippe mox à primo sensu discentes in animo velut inscriptas habemus.
                            Euery vveeke all the people come togither to heare the Lavve. Euery one of vs demaunded any question of the lavve, can ansvvere readily, as he can tell his ovvne name. For vvee learnyng the lavve euen from our youth, haue it, as it vvere vvritten in our memorie.
                        Secondly the publike reading of the Scripture, is good for such as can not reade themselues: to suche likewise as can reade, but yet haue not the bookes of the holy Scripture at home in their houses.
                        Thirdly, it maketh the people better to vnderstande the Sermons preached vnto them: bycause through the continuall hearing of the Scriptures read, they be acquainted with the wordes and phrases of the same.
                        Last of all, it may be that some men be more edified by the simple reading of the scriptures, than by sermons.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     By this booke bare reading is 1. Cor. 3. 5. good tilling, and single seruice saying is excellent 1. Cor. 3. 9. buylding, and he is shepherde good inough, that can, as popish Priestes could, out of their Portuis say fayrely their diuine seruice.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 165. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 166.
                        Here is much a do about bare reading and single seruice saying: by like you lacke matter to make out your volume, when you iterate one thing so often. I tell you agayne, no honest, godly, or learned man,No godly mā 
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               reading in the churche. euer hither to did or will disallow readyng of the Scriptures in the Churche, or a prescript order of Common prayers. Shew any learned mans iudgement to the contrary, shewe the example of any Christian Churche of antiquitie, or of any late reformed Churche, wherein there is not both reading of the Scriptures in the publike congregation, and a prescripte order of Common prayers. Nay

shewe any one sillable in the Scriptures to the contrary. As for your places alleaged out of the 1. Corinth. 3. vers. 5. And 1. Corinth. 3. vers. 9, The one to proue that by the booke bare readyng is good tilling, the other that by the same booke, single seruice saying is excellent buyldyng. &c. They shewe your intollerable audacitie (I will terme it no worse) in abusing the Scriptures. In that place to the Corinthes the Apostle sayeth thus. VVho is Paule then? vvho is Apollos?1. Cor. 3. But the mynisters by vvhomeyee beleeued, and as the Lorde gaue to euery man. Howe can you gather hereof that by the Communion booke bare readyng is good tilling, or how can you hereof conclude (that which I thinke you meane) that the sole and onely reading of the Scriptures is not tilling, or that the Scriptures may not be read in the open congregation by the Minister? what s
                              〈1 line〉
                           quele call you this? Paule and Apollos be the ministers by whome youUnskilfull Logicians. beleeued, as the Lord gaue to euery man: Therefore the readyng of the Scriptures edifie not, or it is not lawfull for them to be read in the Churche by the Minister. You come to soone from the vniuersitie to haue any great skill in Logike: but belyke bycause there is mention made of tylling in the nexte verse of that chapter, therefore you quote it in the margent, missing onely the lyne: for this is your vsuall manner, if you haue but one worde in a texte whiche you vse in your booke, you quote the place, as though it made for your purpose. This is neyther playne nor wise dealyng?
                        
                           The examples of suche as haue bene conuerted by readyng of
                                 
                                    Pag. 168. Sect. 1. 2. 3. Many conuerted by hearing the scriptures read. the Scriptures, and hearyng of them read, be infinite. I knowe not wherevnto this your bitternesse agaynst readyng of the Scripture tendeth, excepte it be to confirme an other opinion of the Papistes, touching the obscuritie and darkenesse of the Scripture, or diuerse senses and vnderstanding of the same. If you ioyne with them in that also, then I haue to say vnto you with S. Augustine: In his quae apertè in Scripturis posita sunt inueniuntur illa omnia quae cōtinent sidē, mores
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  viuēdi.
                           
                           August. In those things that be playne and manifest in the Scriptures, are all such things conteyned, vvhich perteyne to fayth and good manners. And with Hierom. in Psalme. 86. Sicut scripserunt Apostoli, sic & ipse Dominus, hoc est, per Euangelia
                           Hierome. 
                           sua locutus est, vt non pauci intelligerent, sed vt omnes. Plato scripsit in scriptura, sed non scripsit populo sed paucis, vix enim intelligunt tres homines. Isti verò, hoc est, principes E
                                 〈1 line〉
                              clesiae, & principes Christi non scripserunt paucis, sed vniuerso populo. As the Apostles vvrite so did the Lorde, that is, he spake by his Gospels, not that a fevve, but that all might vnderstand. Plato vvritte, but he vvritte to fevv, not to the people, for scarse three do vnderstand him: these, that is the Apostles vvritte not to fevv, but to the vvhole people. But I thinke you doubt not of this matter.
                        
                        If the readyng of the scriptures edifie not, what needed ChrysostomeChrysostome exhorteth the people to get Bibles. writing vpon the third to the Coloss. so earnestly exhorte the people to get them Bibles, or at the least the new Testamēt, to be as it were a continuall maister vnto them to instruct them?
                        What needed the same Chrysostome Hom. 3. De Lazaro. withIdem. suche vehement wordes, haue moued the people to reade the Scriptures, declaring not onely the commoditie of them, but the easinesse

also to be vnderstoode? Is not this saying, both auncient and true, That vvhen vvee reade the Scriptures God talketh vvith vs: vvhen vvee pray then vve talke vvith God? But touching this matter I referre you to that whiche I haue spoken before in the former parte of your Admonition. And also I beseech you take paynes to peruse the. 15. Article of that notable Iewell, and worthy Bishop late of Sarisburie, wherein he of purpose intreateth of this matter agaynst M. Harding.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     All this you haue lefte vnanswered, saue onely that you haue touched the laste of Masculus his reasons.
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Of Ministring and Preaching by Deacons. Tract. 14.
            
               The. 1. Diuision.
               
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 93. Sect. 2.
                  We reade in the eight of the Actes, that Philip beyng a DeaconPhilip deacon baptised. did Baptise.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 128. Lin. 1.
                  Of ministring of the sacraments in priuate places and by women, I haue spoken before, there remayneth therfore only in this section to speake of the Deacons, that they ought not to minister the sacrament. Which although I haue done partly before, and partly afterward will do, when I shall shew that it apperteyneth not to them to minister the worde, and therefore not the sacraments (being things the ministerie whereof ought not to be seuered) yet I will in a worde answere, those arguments, that M. Doctor bringeth for to proue, that they may minister the sacramentes, wherof the first is, that Philip in the. 8. of the Actes baptised. But I would gladly aske M. Doctor how he is able to proue, that that was Philip the Deacon, and not rather Philip the Apostle, seing that S. Luke when he speaketh of Philip that was the Deacon, speaketh of him, with that title & addition of Deaconship, and there is great doubt amongst writers, which Philip that was, that S. Luke mentioneth in the eight chapter of the Actes of the Apostles. But let it be that Philip that was the Deacon. I answere that he was no Deacon then, for the Church of Ierusalem whereof he was Deacon, being scattered, he could be no more Deacon of it, or distribute the mony that was collected for the poore of that Churche. And further I answere that he was afterwarde an Euangelist, and therefore preached not by vertue of his Deaconship, (whose calling is not to preach) but by that he was an Euangelist, whose office put vpon him a necessitie of preaching.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     In the beginning of that. 8. chap. of the Actes. S. Luke declareth, that all the ApostlesPhilip that baptised Samaria, was a Deacon. did still remayne at Ierusalem, wherefore it could not be Philip the Apostle which was now at Ierusalem: but it muste néedes be Philip the Deacon that was dispersed with the rest & came to Samaria, where he now preached & baptised. And of this indgement is M. Caluine whose wordes vpon the same place & chapt. be these:Caluine. 
                        Seing Luke had before declared, that the Apostles did not stirre from Ierusalem, it is probable, that one of the seuen Deacons, whose daughters also did Prophecie is here mentioned. M. Gualter writing vpon the same place sayeth thus. This Philip was not the Apostle,Gualter. but he whiche was reckened before among the Deacons, as the auncient Ecclesiasticall writers do with one consent testifie: especially Epiphanius wryting De Simone & Simoniacis.
                         That this Philip still remayned Deacon, and that he was called an Euangelist, in respecte that he preached the Gospell though he were but a Deacon,Act. 21. it appeareth Act. 21. Where S. Luke speaketh of him in this manner. And wee entring into the house of Philip the Euangelist, whiche was one of the seuen, &c.
                        
And further, that he still remayned Deacon, althoughe he was nowe departed fromGualter. Ierusalem, M. Gualter declareth in the eyght of the Actes, in these words: Althoughe it was the office of Deacons to take charge of the common treasures of the Churche, and of the poore, yet was it heerewith permitted vnto them to take the office of preaching, if at anyttme necessitie required, as we haue hitherto seene in the example of Stephen. And peraduenture there was not so great neede of Deacons at Ierusalem, when the Churche was through persecution dispersed: and therefore they whiche before werc stewardes of the Churche goodes, dyd giue them selues wholly to the ministerie of the worde. TheEpipha. de Simone & Simoniac. wordes of Epiphanius, whome M. Gualter mentioneth, be these: For when Philip beeing a Deacon had not authoritie to lay on handes, that thereby he mighte giue the holy Ghost, &c. Whereby it is playne, that Philip béeing Deacon did baptise, thoughe he had not authoritie 
                           imponendi manus, to lay on handes.
                     
                     Augustine also in his questions, speaking of Philip, sayth thus: Et iternm mnltum
                        
                        Aug. in quaest. ex vtro
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            test. 
                        distare inter Diaconum & Sacerdotem, liber approbat quem dicimus actus Apostolorum &c. Agayne the booke, which we call the Actes of the Apostles, dothe proue that a Deacon differeth muche from a Priest, for when they of Samaria beleeued the preaching of Philip the Deacon, they sent (sayth he) vnto them Peter and Iohn. &c.
                  
               
            
            
               The seconde diuision.
               
                  T. C. Page. 128. Lin. 19. & Sect. 1.
                  After you say that Deacons are not permitted wyth vs to celebrate the Lords supper, and why then should they be suffered to minister baptisme? as if the one Sacrament were not as precious as the other. This is a miserable rending in sunder of those things whiche God hathe ioyned togither, not onely to separate the ministery of the Sacraments from the worde, but also the ministery of one sacrament from an other.
                  And what reason is there, that it shoulde be graunted vnto one that can not preache (beeing as they Why▪ do you account him no minister▪ this geare would be marked. call him a minister) to minister bothe the sacraments, when as the same is not permitted vnto a Deacon (as they call him) whyche is able to preach? I doe not speake it, for that I would haue those whych be deacons in deede, that is, which haue charge to prouide for the poore of some one congregation, should eyther preache or minister the sacraments, but I say that it is agaynst all reason to permit the ministerie of the sacraments to those whych can not preache, and to deny it to those whych are able to preache.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I doe but in that poynte agrée with the Scriptures, and all other wryters, for the moste parte, bothe olde and newe, who testifie that Deacons dyd preache the worde, and minister the Sacrament of Baptisme. But I can not reade in any author, where they ministred the Communion, and therefore I am bolde to speake as I haue learned out of the holy Scriptures, and other godly wryters: neyther is this to rende in sunder eyther the Sacraments from the worde, or the Sacraments from them selues: but to keepe the order vsed in the Churche in the Apostles time, and since their time.
                     No man that is able to preache, béeing for his other qualities also méete, is debarred from ministring the Sacraments, if he be in the ministerie: but no man be he neuer so able in all respectes, may presume to take an office vpon him, wherevnto he is not called. Therefore he that can not preache, and yet by the order of theTract. 6. & cap. 1. Tract. 9. cap. 1 diuis. 15. Churche is admitted to minister the Sacraments, is a lawfull minister of the same: and he that can preache, excepte by order he be therevnto called, maye not intrude him selfe into any function of the ministerie. I haue also declared before, that euen from the beginning, the administration of the Sacramentes haue béene committed to some, to whome the preaching of the worde hathe not béene committed.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The. 3. diuision.
               
                  Admonition.
                  Touching Deacons though their names be remayning, yet is the office foully peruerted and turned vpside downe, for their duetie in the Primitiue Churche, was to Rom. 12. 8. gather the a
                        〈1 line〉
                     mes diligently, and to distribute it faythfully: also for the sicke and impotent persons to prouide paynefully, hauing euer a diligent care, that the charitie of godly men were not wasted vpon loyterers 2. Th. 3. 10 and idle vagabounds.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 118. Sect. 2.
                     It is true that in the primitiue Churche, the office of a Deacon was to collect and prouide for the poore, but not only, for it was also their office to preache, and to baptise. For Stephen and Philip beeing Deacons dyd preache the Gospell. Acts. 6. 7. 8. And Philip dyd baptise the Eunuche. Act. 8.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 128. Sect. 1.
                  In the. 118. page, vnto the example of Philip he addeth S. Stephen, whyche was one of the Deacons, which he affirmeth to haue preached. But I denie it: for all that long oration which he hath in the seuenth of the Actes, is no sermon, but a de
                        〈1 line〉
                     ense of him selfe, agaynst those accusations whych were layde agaynst hym, as No suche thing to be foūd in Beza his annotations. M. Beza dothe very learnedly and substantially proue in his annotations vpon those places of S. Stephens disputations and defense. Nowe to defende himselfe beeing accused, is lawfull not for the Deacons onely, but for any other Christian, and we reade nothing that Stephen did there, eyther touching the defense of his cause, or the sharpe rebuking of the obstinate Pharisies and Priestes, but that the holy Martyrs of God which were no deacons nor ministers haue done with vs, when they haue bene conuented before their persecutors: and whereas he 
                        〈1 line〉
                     ayth, that Philip baptised, I haue shewed before by what authoritie he dyd it, that is, not in that he was a Deacon, but for 
                        〈◊〉
                      he was an Euangelist.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     This is a harde and new deuised shifte. You imagine (as I thinke) that you are inStephen hys oration a serm
                              〈1 line〉
                           n. the Logike or Philosophy scholes, where you may feyne what distinctions you liste, but al wil not serue. The accusations are conteyned in the. 13. &. 14. verse of the. 6. chap. let the Reader compare his sermon with them, & iudge whether he spake in the way of preaching, or of defending himselfe. Although a man may make his Apologie in preaching, & answere accusations in a sermon: and surely that sharpe & seuere repr
                           〈1 line〉
                        hension, that he concludeth with, beginning at the. 51. verse, doth euidently declare that it was a sermon: Moreouer it was in the Synagogue which was called the Synagogue of the Libertines. &c. The ende of it was to proue true religion, and the true worshipping of God, to be affixed neither to the Temple, nor to external ceremonies, but to consist of fayth in God. And yet I do not deny but that Stephē also did vse this sermon as an answere to those matters, wherof he was accused: but he answered in the way of preaching, & not of pleading. And that doth M. Gualter directly affirme: forGualter. although he cal this an oration, & a defense, yet in the. 8. chap. he proueth by this example of Stephen, that Deacōs were permitted togither with the charge of the goods of the Churche, and of the poore, to preache, as I haue shewed before. And the Authors of the Centuries, speaking of that time, say thus: It appeareth also out of the. 6. & 8. of the ActsCent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 7. that Deacons did teach. And in the same booke & chap. Others were Deacons, whose office was to serue the tables at Ierusalem, so long as there was there a cōmunitie of goods. Act. 6. notwithstāding it appeareth by Steuen, Act. 6. & by Philip, Act. 8. that they did teach & work myracles, & euery where in other Churches, the office of Deacons was to teach & minister.
                     
                     I can not finde in M. Beza his Annotatiōs any such thing, as you héere affirme. Although if it were so, yet doth it not improue this to be a sermon: for then was the oration of Peters no sermō. Act. 2. wherin he answered to those that accused the Apostles of drunkennesse: neyther can Paule be sayde to haue preached. Act. 24. If this be true that an Apologie may not be made by the way of preaching. If it be lawfull thus to inuent distinctions to shift off so manyfest examples of Scriptures, then it is an easy matter to shift off any thing that shall be propounded.
                     
                        I haue proued by the Scripture it selfe, by Epiphanius, and by M. Gualter, and by the authors of the Centuries, that Philip béeing a Deacon dyd bothe baptise and preache, and you onely deny it, without eyther author or reason.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 4. Diuision.
               
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 118. Sect. 2.
                  
                     Iustinus Martyr one of the moste auncient wryters, in his secondeDeacons helped in the ministration of the supper. Apologie sayth, that in the administration of the Supper, Deacons did distribute the bread and the wine to the people. The same dothe M. Caluine affirme of Deacons in his Institutions. chap. 19.
               
               
                  T. C. Page. 128. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                  He addeth further out of Iustine Martyr, that the Deacons dyd distribute the bread and the wyne, in the administration of the Supper. Tully sayth in a certayne place, that it is as greate a poynt of wisedome in an aduocate, or pleader of causes, to holde back and to keepe close that which is hurtfull to hys cause, as it is to speake that which is profitable.
                  M. Doctor obserueth none of these poynts, for besydes that the things whych he brought for the defense of the seruice booke, are suche, as they haue before appeared: in seeking to defende it, he manifestly oppugneth it. For before h
                        〈1 line〉
                      sayde, that the booke of seruice dothe not permit Deacons to minister the supper of the Lorde, and that by way of allowing of the booke, and here proueth that the Deacons dyd minister the sacrament of the Supper, and that also as a thyng whyche he dothe allowe of.
                  But to let that passe, I beseeche thee (good Reader) marke, what a An 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         cauill. ministring of the Supper thys is, whiche Iustine maketh mention of, and note wyth what conscience M. Doctor handleth this cause. Iustine sayth, that after the Scriptures are read, and preached of, and prayers made, bread and wyne, and water was broughte foorth, and that the minister made prayers and thankesgiuing in the hearing of the people, (whych is that whyche the Euangelistes call the blessing, and hath beene of later times called the consecration) and after that the people were partakers of them, that then thys beeing done, the Deacons doe carry of that whych was left vnto those whych were not present (for that corruption of sending the Communion vnto the houses was then in the Churche, agaynst whych I haue before spoken) now if to carry to a priuate house the bread and wyne whyche was blessed, or set aparte by prayers, and by obeying the institution of Christ by the minister, be to minister the sacrament of the Supper, than Serapions boy, of whome mention is made by Eusebius, ministred the sacrament. For Serapion beeing sicke, asLi. 6. ca. 43 I haue before shewed; and sending hys boy to the minister for the sacrament, receyued the same at the hands of his boy, for that the minister beeing sicke, could not come hym selfe. So by M. Doctors reason Serapions boy ministred the sacrament.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Where dothe M. Doctor saye that Deacons dyd minister the Lordes supper? set downe his wordes: Is there no ende of your falsifying and vntrue gathering? Let the Reader compare the wordes that I haue recited out of Iustinus Martyr wyth your collection, and then iudge of the honestie and sinceritie of your dealing. The Admonition so speaketh of Deacons as thoughe their office in the primitiue Church, had béene onely to gather, and to distribute almes. This I denye, and proue that Deacons dyd then also preache, baptise, and distribute the bread and the wyne in the administration of the Lordes Supper. I no where saye, neyther doe I beléeue that they dyd at any tyme minister the Lordes Supper, and you mighte haue vnderstoode, that to distribute the bread and wyne to the people in the administration of the Supper, is not to minister the Sacrament of the Supper. For these Deacons of whome Iustinus Martyr speaketh, yea and Serapions boy also dyd the one, but they dyd not the other: and therefore the spirite of cauilling hathe dryuen you to thys surmise.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The. 5. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 129. Lin. 11.
                  A man would not thinke, that one that hath beene the Queenes Masesties publike professor ofMany wordes bestowed in the confutation of that whyche is not affirmed. diuinitie in Cambridge, should not know to distinguish, & put a difference betweene ministring the sacrament, & helping to distribute the bread & the cuppe of the sacrament. And if M. Doctor could not learne this in bookes, yet he mighte haue eyther seene it, or at least heard tell of it, in all reformed Churches almost, where the Deacons do assist the minister in helping of him to distribute the cup, and in some places also the bread, for the quicker and speedier dispatche of the people, beeing so many in number, that if they should al receyue the bread & the cup at the ministers hand, they should not make an end in eyght hours, which by that assistance may be finished in two, whych is that that M. Caluine sayth. For he sayth, the deacons did reach the cup, & maketh no mention of the bread. And if this be to minister the sacramēt, then they that cut the loafe in peeces, they that fetch ye wine for the supper, they that poure it foorth from greater vessels into glasses & cuppes, or whosoeuer aydeth any thing in this action, doe minister the sacrament, than the whych thing there can be nothing more ridiculous.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     A man would not haue thought, that one which hath ambitiously desired to be the Quéenes Maiesties diuinitie reader, & yet pretēdeth such puritie & simplicitie, would vpon any occasion (muche lesse of none) vse suche contēmptuous & deriding spéeches towards one not so muche his inferiour. But I passe all ouer quietly, desiring only the Reader to take these & such like notes of your mortification, modestie, & playne dealing. And marke I pray you, howe many words he spendeth in this place to confute me, which speake no otherwise than he would haue me to speake. Surely it is very like that (when you were answering this parte) the olde griefe conceyued for missing the diuinitie Lecture came into your minde, & so much ouercame you, that you coulde not vnderstande what I had sayd: otherwise it coulde not haue béene possible that a man in his right wittes should so farre haue béene ouershot. For marke my saying that you confute, and you shall finde it to differ very little in wordes, but in effecte nothing at all, from that which you in confutation héereof affirme to be the vse in reformed Churches.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 6. diuision.
               
                  Admonition.
                  Now it is the first steppe to the ministerie, nay rather a meere order of Priesthoode.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 119. Lin. 2.
                     It may well be counted the first steppe to the ministerie, as it hathe beene from the Apostles tyme: and S. Paule ioyneth them togither. 1. Tim. 3.
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Page. 129. Sect. 1.
                  In the ende M. Doctor to shut vp thys matter, sayth, that it is the first steppe to the ministery, and so ioyned of S. Paule in the thyrd chapter and fyrst Epistle to Timothie. But what a reason is thys? to be a Deacon is the fyrst steppe to the ministery, therfore the Deacon may preach & minister the sacraments, when as the contrary rather followeth. For if it be a steppe to the ministery, then it is not the ministery, but dyffereth from it, and so ought not to doe the thyngs that belong to the minister.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     You are but disposed to counterfeite, I must giue you leaue so to doe, & be content: But I trust it will turne smally to your credite. The wordes of the Admonition be these: Now it is the fyrst steppe to the ministery, nay rather a meere order of Priesthoode. The which words I answere in this maner: It may well be counted the first step to the ministerie, as it hath bin from the Apostles time, and S. Paul ioyneth them togither. 1. Tim. 3. Now let the Reader consider, whether I vse this for an argument, or no, to proue that a Deacon may preach & minister the sacraments. If I should so haue concluded, the argument might haue bin proued, for preaching

and baptising: but séeing my Answere is direct to the words of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         in an other matter, it is too much for you thus deridingly to feyne, and to vtter an v
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        truth. It séemeth you want false arguments to dally with, when you are fayne to 
                           〈◊〉
                         some of your owne, and so for want of other sporte, to imitate the Caste that 
                           〈◊〉
                         with hir owne tayle.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 7. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Page. 129. Sect. 1.
                  But I 
                        〈1 line〉
                     eny that it is or ought to be alwayes a step to the ministerie. I know that it hath bene the vse of long time, and I know also, that there be very many whyche interpr̄ete the place of S. Paule (where he speaking of the Deacons that behaue themselues well, that they get themselues 
                        〈1 line〉
                      good 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, a degree, to be a minister, or a Bishop.) But I wyl shew a mani
                        〈1 line〉
                     est reasō 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     hy it can not so be vnderstanded, whych is for that as the functions of a Deacon, or a minister 
                        〈1 line〉
                     te 
                        〈◊〉
                     : so are the gyfts also, wherby those functions are executed likewyse diuers, & therefore there may be some men for their wisdome & grauitie, discretion & faythfulnesse, 
                        〈1 line〉
                      whatsoeuer other gyfts are required in him that should do this office of prouiding for the poore & to be a good de
                        〈1 line〉
                     cō: 
                        〈◊〉
                      notwithstanding for some impediment in his tongue, or for want of vtterance, shall neuer be able as long as he liueth to be a good minister of the worde, and therefore the 
                        〈◊〉
                      beeing dyuers, 
                        〈◊〉
                      those offices must be executed (although it is neyther vnlawfull nor 
                        〈◊〉
                      to make of 
                        〈1 line〉
                      deaco
                        〈1 line〉
                     t a minister, if he haue gyfts for that purpose) yet I deny that S. Paul appoynteth that the 
                        〈◊〉
                      shoulde be (as it were) the seede or frye of the ministers, or that he mean
                        〈1 line〉
                     th by those words, that the deaconship is a step to the pastorship. Which may yet also further appeare, by the 
                        〈◊〉
                      offpecche which the Apostle vseth, for he doth not say, that they that doe the offyce of a deaconship well, shall come to, or get a good standing, but he sayth, that in so doing they doc gette them 
                        〈◊〉
                      a good standing, that is, they get them selues authoritie & estimation in the Church, wherby they may be both the bolder to do theyr offyce, & wherby they may do it with more sruite, whereas when they 
                        〈◊〉
                      naughtily, they neyther dare do oftentymes that whych they should do, nor yet that whych they do well taketh so good effect, bicause of the dyscredite, whych commeth by theyr euyll 
                        〈◊〉
                     . And so I cōclude that M. Doctor hath brought hither to nothing, to proue why eyther Deacons ought, or else haue wont eyther to preach, or to minister the sacraments.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     It is not necessarie that euery one which is a Deacon, shoulde be preferred to theA deaconsh 
                              〈◊〉
                            a step into th
                              〈1 line〉
                            ministerie
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         ministerie: for it may be that he shall so euill vse him selfe in that function, that he be thought vnméete further to be preferred. But you haue not read, as I think, sithence the Apostles tyme, of any that hath béene orderly preferred to the ministerie, not beeing D
                           〈1 line〉
                        acon before.
                     
                        Ambrose, Chrysostome, the Greeke Paraphrast, Bullinger, Gualter, Hemingi
                              〈1 line〉
                           s, & diuers other do so expound these words of Paul. 1. Ti. 3. (Qui bene ministrauerūt. gradū sibi honū 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           cquirunt. &c.) that they make the deaconship a step to the ministerie. And therefore your reason had néede be very good, that shall conuince all these of vnskilfulnesse.
                     S. Paule doth not make much difference betwixt the gyfts that are to be required 
                           〈◊〉
                         a Bishop, & the gyfts that are to be required in a Deacon, as it appeareth, 1. Tim. 3. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nd in déede if you respect the gyfts, required in thē both, there is not much difference betwéene them, & therfore your reason is not so strong, as you make it. Moreouer I neuer heard that an impediment in the tongue, or some want of vtterance were sufficiēt cau
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                         to debarre a man (otherwise méete) from the ministerie. In déede S. Paul requireth that he should be aptus ad docendū, which he may be, though he hath some impe
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        iment in spéech. For S. Paul doth not meane by these words, volubilitie of tongue, but wisdome, discretion, & order in teaching. If you meane such a one, as eyther cannot speake at al, or not vtter his mind in such sort, as he may be vnderstoode, him I thinke neither to be sit for to be minister, nor a deacon, but (as I told you before it is not necessarie, that whosoeuer is deacon should after be minister, no more than it is that a Bacheler of Art shuld be a Master of Art, or a Bacheler of diuinity a Doctor, for there may be iust causes to stay thē frō proceeding any further. And therfore sayth S. Paul1. Tim. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 
                        
                           Qui bene ministr au
                                 〈1 line〉
                              rint, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               bonū acquirunt. &c. They which haue ministred well, get themselues a good degree. So that this reason of yours is easily pushed away. I know 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        o exp
                           〈1 line〉
                        unde the words of S. Paul as you 
                           〈1 line〉
                        o, & the interpretation is not amisse:

yet are not the reasons sufficient to improue the other, to the whiche I moste incline, bicause it is allowed of moste learned men, and the words themselues doe very fitly beare it. But the matter dothe not depende onely vpon these words of S. Paule, but vpon the continuall practise of the Church also from tyme to tyme.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 8. diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 129. Sect. vlt.
                  And albeit M. Doctor be not able to shewe it, yet I confesse that it hathe beene in times past, permitted vnto them in some Churches to baptise, in other some to preache and baptise, & somtimes also to minister the supper: but I say also that this was a corruption, & vsed at those times, when there were very many other grosse & vntollerable abuses, from the whych I do appeale vnto that, whych was first, that is, the institution of the Apostles, which limited and bounded euery function within his seuerall limits and borders, which it ought not to passe.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     
                        Yes I haue proued it by sufficient testimonies to haue béene so, euen in the ApostlesDeacons bap tized. Tertul.
                            time, when the Church was furthest from corruption: and now I will adde a little more. Tertullian in his booke de baptismo hath these words, Baptizandi quidem iu
                                 〈1 line〉
                               habet summus sacerdos, qui est Episcopus, deinde Presbyteri & Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi authoritate, propter Ecclesiae honorem:
                         The highe Priest, which is the Bishop, hath authoritie to baptize, so haue the Ministers and Deacons, but not without the authoritie of the Bishop, for the honour of the Churche.
                     Hierome aduersus Luciferianos, sayth thus, I do not denie, but that that is the 
                           〈◊〉
                         ofHierom. the Churche, that the Bishop should go to lay his hand by the inuocation of the holy spirit, vpon those which a far of in little cities by ministers and Deacons were baptised.
                     
                        And a little after he sayth, that neyther the ministers nor deacons haue authoritie to baptise, without the commaundement of the Bishop.
                     M. Beza lib. confess. cap. 5. sayth, that deacons did oftentimes supply the office of the PastorsBeza. in the administration of the sacraments, and celebrating of Mariage. And to proue this he quoteth. 1. Cor. 1. verse. 14. 15. &c. and Iohn. 4. verse. 2.
                     
                     But the thing is manyfest, and can not be denyed: wherefore you are but disposed to play Iohannes ad oppositum.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Of matters touching the Communion. Tract. 15.
            
               Of the orders and ceremonies vsed in the celebration of the Communion.
               
                  Cap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They had no introite, for Celestinus a Pope brought it in, about the yere. 430. But we haue borrowed ap
                           〈1 line〉
                        ce of one out of the Masse booke.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 94. Sect. 1. 2.
                        What you vnderstande heere by the Introite, certaynely I knoweThe introite. not. The first thing that we say at the Communion is the Lordes prayer, which Celestinus did not inuent, but Christe. Matth. 6. norThe Apostles began the Lordes supper with the Lordes prayer, first vse in the celebration of the Lordes Supper, but the Apostles, as we reade in good Chronicles: next vnto that is a very godly and necessary prayer, worthy to be sayde in the celebration of suche a mysterie, and therefore no matter at all who inuented it, or broughte it in: And yet Celestinus was a godly Bishop, and the Churche of

Rome, at that tyme had the substance of the sacraments, according to Gods word, neither was there any superstitiō mixed with them: notwithstanding I know not any Introite of Celestinus inuētion, thatCelestinus introite what it was. we haue in our order of the Communion: for the Introite that he appointed was one of the psalmes, as Volateranus, Gratianus, and Polydorus Vergiliu
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            do testify. And we haue not any psalme in the celebratiō of the supper: if we had, it were not to be reproued.
                        This I am sure of, that it is not euill, bycause it is in the Masse booke, except it be repugnāt to the word of God: for the Lords prayerThe epistle and Gospell. some of the psalmes, the Gospells and Epistles, the Nicene creede &c. be in the Masse booke, and yet good, so is there some other good prayers in it also.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The second▪ They read no fragments of the Epistle and Gospell, we vse both.
                     
                        Ansvvere Pag. 94. Sect. vlt. &. Pag. 95. Sect. 1.
                        And what fault can you find in that? is not the whole scripture, and euery peece of it profitable to edify? can the scripture at any time in the open congregation be read out of season, being in a knowen tongue? but I thinke your quarell is at reading, not against the Epistle and the Gospell.
                        Always in the Churche there hathe bin red the scriptures in the celebration of the mysteries, and I am sure, the Gospell was not wont to be read from the one ende to the other at one time. Well,Reading of scriptures at the communion. Anno. 111. Alexander. it is but your opinion withoute reason, that the Epistle and Gospell oughte not to be read at that time: for you bring no proofe, and I thinke the contrary. Fyrst, bycause they be scripture, and tend to edify: secondly, bycause it hathe bin the manner of long tyme, euen since Alexanders time. Anno. 111.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The third. The Nicene creede was not read in their communion, we haue it in ours.
                     
                        Ansvvere Pag. 95. Sect. 3.
                        The Nicene Creede and euery parte of it is grounded vppon theThe Nicene Creede. worde of God, it was collected by that famous Councell of Nice, to confounde that detestable heresie of the Arrians, and therefore meete to be reade in all Christian congregations, neyther can any mislyke it, but Arrians and suche lyke, of the whiche secte you gyue iust suspitions that you bee fautors. This Creede in thys forme was not framed in the Apostles tyme, bycause the heresie of Arrius was not then hatched. And therefore no good reason to say it was not read in the Apostles tyme at the communion: Ergo it ought not to be read now. But thys argumente is intollerable, the Nicene Creede is read at the communion, therefore the communion is not sincerely ministred. All these three reasons be taken ab authoritate negatiuè: and therefore of no force, excepte wee wyll also graunte these to bee true, and suche lyke, scilicet,
                           
Then they had no Christian Princes, and therefore we maye haue no Christian Princes. Then they had no ciuill or politike lawes, Ergo we ought to haue none. Then the Churche had no externall peace, but was vnder persecution, Ergo it should haue no peace now. Then Christians had proprietie in nothing, but all thinges were common: Ergo no man may haue any thing of his owne, but common to other: we do not reade expressely, that Children were then baptised, therefore they ought not to be baptised now (for so do the Anabaptists reason) neyther do we reade that women did then receiue the supper, therefore they ought not to do it now: with infinite other as absurd as these.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 130. Sect. 1.
                     Unto the three next sections conteyned in the. 94. 95. and a peece of the. 96. pages, touching that which is called the Introite, and You may aswell call chapters fragments, for they are but peeces of the gospells and epistles, and were first so deuided by men. fragments of the Epistles and Gospels, and the rehearsall of the Nicene creede, I haue declared before the causes of our misliking, neyther meane I to stand to refute the slanderous surmises, which M. Doctor raiseth of the authors of the Admonition, whereby he would bring them into the suspition of Arrianisme, to whom all those that feare God beare witnesse, that they are moste farre from. He him selfe notwithstanding once agayne in the laste of these three sections. 96. pag. doth laye the manyfeste foundations of that part of Anabaptisme, which standeth in hauing all things common, saying directly against S. Peter, that in5. Act. the time of the Apostles, Christians hadde proprietie in nothing. And further giuing great cause of triumph of the one syde to the Eatabaptists, and such as denie the baptisme of yong infants, in matching that with those things which the church may (although not without incommoditie, yet withoute impietie) bee withoute: and of the other syde vnto the Papistes, whylest he sayeth that wee reade not of any women which receyued the Lordes supper in the Apostles tyme. For this is that they alleage to proue their vnwritten verities, when as it is easyly answered bothe to the Papistes, and M. Doctor, that forsomuche as the Apostle dothe witnesse, that the Churches of Corinthe consisting of men and women did receyue, that therfore women also did receyue, and were partakers of the Lordes table. Thus it is manifest that M. Doctor onely to displease the authors of the Admonition, sticketh not to He pleasureth them in declaring the absurdities of their arguments. pleasure three notable heretikes, Anabaptists, Catabaptistes, and Papistes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Yet you should here haue excused their ignorance, in certaine poynts and theyr absurd reasoning: but seeing you are content so lightly to passe all this ouer, and leauing the defense of the Admonition, séeke to confute my collections, I am contente also that it stande vntouched, and will answere that whyche you onely séeme to misselyke.
                        I doe not otherwyse suspect them of Arrianisme, than they haue giuen iust occasion, by dislyking the publike reading of that Creede, whiche was purposely made to ouerthrow Arrianisme. I trust there is a great number of suche as feare God in the Churche of Englande that knowe not them, but yet for their rashnesse in this point, haue them in some suspiition.
                        By these examples of negatiue argumentes from the Scriptures, I ouerthrow all the Anabaptistes reasons, that they do, or can vse in the defense of their errours, so do I lykewyse yours, vsed against this Church of England, neyther speake I any otherwyse of the baptisme of infantes, or of womens receyuing the Communion, than M Zuinglius doth in his Elench. against the Anabaptistes, and M. Caluine also in his booke written against them.
                        
                           But this answere sore troubleth you, and therefore you onely replie against it with slaunderous wordes: but least you should by such meanes abuse the Reader, I will set
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e downe bothe Zuinglius and Caluines wordes. M. Zuinglius in his Elench. contra
                           
                           Zuinglius. 
                           Anabap. sayth thus: You can fynde no hole to escape at. For you foolyshly reason negatiuely from deedes and examples, naye from no deedes and no examples. For what doe you else when you saye, wee reade not that the Apostles didde baptize infantes, Ergo, infantes oughte not to be baptized? Dothe not all the force of youre reasons consyste herein? And again: VVherfore it is to be maruelled at, with what face they dare measure

the Baptisme of Infantes by the Scripture, or rather by not scripture, for they haue nothing in the Scripture whervnto they may truste, but they make onely the negatiue their foundation, when they saye: we reade not that the Apostles baptized infantes, therefore they ought not to bee baptized. &c. And in his booke de Baptismo:
                            of the baptisme of infantes and the first originall thereof neyther I, nor any other man can otherwise affirme (if we respect the expresse and euident worde of God) than that it is that true and onely baptisme of Christe. For we may fynde many things of this sorte, whereof although there be no expresse and playne testimonie of God, yet they are not repugnant to his will, but rather agreeth with the same: of this sort is that, that we make women partakers of the Lords supper, when as notwithstandyng wee reade of none that sat downe in that Supper which Christe dyd institute. And M. Caluine in his booke aduersus Anabaptist. sayeth in lykeCaluine. maner, They haue nothyng to saye agaynste the Baptisme of infantes, but that there is no where any mention made that the Apostles did vse it: to this I answere, that no more doe wee reade in any place, that they did at any tyme minister the Supper of our Lorde to any woman. And yet these two be neyther Anabaptistes▪ Catabaptistes, nor Papists, but valiant captaines against them all.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the seconde Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The fourthe. There was then accustomed to bee an examination of the communicantes, whiche nowe is neglected.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 96. Sect. 2. 3.
                        Howe proue you that there was then any examination of communicantes?Examination of communicantes. If there hadde bene eyther commaundemente or example for it in Scriptures, I am sure you woulde not haue lefte it vnquoted in the margent. Saincte Paule sayeth. 1. Cor. 11. Probet
                              1. Cor. 11. 
                              bomo seipsum. Lette a man examine hym selfe. &c. But he speaketh of no other examination: wherefore this reason of youres is altogether friuolous and without reason.
                        And yet I doe not disallowe the examination of communicants, so there be a discreete respecte had of the persons, places, and other circumstances, neyther is it neglected in this Churche of Englande, but by learned and discrete ministers, wyth learnyng aud discretion vsed. But note I praye you the force of this argumente: some ministers neglecte to examine the communicantes, Ergo, the Communion is not rightly and syncerely ministred, as thoughe the examination of the communicantes were of the substance of the sacrament. If you woulde reason after your accustomed manner, you should rather conclude thus, the Apostles were not examined when they receyued the communion, neyther is it expressed in Scriptures that they examined others, therefore there ought to be no suche examination: this is your vsual maner of reasonyng, but it is chyldish, vnlesse it were to conclude damnation or saluation.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 130. Sect. 2.
                     M. Doctor asketh howe it is proued that there was any examination of the communicantes. After this sorte, all things necessarie were vsee in the churches of God in the Apostles tymes, but

examination of those, whose knowledge of the mysterie of the Gospel was not knowne or doubted of, was a necessary thing, therefore it was vsed in the churches of God whiche were in the Apostles time.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           I denie your minor, fyrst, bycause no suche at that tyme woulde offer themselues to receyue the communion. Secondly, bicause if any such did offer themselues, not béeing knowne, the fault is particular to themselues, and toucheth them onely, not the whole Churche. Thirdly, bycause if it had bene so necessarie a thing, Saincte Paule woulde not haue omitted it, especially when he hadde an especiall cause to speake of it, as he had when he spake of priuate examination of a mannes selfe, 1. Cor. 11. Probet autem seipsum home. &c. Of the whiche wordes M. Caluin speaking in
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 . Cor. 11. Caluin. his booke agaynst the Anabaptists sayth thus: But what neede we so to dispute? seing the Apostle himselfe in an other place treating of the manner, howe euery man shoulde be prepared to the receyning of the Supper of the Lorde (as it behoueth him) doth not bidde euery one too examine the faultes of hys neighboure, but speaketh after thys manner, Probet seipsum bomo. &c. Lette a man examine himselfe, and so let him eate of this breade and drynke of this cuppe: for hee that cateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne damnation. In whiche woordes there are two things to be obserued. Firste, that to communicat with those that are vnworthy, is not to eate the bread of the Lorde vnworthyly,Two things worthy the noting, for those which shall communicate. but not to prepare himselfe as he ought to do, and not to expend and consider his owne faith and repentaunce. The second, that when the supper is to be receiued, we begin not with other men to examine them, but that we trie ourselues: and surely if all things were exactly considered, euen they which haue so much leysure to enquire of other mens behauiour, are for the most part negligent, and forgetfull of their owne duties. So that it is necessary for euery man to examine himselfe, and not so necessary for one man to examine another. But what I thinke of this kynde of examining by other, I haue declared in my Answer to the Admonition.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 130. Sect. 2.
                     Then he saith he is sure there is neither commaundement nor example in all the scripture. InA place of scripture fondly applyed. the second booke of the Chronicles he might haue read, that the Leuites were there commaunded2. Chro. 35 to prepare the people vnto the receiuing of the passouer, in place whereof we haue the Lords supper. Now examination being a part of the preparation, it followeth that there is commaundement of examination.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You bewray the weakenesse of your cause to much, when you are constrayned toThe Replyer applyeth a ceremoniall precept to the receiuing of the communion. runne so farre for a precept to proue the examination of communicants to be commaunded: and especially when you are compelled for want of other, to bring out ceremoniall precepts long ago abrogated. This boldnes of yours is so by custome confirmed that now without blushing it dare abuse any scripture, yea euen touching the Ceremonies of the law, to proue any deuise of your owne: and why may not the Papistes as well vse the same for their auricular confession?
                        But what if that commaundement signify no such thing? from whence then willHis precept proueth not his purpose. you fetch your proofe? the wordes of Iosiah to the Leuites in the. 2. Chro. 35. vers. 6. be these: So kill the passouer, and sanctify your selues, and prepare your brethren that they may do according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses. What one word of examining other is there in this commaundement? These words Prepare your brethren
                           Looke the marginal note in the Geneua Bible. &c. are thus expounded by learned interpreters: Exhort your brethren to examin thē
                              selues, that they may be ready to eate the passouer, according to the word of the Lorde by the hand of Moses. And manifest it is that neyther the Priests, nor the Leuites dyd

did euer vse any suche kinde of examination before the eating of the Passouer, as you woulde insinuate, and therfore as yet you are vtterly destitute of a commaundemente.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 130. Sect. 2.
                     And how holdeth This is an ar
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ument of your owne framing. this argument. S. Paule commandeth that euery man should proue him self, ergo, there is no commaundement, that the ministers shold proue and examine them? so I may say, that euery man is a spirituall king to gouerne himself, therfore he may not be gouerned by others. The authors of the Admonition do not meane that euery one should be examined, as those whose vnderstanding in the Gospell is well knowne, or whych doe examine themselues, and so they interprete themselues, in the. 108. page.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely it holdeth as the moste parte of your argumentes do, that is loosely: for it is your reason, it is not myne: If I haue framed any such argument, it will appeare in my Answere. But this is your manner peuishly to peruert my wordes, and therfore haue you concealed my booke, least your Reader should espie you, as he must needes do, if he hath any iudgement.
                        Neyther doe I mislyke, that there should be examination of the communicantes,Examination of communicants 
                                 〈◊〉
                               disallowed. as I haue said in my Answere: but I mislyke this wrangling at the administratiō of the sacraments vsed in this church without cause: neither would I haue this kinde of examination counted as necessarie, seing it is no where cōmanded, neither yet any example of it, either in the Apostolicall or primitiue Church.
                        In what words, or how do the Authors of the Admonition interpret themselues. pag. 108? or how do they knowe that men do not examine themselues?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the fifth Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The fifth. Then they ministred with common & Act. 2. 46. Act. 20. 7. vsual bread: now with water cakes brought in by Pope Alexander, being in forme, fashion, and substance like their god of the altar.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 97. Sect. 2. & Pag. 98. Sect. 1. 2.
                        The place you alleage, Act. 2. (which is this) And they continuedOf bread vsed in the cōmumon. dayly with one accord in the temple, & breaking bread at home, did eate their meate together vvith gladnesse, and singlenesse of heart, maketh as much for your purpose, as it maketh for the Papistes halfe Communion: for they alleadge it to proue that the Supper may be ministred with bread only: But learned interpreters, & especially M. Caluine, denye this place to be mente of the ministration of the supper: how soeuer it is vnderstanded, it doth not necessarily proue, that the Sacrament was then ministred in common and vsuall breade, for there is no mention made of the kinde of breade.
                        Yf any thynke better of one kynde of breade than of an other, in the ministration of the Sacramente, it is theyr erroure, and derogateth nothyng from the order of administration.
                        M. Caluin in his Institutions cap. 19. sect. 72. touchyng this ma ter writeth on this sorte: Caeterùm in manum accipiant fideles necne: inter se diuidant,
                           
                           
                           an singuli quod sibi datum fuerit edant: calicem in diaconi manu reponant, an proximo tradant:
                           Caluins opinion of ye kind breade. 
                           panis sit fermentatus, an azymus: vinum rubrum, an album, nihil refert: haec indifferentia sunt: & in ecclesiae libertate posita. But vvhether the faythfull take it in their handes or no: vvhether they deuide it among them selues, or euerye one eate that vvhiche is giuen vnto them: vvhether they gyue the cuppe to the Deacon, or deliuer it to hym that is nexte: vvhether the breade be leauened or vnleuened: the vvyne redde or vvhyte, it makes no matter. These be indifferente thyngs, and put in the libertie of the Churche.
                        
                           Alexander lyued Anno. III. and was a good and godlie Bishop: itAlexanders institution. is reported in some writers that he appoynted vnleauened breade to be vsed in the Euchariste, bycause that Chryste hymselfe vsed the same accordyng to the lawe written Exod. 12. Deuteron. 16. But that he broughte in wafer cakes, or appoynted any certayne forme of breade, you can not proue, neyther dothe any credible authour wryte it.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     To all this there is not one word answered.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Answere to the Admonition. Pag. 97. Sect. 2. & Pag. 98. Sect. 1.
                     The truth is, that it skils not what kynde of bread is vsed, leuened or vnleuened so it be bread, although it were to be wished for the auoydyng of superstition, that common and vsuall breade were vsed,Usual bread. and also that the forme were altered, and the quantitie encreased. But these thyngs are not de substantia Sacramenti, and therfore not sufficient to proue that the Supper is not sincerely ministred.
                     M. Bucer likewyse in his censure vpon the booke of Cōmon prayers is of the same iudgement, his wordes be these: The thirde chapterM. Bucers opinion. is of the substance, forme, and breaking of bread, vvhiche all doe vvell inough agree vvith the institution of Christe, vvhome it is manifest to haue vsed vnleuened breade, and easy to be broken, for hee brake it, and gaue to his disciples peeces of the breade broken. Touching the forme and figure, vvhether it were rounde or square, there is nothyng declared of the Euangelistes. And bicause this breade is vsed onely for a signe, and not for corporall nourishemente, I see not, vvhat can be reprehended in this description of the breade vvhiche is in this booke, excepte some vvoulde peraduenture haue it thicker, that it maye the more fully represente the forme of true breade.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 130. Sect. vlt.
                     I haue spoken of this bread before in generall, and if M. Doctor did not disagree with himselfe, we are here well agreed. For first he fay the, it skilleth not what bread we haue 
                           〈◊〉
                         by and by he sayth, that he wisheth it were common bread, and assigneth a great cause, which the booke of seruice likewise assigneth, which is, to auoyd superstition, and it is certaynly knowen by experience that in diuers places, the ignorant people that haue bin misseled in poperie, haue 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         kneeled vnto it, and held vp their hands whilest the minister hathe giuen it not those only whiche haue receiued it, but those whiche haue bin in the Churche and looked on. I speake of that whiche I

know, and haue seene with my eyes. Another reason is alleadged by M. Bucer, whiche is, that there being some thicker substance of bread, and such as should moue and stirre vp the tast better, the consideration of the mind which is conneyed by the senses, might be also the more effectuall, and so the frute of receyuing greater. By the way note that eyther Or else you speake of a matter you know not. Bucers censures vppon the booke of seruice be falsely ascribed vnto him, or be corrupted, or else were not euen in his owne time here thought good, substantiall and sufficient, when there is some cause by act of Parliament afterward found (I meane in the second booke of King Edward) to mislike water cakes, and to change them into common bread. Howsoeuer it be, that circumstance would be well marked, that it was one thing to talke of a water cake in the vse of ye supper in King Edwards dais before they were iustly abolished, and another thing, now being reuoked, after they were renioued.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I am constant and agrée with my selfe in the truth I thanke God for it. I knowe the kind of bread to be indifferents my priuate iudgemēt I haue in my Answer vttered. But in such matters I submit my selfe to the determination of the Church, to whome God doth giue his spirit most aboundantly, so long as it followeth and embraceth the truth.
                        The daunger that you speake of, is in the forme, and figure of the bread, not in the other qualities, nor in the substance: and therfore not perteyning to any thing that I haue spoken. For the question is of leauened, or vnleauened breade, not of roundnesse or squarenesse. &c. Although the forme and figure also is indifferente, and in the power of the Churche to appoynt: wherfore there may no schisme or diuision in the Churche be made for it.
                        
                           M. Bucers censures were vpon the firste booke in King Edwards time, not vpponBucers censure vpon the first booke 
                                 〈◊〉
                               King Edwards days. the second, therefore you are deceiued. The Church hath authoritie in things indifferent to abolish or reuoke as occasion serueth: and therefore that circumstance is not worthe the noting.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 131. Sect. 1.
                     Besides that, we be called by the example of our sa
                           〈1 line〉
                        ionce Christ to vse
                           〈1 line〉
                         the supper vsual and common bread, for what time our Sauioure Christ celebrated his supper there was no other bread to be gotten but vnleauened bread, there being astraight charge giuen by the law, that there should be then no leauened bread, and it is not to be doubted but that if there had 
                           〈1 line〉
                        in then when he celebrated his supper, as at other times nothing but leauened bread, he would not haue caused vnleauened bread to haue bin made for that purpose of celebrating his supper.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It was not vsuall bread, but properly appoynted for the celebrating of the passouer,Christ vsed vnleuened bread. and then to be vsed and not otherwise vsually and commonly for their vsuall and common bread was leauened, wherefore this maketh against you, and if you will haue the commaundements that appertethe to the eating of the passouer perpetuall,Pa. 130. Sect. 2 and to be referred to the celebrating of the Lords supper, as by that precept 2. Chro. 35. before alleadged, it seemeth you would, then must we make it a matter of necessitie, to haue vnleauened bread: but as that is 
                              〈◊〉
                           , so is this also: for the kind of bread is indifferent, although (as M. Bucer sayth) it commeth nearer to the institutionThe kind of bread of itself indifferent of Christe to vse vnle
                              〈1 line〉
                           uened bread, b
                              〈1 line〉
                           cause he did celebrate his supper with it, if there wer not other circumstances and reasons to moue the Church sometimes to vse the contrary.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 131. Sect.
                     But this is a grosse ouersight of M. Doctor, both 
                           〈◊〉
                         this section and that whiche goeth 
                           〈◊〉
                         fore, that he hath not learned to make a difference betwene that which is not 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ncerely done, & that which is not at al done, For in the former 
                           〈◊◊◊〉
                         vpon the Admonition bicause they conclude that for as much as there is no examination therefore it is not 
                           〈◊〉
                         and sincerely ministred. For saythe he, the examination of the communicantes, is not of the Iubstaunce of the

sacrament, and in this section he saith, that for as much as it is not of the substance of the sacramēt whether there be leauened or vnleauened bread, therefore it is not sufficiently proued that the sacrament is not sincerely ministred: but he ought to haue vnderstanded, that if eyther the matter of the sacrament as bread and wine, or the forme of it, which is the institution (which things are only substantiall parts) were wanting, that then there should haue bin no sacrament ministred at all, but they being reteyned, and yet other things vsed which are not conuenient, the sacrament is ministred but not sincerely. For example in the popish baptisme, there was the substance of baptisme, but there being vsed spittle and creame, and candels and such beggerly trumperie, it was not sincerely ministred, therefore it is one thing to minister sincerely and another thing to minister, so that that which is of the substance should be wanting. But of this distinction I haue spoken in another place, whereinto although M. Doctor falleth in the next section, and in other places, yet this shall be an answer for all.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is as grossely replyed vnto: but my beléefe is, that the sacrament is as purely and sincerely ministred, with the one, as it is with the other. For not euery fond, superstitious or vayne opinion of euery priuate person in this or that ceremonie, 
                              •
                           erogateth any thing, from the pure and sincere administration of the sacraments, except it can be shewed that the things vsed be wicked, vnlawfull or superstitious of themselues. Wherefore this is a grosse quarell of yours, it is no ouersighte of mine, for I am well assured of the right and sincere administration of the sacraments in this Church, both touching substance, ceremonies, and other circumstances. And it is too much iniurie that you do to this Church of England, in comparing the ceremenies thereof (which he pure) to the corrupt and superstitious ceremonies of the Papists vsed in baptisme. But how should you otherwise vtter your cōtempt or great spite against it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition Pag. 99. Sect. 1.
                     These words that you vse (like their God of the altar) be slanderous and false, we are as farre from thinking the bread to be our God as you, and teach as sound doctrine touching this sacrament: And therefore you shew of what spirit you be.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 131. Sect. 2.
                     The meaning of the Admonition in saying (their God of the Altar) is playne enough, that it is vnderstanded of the Papists, but that M. Doctor doth set himselfe to draw the authors of it into hatred, and he cannot be ignorant, that when a man speaketh of thinges whiche are 
                           〈◊〉
                         knowen, he often vseth (the, or that, or their,) without naming the things which he speaketh of.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The words of the Admonition be these: Then they ministred with common and vsual bread now with wafer cakes brought in by Pope Alexander, being in forme, fashion and substance like their God of the Altar. Now let the Reader iudge whether I charge them 
                              〈◊〉
                            or no. Your excuse is but for a fashion, their opinion of this whole Churche, is as peeuishly and opprobriously vttered in sundry other places of their booke, as it is in this. And therefore there is no great doubt of their meaning or if their meaning be not so, yet was it vnaduisedly set downe in that order, that me may iustly suspect their meaning to be so.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chp. 1. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The sixth. They receiued it Mat. 26. 20 Mar. 14. 18 Luk. 22. 14 Iohn. 13. 28 sitting: we kneeling according to Honorius decree.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 99. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                        The places of scripture that you quote in the margente to proue sitting at the communion, declare that Christe and his disciples sateKneeling and sitting at the Communion. at the table, but that proueth nothing. For you mighte as well haue sayde, they receiued after supper, we before dinner: they at nighte, we in the morning: they after meate, we before meate,

they in a priuate house we in the open Churche, they being all men and in number twelue, we togyther with women, not strictly obseruing the nūber of twelue or any other nūber aboue three or foure.
                        This your argument toucheth them as well as it doth vs, whiche receiue it standing or walking. But to sit, stande, kneele or walke be not of the substance of the Sacrament: and therfore no impediments why it may not be sincerely ministred.
                        It be houeth humble and meeke spirites, in such indifferent matters to submit themselues to the order of the Churche, appoynted by lawfull authoritie, and not to make schismes and contentions in the Church for the satisfying of their owne fantasies.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothing answered.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. II. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition Pag. 99. Sect. vlt. &. Pag. 100. Sect. 1.Kneeling the meetest gesture.
                     
                     Touching kneeling at the communion it forceth not who did first appoint it (although I can finde no such decree made by Honorius) it is the meetest manner of receiuing this sacrament in mine opinion, being commonly vsed in praying and giuing of thanks, both whiche are annexed to this sacrament, and are to be required in the cōmunicants, and therfore I thinke this to be a good reason: the meet est gesture for praying and thāksgiuing is kneeling, but those that receiue the Eucharist pray and giue thāks, Ergo the meetest gesture for them is kneeling.
                     The onely perill is adoration, whiche may as well be committed sitting or standing. But wherefore then serueth preaching? there is as much daunger of contempt the one way, as there is of adoration the other way. In such matters Christian magistrates haue authoritie to appointe what they thinke most conuenient, and the same must be obserued of those that be pacifici, and not contentiosi. But of sitting and kneeling at the communion more is to be spoken hereafter in the second part.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 131. Sect. 3.
                     Although it be not of necessitie that we should receiue the communion sitting, yet there is the same cause of abolishing kneeling, that ther is of remouing the wafer cake, and if there be daunger of superstition in one (as M. Doctor confesseth) why is ther not daunger in the other? and if ther be men that take occasion to fall at the one, & that by superstition, how commeth it to passe that M. Doctor in the. 180. pag. saith ye neither gospeller, nor Papists, obstinate nor simple, can superstitiosly offend in this kneeling, when as the kneeling carrieth a greater shew of worship, & imprinteth in the mindes of the ignorāt a stronger opinion, and a deeper print of adoration, than the sighte of a round cake. And if kneeling be so voyd of all fault, as M. Doctor would make vs beleeue, howe came it to passe, that in King Edwards days, there was a protestation added in the booke of prayer, to cleare that gesture from adoration.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If this be a sufficiēt argument, to alter & chaunge so decent & comely an order and gesture in praysing God, then what order can stand in the church, seing there is nothing that may not be abused? My words in the. 180. pag. be true, and as yet vnanswered. I will set them downe in their place, that the Reader may perceyue howe little you are able to saye against them.
                        The protestation made in king Edwards dayes touching this gesture, was to satissye (if it

might be) such quarellers as you are, and to take away all occasion of cauilling, not for any great seare of adoration.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 131. Sect. vlt.
                     Another reason why kneeling should be taken away, is for that sitting agreeth better with the action of the supper, wherevnto M. Doctor taketh exception, both in this place, and where he speaketh againe of it, that forsomuch as this sacramēt is a sacrament of thanksgiuing, and thanksgiuing a prayer, therfore kneeling to be most fit, as that which we vse ordinarily when we pray.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If this be a good reason, then let the sacrament be ministred at night, for that doth most of all agrée with the supper, let there be also other meate, and let it be made a supper in all poynts. But are you come now to the grosse imagination of the manner and forme of an earthly and terrestriall supper? Christ doth will vs in the celebrationMath. 26. of this sacrament to expresse his death and passion vntill he come, and not the manner of his sitting at the table. But to such vnapt reasons dothe the absurditie of your cause driue you, and therefore you are to be pitied rather than confuted.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 132. Sect. 1.
                     But he should haue remembred that that thanksgiuing may well come after we haue receiued the sacrament, and that whilest we receiue the bread and wine of the sacrament, we are not then most fit to speake, they being in our mouthes, and during the time we receiue them, our minde is occupyed in considering the inestimable benefite which the Lorde hath bestowed vpon vs, and to meditate of the frute which we receiue thereby, by the Analogie and comparison, betwene the bodily nourishment and the spiritual, that by these consyderations our minds may be more enflamed, and set on fire, and our mouthes may be filled, with the prayse of God, after we haue receyued.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And you should haue learned that the whole action of this supper is a thanksgyuing, and therefore it is called Eucharistia, so that knéeling is a conuenient gesture for it, during the whole time of the celebration: Moreouer who can be voyd of thanks, when he is in that consideration you speake of
                              〈1 line〉
                           can any Christian hart thinke of the vnspeakeable benefyts of the death and passion of Christ, exhibited vnto him in thys sacrament, and not togyther be moued in hart and mind to giue thanks? for thankefulnesse is as well in heart and thought, as it is in word: and a man may giue most hearty thankes vnto God, who vnderstandeth his cogitations, though he speake not one word, Ah dally not, dally not in Gods mysteries, séeke not for vayne reason against most méete and conuenient orders.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 132. Sect. 1.
                     And further if this be a good reason, that therefore it is meete we should kneele at the supper for as much as we giue thanks, then it followeth that when soeuer we haue supped or dined, it is meete that we should kneele, whē as yet we do say grace sitting. And by this he accuseth our Sauioure Christe, and his Apostles, as those whiche did not vse that which was most fit, for in his iudgement he saythe kneeling is the fittest site, or position of the body which can be, and if our Sauioure Christ had bin of that iudgement, vndoubtedly he would haue also kneeled, and caused hys Apostles so to do.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I do not speake of euery priuate mans gesture in euery priuate place. I knowe that a man may also pray sitting, lying, standing, walking and riding. I speake of the publike gesture most méete to be vsed in praying and thanksgiuing in the publike congregation: and therefore I say againe that in the publike Churche, though knéeling be not the onely, yet it is the fittest gesture for praying: neyther can you

more obiect the sitting of Christe against it, than you maye his supping at nyghte, agaynst our receyuing in the morning.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The fourth reason. In this booke we are enioyned to receiue the communion kneeling, whiche besyde that it hath in it a (1. The. 5. 22 Exo. 12. 11.) shewe of Papistrie, doth not so well expresse the mysterie of this holie supper. For as in the olde testament eating the Pascall lambe standing, signified a readynesse to passe, euen so in the receyuing of it now sytting (Mat. 26. 20 Mar. 14. 18 Luc. 22. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           4. Iohn. 13. 28) according to the example of Chryste, we signifie rest, that is, a full finishing through Christ (Gala. 4. 10. Ga. 5. 3. 4. 5 Hebr. in many places. of al the ceremonial law, & a perfecte worke of redemption wrought, that giueth reste for euer. And so we auoyde also the daunger of idolatrie, which was in tymes past to common, and yet is in the heartes of many, who haue not as yet forgotten their breaden God, so slenderly haue they bene instructed. Against which we maye set the commaundement, Thou (Exo. 20. 5.) shalt not bowe downe to it, nor worship it.
                     
                        Ansvvere Pag. 180. Sect. vlt. &c.
                        You say, sitting is the most meetest gesture, bycause it signifyeth rest, that is a full finishing thorough Christ of al the ceremoniall law. &c. What? are you now come toThe Admonitors flye to allegories. allegories and to significations? Surely this is a very papisticall reason: nay then we can giue you a great deale better significations of the surples, of crossing, of the ring in marriage, and many other ceremonies, thā this is of sitting. I pray you in the whole scripture where dothe sitting signify a full finishing of the ceremoniall law, and a perfect worke of redemption that giueth rest for euer? If allegories please you so well, let vs haue eyther standing which signifyeth a redinesse to passe (vsed also in the eating of the passouer) or kneeling, which is the proper gesture for prayer, and thanksgiuing, and signifyeth the submission and humblenesse of the mind. But you say, Christ sate at his supper, therefore we must sit at the receiuing of the supper. You may as wel say, Christ did celebrate his supper at night, after supper, to twelue, only men and no women, in a parloure, within a priuate house, the thursday at night before Easter, therefore we ought to receiue the communion at night, after supper, being twelue in number, and onely men, in a parlour, within a priuate house, the thursday at night before Easter. But who seeth not the Non sequitur of this argument?
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 132. Sect. 1.
                     In the. 181. page vnto the Admonition saying that sitting is most fitte, bycause it betokeneth rest, and accomplishment of the ceremonies in our sauioure Christ, M. Doctor sayth it is a Papistical lreason, and triumpheth ouer the Authors of the Admonition, bycause they allegory, when as notwithstāding the surples before, crossing, & rings, &c. afterwards are defended by nothing but with vayne allegories, which haue nothing so good grounds as this hath. But let it be that this is not sound a reason (as indeede for my part I will not defend it, and the authors themselues haue corrected it) yet M. Doctor might haue dealt easilier withall than to call it a papistic
                           〈1 line〉
                        ll reason,In liturgia eccle. pere. which is farre from poperie, and the reason of two notable learned and zelous men Iohannes Alasco, and of M. Hooper in his commentarie vpon the Prophet Ionas.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I call it Papisticall, bycause the Papists ground the most points of their doctrine vpon allegories, as the authors of the Admonition do their sitting. I neyther defend surplis nor any thing else by allegories, but I shew that I might do it, muche better than they do sitting at the Communion.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition Pag. 180 Sect. 3.
                     You say kneeling is a shew of euill, and for proofe thereof you alledge.

1. Thessa. 5. Absteyne from all apparance of euill. How followeth this, The Apostle willeth vs to absteyne, from all apparance of euill: therefore kneeling at the communion is a shewe of euill? But your meaning is, that bycause the Papists kneeled at the sacring of the Masse (as they called it) therefore we may not kneele at the receiuing of the communion: you may as well say, they prayed to images and saincts kneeling, therefore we may not pray kneeling.
                     The places written in your margent to proue, that Christ did sit atPag. 181. sect. 1. &. 2. supper be needelesse, & were vsed for the same purpose before, where I haue also spoken my opinion of kneeling.
                     If you cite the Galat. 4. and. 5. and the Epistle to the Hebrues in many places, to proue that sitting signifyeth rest, that is, a full finishing of the ceremoniall law: you do but delude the Readers, and abuse the Scriptures, for there is no such matter to be found in them. If you alleage them to proue that Christ is the full finishing of the the Ceremoniall lawe, you take vpon you to proue that whiche no man doubteth of, and is verie farre from your purpose.
                     You note also the. 20. of Exodus: Thou shalte not bovve dovvne toPag. 182. sect. 1 them, nor vvorship them, to proue that we may not kneele at the communion: but how fitly, euery childe may iudge. For what sequele is there in this argumente? God in the seconde commaundement forbiddeth worshipping of images, therefore we may not receyue the communion kneelyng.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 132. Sect. 1.
                     For the rest which he hath here, or in the. 180. and. 181. page, it is eyther answered before (as that the daunger of adoration may be taken away) or hath no matter worthye the answeryng. I onely admonishe the Reader, that sytting at the communion is not holden to be necessarie, but only I thinke that kneeling is verie daungerous, for the causes before alleadged.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        An easy kinde of answering, & a verie slender defense for the crooked handeling of the scriptures, by the authors of the Admonition. But it is wittily done, so to passe ouer that which you can not mainteyn. Surely the authors of the Admonition are verie little beholding to you, for in most places you leaue them to answer for thēselues.
                        If sitting at the cōmunion be not holden to be necessarie, why do you then make a schismeContention aboute externall rites become not the churche of God. 1. Cor. 11.
                            in the church for it? do not you know yt 
                           M. Caluin, M. Bullinger, and others, writing against the Anabaptists, do especially condemne them for makyng a tumulte in the Churche aboute externall and indifferente things? S. Paule sayeth, If any luste to be contentious, we haue no such custome, neither the Churches of God, and he meaneth in externall rites. But the question is whether the church must giue place to you, or you to the church, in that thing that by your owne confession may be vsed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The seuenth. Then it was deliuered generally, and indefinitely. Take ye (Mat. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           6. 26 Mar. 14. 22 1. Co. 11. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           4) and eate ye: we particularly and singularly, take thou, and eate thou.Of the words take thou, eate thou. &c. The plurall number includeth the singular.
                     
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 100. Sect. 3. 4.
                        Here is a hyghe matter in a lowe house, hee that sayeth, Take ye and eate ye, dothe hee not also saye in effecte, take thou and eate thou? Dothe not the Plurall number include the

singular? Christ, Matth. 6. sayth: 
                              Ad hunc igitur modum orate vos, Praye ye on this maner: maye we not therefore say, pray thou on this maner if we speake to one singular person? so speaking to all his Apostles he sayth: 
                              Ite in vniuersum mundum, Goe into all the vvorlde.
                        
                        We vse the plurall number when we speake to many ioyntely, we vse the singular number when we speake to one seuerallie.
                        And for as muche as euery one that receyueth this sacrament,Euery one must apply the sacrament to him selfe. hath to apply vnto himself the benefites of Christes death & passion, therefore it is conuenient to be sayde to euery one: Take thou, eate thou. But this obiection is so ridiculous, that it is more worthy to be hissed at, than to be confuted.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 132. Sect. 2.
                     Unto the three next sections conteyned in the. 100. &. 101. page. I haue spoken already, when as I shewed the general faults of the seruice booke, only that is to be noted that M. Doctor still priuily pyncheth or euer he be aware, at our sauiour Christes action in the first of these sections, whē as he commendeth rather this forme of speaking, take thou, than that whiche our sauiour Christ vsed in saying, take ye. And if it be a good argument to proue, that therefore we must rather saye, take thou, than take ye, bycause the sacrament is an application of the benefites of Christ, then for as muche as preaching is the applying of the benefites of Christ, it behoueth that the Preacher should direct his admonitions particularly one after an other, vnto all those whiche heare his sermon, which is a thing absurde: and therefore besides that it is good to leaue the popishe forme in those things, whiche we may so conueniently do, it is best to come as neere the maner of celebration of the supper which our sauiour Christ vsed, as may be.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I sée no difference betwixte them, but onely in number, for the whiche I haue giuen some reason before, wherevnto you haue made no answere. The similitude of preaching that you héere vse to improue my latter reason, is very vnapte, for there is great difference betwixte the meanes of exhibiting the benefites of Christ by his Sacraments, and by preaching of his worde. And yet there is none doubteth,Particular exhortations moue more than general. but that a man is more moued by that whiche is spoken to him particularly, than he is with that whiche is spoken generally as well to other, as to him selfe. And therefore we may commonly note that godly and zelous Preachers, euen in their generall exhortations, vse oftentymes the singular number, and seconde person, as thoughe they spake to euery particular man seuerally. Therefore, be the commaundements giuē in that number & person, as Thou shalt haue no other Gods but me &c. And Christ dothe vse the same maner of spéeche oftentimes in his sermon. Matth. 5. 6. &. 7. If thou bring thy gifte to the alter. &c. Agree with thine aduersarie quickly. &c. It is vsuall in all exhortations, and it is a maner of speaking that giueth euery man occasion to apply that vnto him selfe, whiche is spoken. Neither doe I héerein pinc
                              〈1 line〉
                           e at our sauiour Christes action, as you surmise, for he spake generally to them all, and therefore vsed that forme of words, which was most conuenient for that purpose.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The eyghte. They vsed no other words but suche as Christ left: we borrowe from Papistes, the body of our Lorde Iesus Christ which was giuen for the. &c.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 101. Sect. 2. 3.
                        From whence soeuer these words were borrowed, they were wellOf the words The body of our Lorde Iesus Christ. &c.
                            borrowed, for it is a godly prayer, and an apte application of that sacrament, and putteth the Communicants in minde of the effecte of Christes passion exhibited vnto them by that sacrament, and sealed with the same, if it be worthily receyued.
                        
                           It maketh no matter from whome we receyue any thing, so it be godly, profitable, and consonant to the scriptures. But I pray you tell vs what Pope inuented these words, The body of our Lorde Iesus Christe. &c?
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The ninth. They had no Gloria in excelsis in the ministerie of the sacrament then, for it was put (Telesphorus in anno 130. to afterwarde. We haue nowe.
                     
                        Ansvvere. Pag. 101. Sect. 5. &. Pag. 102. Sect. 1.
                        It is the common consent of ecclesiasticall hystories, that the ApostlesOf Gloria in excelsis. dyd celebrate the Lords supper with the Lords prayer, and yet we doe not reade that Christe dyd so. You also teache that theThe Apostles celebrated the Lords supper with ye Lords prayer. supper ought not to be ministred without a sermon, and in the ministration thereof you vse diuers prayers, and other orders whiche Christe vsed not: Can you espie a mote (if it be a mote, as it is not) in an other mans eye, and can you not perceyue a beame to be in your owne? There is nothing conteyned in Gloria in excelsis, but the same is taken out of the scriptures, and to be vsed of all true Christians.
                        
                           Telesphorus, whome you note in the margent to haue added to theTelesphorus a good Bishop. supper of the Lorde Gloria in excelsis, in the yere of the Lorde. 130. was a good Bishop, and the Church of Rome was as yet pure in doctrine, and vnspotted with heresie.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     No answere to one whit of all this.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The tenth. They tooke it with conscience, we with custome.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 102. Sect. 3. 4.
                        This is but your presumptuous and arrogant iudgement, who dare take vpon you to giue this generall sentence, so generally vpon this whole Churche of Englande, for you make no exception, but set vs ad oppositum to them.
                        If you say some take it without conscience, I thinke you say truely, and so did some of them, as Iudas. But if you say all or the moste part, you go beyonde your commission, and make your selues Iudges of other mens consciēces, contrary to the rule of Christ. Mat. 7. Luke. 6. and of Paule. Rom. 2. and. 14. 1. Cor. 4. and of Iames. 4.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 132. Sect. 3.
                     When as many receyue they know not what, some other without any examination, eyther of thē selues, or by others, howe they come, with what fayth in Christ, with what loue towards their brethren, I see not agaynst what rule of our fauiour Christ it is, or what rashe iudgement to say, that they come rather of custome than of conscience, when neyther they speake generally of all, nor singularly of any one particular person.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Generally to charge the whole Churche with that, which is but the faulte of some, and thus boldely to enter into many mens consciences, must néedes be bothe lacke of

great discretion, and also agaynst those rules of Scripture that I haue quoted in my Answere to the Admonition.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Of shutting men from the Communion, and compelling to communicate.
               
                  Chap. 2. the first Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The eleuenth. They shut men by reason of their (1. Co. 5. 11.) sinnes, from the Lords supper: we thrust them in their sinne to the Lords supper.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 102. Sect. 6. 7.
                        The place that you alleage out of the fifte chapter of the fyrst to the Corinthians, whiche is this (But novve I haue vvritten vnto you that you companie not togither: if any that is called a brother be a fornicatour. &c.) dothe not particularly touche the secluding of men by reason of their sinnes from the Communion, but generally prohibiteth true Christians to haue any familiaritie or frendship with any suche notorious offendour.
                        If you were not with malice blynded, you mighte easily vnderstande, that by the order and rules of this Church of Englande, all notorious and knowne offendours, euen suche as S. Paule heereThe Admonito
                                 〈1 line〉
                               gratify the Papists. speaketh of, are secluded from the Lordes supper. But peraduenture your meaning is, that no man should be compelled to the Communion at any time, wherein you greatly gratifie the Papistes, and shewe your selfe a good patrone of theirs. When you shewe any reason why men may not be compelled to come to the Communion: then you shall be answered: In the meane time you are worthy of your fee.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 132. Sect. vlt.
                     If the place of the. 5. to the Corinth. do forbid that we should haue any familiaritie with notorious offenders, it doth much more forbid that they should be receyued to the Communion.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           I will Answere you as M. Caluine answered the Anabaptists obiecting the sameCalu aduersus Anabapt. place of S. Paule. 1. Cor. 5. in effect to the same ende and purpose, that the Authors of the Admonition doe, & vsing the like collection that you doe in this place. But wheras (sayth he) Paule doth forbid to eate, with those that lyue dissolutely, that perteyneth to priuate conuersation, not to the publike Communion, but some will saye: if it be not lawfull for a Christian man to keepe company with him that is wicked for corporall meate, much lesse may he receyue with them the Lords bread. I answere that it is in our power, whether we will be familiarly conuersant with the wicked, or no, and therefore euery one ought to flye from them: But it is not so in our power to receyue the Communion, or not to receyue it, therefore the reason is not all one, we must therfore note, that if the Churche do tollerate and suffer an vnworthy man, he shall do well, that (knowing him to be suche a one) doth abstayne from his companie as muche as he can: so that his dooing make no schisme or separation in the Churche. This I speake onely touching the true vnderstanding of that place of S. Paul to the Corinthians: and not bicause I would haue the Churche to suffer any suche notorious offendours to receyue the Communion.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 132. Sect. vlt.
                     And therefore Papists beeing suche, as whiche are notoriously knowne to holde hereticall opinions, ought not to be admitted, muche lesse compelled to the supper. For seeing that our sauiour

Christ, did institute his supper amongst his Disciples, and those onely which were, as S. Paule speaketh within, it is euident that the Papists beeing without, and foreners and straungers from the Church of God, ought no to be receyued if they would offer themselues, and that minister that shall giue the supper of the Lorde to him which is knowne to be a Papist, and whiche hath neuer made any cleare renouncing of poperie, with whiche he hath beene defiled, dothe prophane the table of the Lorde, and dothe giue the meate that is prepared for the children, to dogges, and he bringeth into the pasture, whiche is prouided for the sheepe, swyne and vncleane beastes, contrarie to the fayth and trust that ought to be in a stewarde of the Lordes house, as he is. For albeit that I doubt not, but many of those whiche are nowe papistes, perteyne to the election of God, whiche God also in hys good time, wyll call to the knowledge of his truthe: yet notwithstanding they ought to be vnto the minister, and vnto the Churche, touching the ministring of the sacraments, as straungers, and as vncleane beastes. And as for the Papistes howsoeuer they receyue it, whether as their popishe breaden God, as some doe, or as common and ordinary bread, as other some doe, or as a thing they knowe not what, as some other: they doe nothing else but eate & drink their own condemnation, the weight wherof they shall one day assuredly feele, vnlesse they do repent them of suche horrible prophaning of the Lordes most holy mysteries.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        When our sauiour Christ dyd institute his supper, Iudas was present, and partaker thereof with the rest, as it is euident in the Euangelistes: and yet was not Iudas of the Churche, but without the Churche, and a reprobate. You alleage S. Paule, but there is neyther Epistle, nor chapter, nor any other place quoted, which argues a guyltie conscience, and willing to vse vntrue allegations, or at the least vnapte.
                        I doe not allowe that Papists béeing notoriously knowne, and continuing in their poperie, should be admitted to receyue the Communion, neyther are they admitted therevnto in this Churche. And béeing suche as you speake of, I thinke they woulde not come, although they were compelled.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 133. Lin. 16.
                     And if this be to gratisie the Papists, to shewe that they ought not to be compelled to receyue the supper of the Lorde, as long as they continue in their Popery, I am well contente to shewe them thys pleasure, so that bothe they and you forget not what I haue before sayde, You sayd before, that if they be not meete to receyue the cō munion, neyther are they meete to heare the worde Pag 118. Sect. 1. that the Magistrate ought to compell them to heare the worde of God, and if they profite not, nor wyth suffycient teaching correct not them selues, that then they shoulde be punyshed. And if you doe aske why they should be more cōpelled vnto ye sermons, than vnto the supper of the Lord, or why they are not as wel to be admitted vnto the one as vnto the other: you see ye like done in the sacrament of baptisme, whiche may not be ministred vnto all to whome the worde may be preached.
                     The reason also is at hande, for the preaching of the worde of God to the Papistes, is an offer of the grace of God, whiche maye be made to those whiche are straungers from God, but the ministring of the holy sacraments vnto them is a declaration and seale of Gods fauour and reconciliation with them, and a playne preaching, partly that they be washed already from theyr sinnes, partly that they are of the housholde of God, and suche as the Lorde wyll feede to eternall lyfe, whiche is not lawfull to be done to those, whiche are not of the housholde of fayth. And therefore I conclude, that the compelling of Papistes vnto the Communion, and the dismissing and letting of them goe, when as they be to be punished, for their stubbornesse in Poperie (wyth this condition if they wyll receyue the Communion) is very vnlawfull, when as althoughe they would receyue it, yet they ought to be kepte backe, vntyll suche tyme as by their religious and gospellike behauiour, they haue purged them selues of that suspition of Poperie, whiche their former life and conuersation hath caused to be conceyued.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is directly contrarie to that which you before affirmed, page. 118. For therePag. 118. sect. 1 you saye, that those whiche are not meete to receyue the holy sacrament of the Supper, are not meete to heare the worde of God: if they be meete for the one, they be meete for the other, and that with what lawfulnesse they may offer them selues to the prayers, and to the hearing of the worde of God, they may also offer them selues to the Lordes supper, and to whome so euer of them the Lorde will cōmunicate him selfe by preaching the worde, vnto the same he will not refuse to cōmunicate him selfe by receyuing of the Sacraments. These be your wordes there, and nowe

you sing another song, going about to proue, that the Magistrate may and oughte to compell those to the hearing of the worde, who are not meete to be receyued to the Lordes supper. Surely this is great inconstancie, but I agree with you in this place, and IMen persisting in wickeanesse and errours are not to be compelled. haue before declared the vntruthe of your assertion in the other place. This onely I muste let you vnderstande, that when I speake of compelling eyther Papistes or other to the communion, I doe not meane that they persisting in their wyckednesse and errours, should be constrayned to come to the Lordes supper, but that all ordinarie meanes of perswasion béeing vsed, if they styll continue in their stubbornesse, and refuse to communicate with vs, suche discipline shoulde be vsed towardes them, as is conuenient for their wilfulnesse and contempt of the truthe.
                        Your selfe before, pag. 117. sayde, that suche as wythdrawe them selues from the Communion,The Replye
                                 〈1 line〉
                               agreeth not with the 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              monition. shoulde bothe by ecclesiasticall discipline, and ciuil punishment be brought to communicate wyth their brethren, the same doe I affirme also. But the Authors of the Admonition saye, that this is to dryue men in their synnes to the Lordes supper, and therefore page. 1
                              〈1 line〉
                           9, they woulde neyther haue Papistes nor other constrayned to communicate in the mysteries ofThe 
                                 〈◊〉
                               would haue no
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e cō
                              pe
                                 〈1 line〉
                              led to communicate. saluation: meaning (as I thinke) that they would haue no correction nor discipline (for that is to compell) vsed agaynst suche as refuse to communicate. I thinke in déede the especiall quarell is their owne, bicause they haue separated them selues from the Churche, and woulde not be constrayned to communicate with vs, but they make their doctrine generall, therby to cloke their intent. Wherefore whether they do it to gratifie the Papists, or no, it may be doubted, but certayne it is that the Papists could not haue had better Proctours.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 133 Lin. 37.
                     As for the fee that M. Doctor saythe wee be worthy of (for shewing our selues (as he fayth) so good patrons of the Pap
                           〈1 line〉
                        stes) he hathe giuen vs well to vnderstande, what it shoulde be if he were the paymaster: but as we serue the Lorde in this worke, so we looke for rewarde at his hande, not fearing but that the Lorde will in the ende giue suche blessing vnto our labours, as we shall not neede greatly to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        eare at the handes of those whiche God hath placed in authoritie, the rewarde which you do so often call for.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely that 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ée you should looke for at my hands, that it behoueth a Christiā man so giue vnto suche as continue in disturbing the Churche: and yet peraduenture shoulde it not be by the twentie parte so sharpe, as the fee that you woulde bestowe vpon me, if it were in your power. Howbeit, I commit my selfe to him, by whome hitherto I haue béene protected (notwithstanding all the deuises, and practises of slaunderous tongues, and hatefull countenances) and I nothing doubte but that in the ende God will turne all to his glory, and profite of the Churche.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Of playne and simple ministring and receyuing of the Communion.
               
                  Chap. 3.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The twelfth. They ministred the Sacraments playnely, we pompeously, with singing, pyping, surplesse, and cope wearing.
                     The thirtenth. They simply as they (
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . Co. 11, 23) receyued it from the Lorde: We, sinfully mixed with mans inuentions and deuises.
                     
                        
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 103. Sect. 2. 3. & Pag. 104. Sect. 1.
                        This is a very slender reason to proue that the sacrament of the Supper is not sincerely ministred, bicause there is singing, pyping, surplesse and Cope: when you shewe your reasons agaynst that pompe, whiche is nowe vsed in the celebration of that Sacrament, you shall heare what I haue to saye in defense of the same. I thinke that there is nothing vsed in the administration thereof, that dothe in any respecte contaminate it, or make it impure. As for pyping, it is not prescribed to be vsed at the Communion by any rule, that I knowe. Synging I am sure you doe not disallowe, beeing vsedSinging vsed in al reformed Churches. in all reformed Churches, and an arte allowed in Scriptures, and vsed in praysing of God by Dauid. Of Surplesse and Cope I haue spoken before, & wyl speake more hereafter as occasionis ministred.
                        There is no suche inuentions or deuises of man mixed wyth the Supper of the Lorde as can make it sinfull, beeing all perteyning to edifying, and to good & decent order, and nothing there appoynted to be done contrarie or not agreable to the Scriptures. Caluine
                           Caluine. him selfe sayth in his Institutions, 
                              Lib. 4. Cap. 10. That those thynges vvhiche be partes of decencie, commended vnto vs by the Apostle, thoughDecent orders be Gods traditions. they be prescribed by man, yet are they Gods traditions, and not mans, as kneeling at solemne prayer, and suche like. The Supper it selfe in all poynts of any moment is ministred nowe in this Churche of Englande, euen as Christ deliuered it, as the Apostles vsed, and as the Primitiue Churche continued the same.
                        These be all the reasons you vse to proue that the Sacrament of the Supper is not rightly and sincerely ministred, wherof some be impious, some ridiculous, and all of them vnworthy any confutation.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 133. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Unto that whyche is conteyned in the two next sections in the. 103. and a peece of the. 104. pages, I haue answered before, partly particularly, & partly when I noted the general faults of the Seruice booke, especially seeing that M. Doctor wyll not defende the pyping and Organes, nor no other synging than is vsed in the re
                           〈1 line〉
                        rmed Churches, which is, in the synging of two Psalmes, one in the beginning, and an other in the ending, in a playne tune, easy both to be song of those whych haue no arte in singing, and vnderstanded of those, whych bicause they can not reade, can not sing with the rest of the Churche.
                     For that whiche is in the. 105. page, and concerneth the surplesse, I haue answered before.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To the moste of it you haue not answered any where, and the substance of it youThe sacraments purely ministred. haue left vntouched, that is, whether these things be of that weight, or no, that in any respect they can contaminate the sacramentes, or make them impure, as they b
                              〈1 line〉
                            nowe vsed. Neyther haue you proued, or can proue that the sacraments are not ministred in this Church of Englande in all poyntes of any moment, euen as Christ deliuered them, the Apostles vsed them, & the primitiueOecolamp. in Epist. apud Gastium. li. 2. de erro. Catabaptist. Churche continued them. Touching singing, piping (as you cal it) surplesse & cope wearing. I answere with Oecolampadius, These things be free vnto Christians, whiche holy or godly Bishops may eyther adde, if it seeme vnto them conuenient, and profitable for the people, or take away if there be any abuse, as the time requireth: euen as they may also doe
                           
                           in other ceremonies. VVe haue made no contention for externall things: those things that be indifferent are not repugnant to the worde of God.
                        
                        I haue hearde no reasons as yet to improue the manner of singing vsed in thisThe originall cause of the pryde of the Romishe churche. Churche of England, neyther do I say that I allow no other singing than is vsed in other reformed Churches. For I woulde not haue any Churche to arrogate that perfection vnto it selfe, that it should thinke all other Churches to be bounde vnto it: it was the originall cause of the pryde of the Churche of Rome. I haue onely sayde that other reformed Churches allow singing, which is true.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Of matters touching Baptisme. Tract. 16.
            
               Of Interrogatories ministred to infants.
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     And as for baptisme, it was inough with them, if they (Act. 8. 35. 36. 37. Act. 10. 47.) had water, and the partie to be baptised, fayth, and the Minister to preach the worde and minister the Sacramentes. Nowe, we must haue Surplesses deuised by Pope Adrian, Interrogatories ministred to the Intant, Godfathers and Godmothers, brought in by Higinus, holy fontes inuented by Pope Pius, crossing and such like peeces of Poperie, which the Church of God in the Apostles tyme neuer knew (and therefore not to be vsed) nay (which we are sure of) were and are mans deuises brought in long after the puritie of the primitiue Churche.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 105. Sect. vlt. &c.
                        Interrogatories to be ministred to the infant, be not straunge,Interrogatories ministred to infantes. Dionysius Areopag.
                            neyther lately inuented, but of great antiquitie. For Dionysius Areopagita in his booke entituled De caelest. Hierar. and seuenth chapter, speaking of the baptising of infantes, and of their sureties or godfathers, and answering to certayne prophane deriders (as he termeth them) which sayde that one was baptised for an other, bycause the Godfather did promise and answere for the childe, speaketh thus in the name of the Godfather. 
                              Neque enim hoc ille ai
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 , Ego pro puero abrenunciationes facio, aut fidei Sacramenta prositeor, sed ita puer renunciat & profitetur, id est, spondeo puerum inducturum, cum ad sacram intelligentiam venerit, sedulis adhortationibus meis, vt abrenuntiet contrarijs omnino, profiteatur
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                 , & peragat diuina quae pollicetur. Neyther doth he say this, I renounce for the childe, or professe the Sacraments of faith, but in this sort the childe doth renounce or professe, that is to say, I promise so to instruct the childe, vvhen he commeth to the yeares of discretion, vvith dayly exhortacions, that he shall renounce all contrary thinges, and professe and performe those heauenly thinges, vvhich he doth promise.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 133. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 134. Sect. 1.
                     There followeth the interrogatories or demaundes ministred vnto the infantes in baptisme, for the proofe whereof is brought, in the first place Dionysius Areopagita, a worthy couer for such a cup. For to let passe that M. Doctor alleageth the celestiall Hierarchie in steade that he should haue cited the ecclesiasticall Hierarchie, this testimonie beyng found in the one and in the other, dare M, Doctor be so bolde as to delude the worlde in so great light, with such babies as this? doth he thinke that the Authour of these bookes of Hierarchies, beyng so full of subtile speculations, vayne and idle fantasies, wicked blasphemies, making one order of Popes, an other of Prelates, the third of Sacrifie
                           〈1 line〉
                        s, and then of Monkes, (some of which orders came not many hundred yeares after that time wherein Denise the Areopagite liued) which mentioneth many foolish ceremonies and corruptions, (that no other Authour neyther Greeke nor Latine stories, nor other diuers hundreth yeares after doth make mention of besides him) I say doth he thinke to abuse menne, and to giue them such drosse in steade of Siluer, such chaffe in steade of corne, as to make vs beleeue, that he that wrote these bookes of Hierarchie, was S. Paules scholler? for the better blasing of this Denis armes, I will sendè the reader vnto that which Erasmus writeth of this Denis of M.

Doctors, vpon the. 17. of the Aetes of the Apostles, where he also sheweth togither with his owne iudgement, the iudgement of Laurentius Ualla. I am not ignorant what Nicephorus a fabulous Historiographer and of no credite in such matters (in those matters especially which might like or mislyke those times wherein he wrote) sayeth of S. Paules communicating with Denis, and2. Lib. 20. cap. an other concernyng the heauenly and ecclesiasticall hierarchie. But bycause I thinke M. Doctor be now ashamed of his Deuis, I will follow it no further.
                     By this it may appeare that M. Doctors Dionysius, beyng a counterfet and start vp, these Interrogatories and demaundes ministred vnto infantes haue not so many graye heares, as he would make vs beleeue, although in deede the question lieth not in the antiquitie. As for reasons he hath none, but only as one which hath learned his aequipollences very euill, he maketh it all one to say (I renounce) and to say (I will teach another to renounce.)
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I knowe there is contrary opinions of learned men touching the authoritie, and Authour of these bookes. And yet it cannot be denied, but that they be very auncient, neyther is it any shame for me to alleage his authoritie, seing the B. of Sarisburie is not ashamed to alleage the same booke against Harding, to proue reading ofDefense of the Apolog. Parte. 5. the Scriptures in the Church, with as great credite as I do. Howbeit, I wil not take vpon me the defense of them, neyther do I doubte, but that something may be thrust in vnto them, but of all other thinges this is the least to be suspected, that I haue in this place alleaged. Neyther am I any more ashamed of him, than you are of so often alleaging the Canons of the Apostles, Hyginus, &c. the which authorities are as much doubted of as the bookes of Dionysius. His reason is to be considered, agreing fully with the true meaning of this Churche of Englande, but you wipe it away with a floute, as your manner is, when you are driuen to a pinche.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 106. Sect. 1. & Pag. 107. Sect. 1.
                     Augustine also in his Epistle written ad Bonifacium, answeringAugustine. this Question, why, seing we dare promise nothing of the infantes behauiour and manners when he commeth to mans state, yet whenAn obiection made by Augustine. The Answere to the same. he is brought to baptisme, and the question is asked of those that offer him to be baptised, whither the infant beleeue or no, they answere that he doth beleeue, sayth on this sorte: Nisi sacramenta quandam haberent similitudinem, &c.
                         Except Sacramentes had a certayne similitude, and likenesse of those thinges vvhereof they be Sacramentes, they vvere no Sacramentes at all, and by reason of this same similitude oftentymes they are called by the names of the thinges themselues, therefore as after a crtayne manner of speaking, the Sacrament of the body of Christe is the body of Christe, the Sacrament of the bloud of Christe is the bloud of Christe, so the Sacrament of the fayth is fayth, neyther is it anything els to beleeue, than to haue fayth: and therefore vvhen ansvvere is made, that the infant dothe beleeue, not hauing as yet fayth in deede, it is ansvvered that he doth beleeue for the Sacrament of fayth, and that he doth conuert himselfe vnto God for the Sacrament of conuersion, bycause the ansvvere it selfe doth perteyne to the celebration of the Sacrament. And a litle after he sayeth: Itaque paruulum, etsi nondum fides illa quae in credentium voluntate consistit, iam tamen ipsius fidei Sacramentum, fidelem facit. Nam sicut credere respondetur, ita etiam fidelis vocatur, non rem ipsa mente annuendo, sed ipsius rei Sacramentum percipiendo.
                         Therfore although that faith vvhich

consisteth in the vvill of the beleeuers, dothe not make the ehylde faythfull, yet dothe the Sacrament of that fayth make him faithfull: for euen as it is ansvvered that he dothe beleeue, so is he also called faithfull, not by signifying the thing it selfe in his minde, but by receyuing the Sacrament of the thing.
                     By these two authorities it is manifest that Interrogatories were ministred to infantes, at the time of their Baptisme, and that they had sureties, which we call godfathers, that answered for them and in their name.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 134. Sect. 1.
                     As for S. Augustines place (although I can 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . not allow his reason that he maketh, nor the proportion that is betweene the sacrament of the body and bloude of our Sauiour Christe, and his body and bloude it selfe of one side, and betwene the sacrament of Baptisme and fayth of the other side: saying that as the sacrament of the body of Christe, after a sorte is the body: so the baptisme of the sacrament of fayth, is after a sort fayth, 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . whereas he should haue sayd, that as the supper beyng the sacrament of the body of Christe, is after a sorre the body of Christe, so baptisme beyng a sacrament of the bloude of Christe, is after a sorte the bloud of Christe. For fayth is not the subiect of Baptisme, as the body and bloude of Christ is the matter of the supper.) Yet I say that S. Augustine hath no one worde to approue this abuse of answering in the childes name, and in his person, but goeth about to establishe, an other abuse, which was, that it was lawfull for those that presented the chylde, to say, that it beleeued, so that it is lyke, that the minister did aske those whiche presented the infant, whither they thought that it was faythfull, and did beleeue, and those which presented it, sayde it was so: wherevpon this question rose, whither it was lawfull to say, that the chylde beleeued.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I neuer hearde that any learned man as yet mislyked this place of Augustine, but I knowe they haue vsed it as a moste manifest testimonie, agaynst Transubstantiation, and the Reall presence, and as a true declaration wherefore the sacramentall breade and wyne be called the body and bloude of Christe, beyng but the sacramentes of the bodie and bloude of Christe. And nowe you with vnwashed handes not vnderstanding the place, presume to giue a blinde and vnlearned censure, vpon so worthie and learned a Father, euen there where he speaketh moste soundly and learnedly: But howe should your arrogancie else appeare? The supper is a sacrament bothe of the body and bloud of Christe, the breade of the body and the
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Rom. 4. wine of the bloude, as S. Augustine there sayeth: and Baptisme is truly called by him the Sacrament of fayth, bycause it is Signaculum iustitiae fidei, as Circumcision the figure of Baptisme was, accordyng to the worde of the Apostle 
                              ad Rom. 4. and therefore in reprouing S. Augustine, for callyng it the Sacrament of fayth, you séeme to be ignorant of this place of the Apostle. To this saying of Augustine, doth that of Tertullian in his booke De Poenitentia very well agrée, where he speakyng of BaptismeTertull. sayeth, 
                              Lauacrum illud obsignatio est Fidci, That washyng is the sealyng of faythe. And Chrysostome opere imp. Homil. 5. in Matth.
                            sayeth also that Baptisme is the seale ofChrysost. fayth, neyther did euer any man before you mislike this kinde and phrase of speache, that baptisme is the sacrament of fayth.
                        
                        S. Augustines woordes be euident, that there were questions in Baptisme moued in the name of the infant, whiche coulde not be, vnlesse there were also answering to the same.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Thyrdely, they prophane holy Baptisme, in toying foolishely, for that they aske questions of an infante, whiche can not answere, and speake vnto them, as was wonte to be spoken vnto men, and vnto such as beyng conuerted, answered for themselues, and were Baptised. Whiche is but a mockerie (Gal, 6. 7.) of God, and therefore agaynst the holy Scriptures.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 192. Sect. 1. 2.
                        To the thirde superstitious toy (as you call it) that is, the questions demaunded of the Infant, at the tyme of Baptisme, I haue also answeredAugustine alloweth questions to the infant. out of S. Augustine, in the firste parte: where it may also appeare, that this manner of questionyng was vsed in the Baptising of Infantes long before Augustines tyme, for Dionysius Areopagita maketh mention of them in like manner.
                        To proue that this questioning with the infant is a mocking of God, you quote Galat. 6. verse. 7. Be not deceyued, God is not mocked, for vvhatsoeuer a man sovveth that shall he reape. Paule in this place taketh away excuses, which worldlinges vse to make for not nourishing theyr pastours, for no feyned excuse will serue bycause God is not mocked: But what is this to the questionyng with infantes? howe followeth this? God is not mocked, Ergo, he that questioneth with Infantes mocketh God. Truely you mocke God when you so dally with his Scriptures, and seeke rather the glorie of quoting of many places of Scripture, than the true applying of any one.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 134. Sect. 2.
                     In the. 191. and. 192. pages he speaketh of this agayne, but he bothe nothing else, but repeate, in bothe places that whiche is here, onely he sayeth that it is a mockyng of God to vse the place of the Galatians, (God is not mocked) agaynst this abuse, and his reason is, bycause S. Paule speaketh there agaynst those, that by feyned excuses seeke to defraude the Pastor of his liuyng, as who shoulde saye S. Paule did not conclude that particular conclusion, thou shalte not by friuolous excuses defraude the minister, with this generall saying (God is not mocked) for his reason is, God is not mocked at all or in any matter, therefore he is not mocked in this, or as who shoulde say, bycause our Sauiour Christe saying that it is not lawfull to separate that whiche God hath ioyned speaking of diuorce, it is not lawfull to vse this sentence, beyng a generall rule, in other thinges, when as we knowe it is as well and properly vsed agaynst the Papistes, which seuere the cup from the breade, as agaynst the Iewes, which put away their wiues for euery small and triflyng cause.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In déede it is a very mocking of God thus to abuse the Scriptures, for the Authours of the Admonition alleage this text to proue, that to question with Infantes is to mocke God, when there is not one worde in that place spoken of questioning with infantes, and therefore this texte is alleaged without purpose, except you will say that it is quoted onely for the Phrase and manner of speakyng. It is true that God is not mocked, but this proueth not that questioning in Baptisme is to mocke God, and therefore vaynely it is applied. Those which seuer the cuppe from the bread, in the Lordes Supper do separate that which God hath coupled, and therefore that text may well be alleaged agaynst them, but suche as question in Baptisme, in the name of those that are to be baptised do not mocke God, and therefore that texte is in the Admonition altogither abused.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 134. Sect. vlt.
                     And as for this questioning it can be little better termed, than a very triflying and ioying, for first of all children haue not nor cannot haue any fayth, hauing no vnderstanding of the worde of God. I will not denie but children haue the spirite of God, whiche worketh in them after a wonderfull fashion. But I denie that they can haue fayth whiche commeth by hearing, and vnderstanding, which is not in them.
                     Secondarily, if children coulde haue fayth, yet they that present the chylde, can not precisely tell whether that particular childe hath faith or no, and therefore can not so absolutely answere that it beleeueth: Bicause it is comprehended in the couenant, and is the childe of faithfull parentes, or at least of one of the Parentes, there is warrant vnto the presenters to offer it vnto Baptisme, and to the minister for to baptise it. And further we haue to thinke charitably and to hope, that it is one of the Churche. But it can be no more precisely sayde, that it hath fayth, than it may be sayde precisely elected, An vntru
                              〈1 line〉
                           . (for in deede it is all one to say, that it is elect, and to say that it beleeueth) and this I thinke the Authours of the Admonition do meane, when they say, that they require a promise of the godfathers, which is not in them to perfourme.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue tolde you before out of Dionysius and Augustine, in what sense the answere is made in the name of the infant, and therefore this is no reason: for though the infant haue not fayth that commeth by hearing and vnderstanding the woorde of God, yet may the Godfathers promise, that they will endeuour so much as lieth in them, that the infant may be instructed in that faith, that they haue professed in his name. Likewise as Augustine sayth, It may be sayde to beléeue, 
                              propter Sacramentum fidei, For the Sacrament of fayth.
                        
                        Your seconde reason is all one with the former reason, and therefore one answereNot al one to say it beleeueth, and it is elected. 
                                 Act. 8.
                            doth serue them bothe: sauing that you here adde a manifeste vntruthe, for it is not all one to saye, that it is elect, and to say it beleeueth: for the Scripture Actor. 8. sayth that Simon Magus beleeued, yet was he not elected.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 135. Lin. 7.
                     Thirdly, if both those thinges were true, that is that infantes had fayth, and that it might be precisely sayde that it beleeueth, yet ought not the minister demaunde this of the chylde, whome he knoweth cannot answere him, nor those that answere for the childe, ought to demaunde to be baptised, when they neither meane, nor may be, (beyng already baptised,) but it is meete, that all thinges shoulde be done grauely, simply and playnely in the Churche. And so (if those other two thinges were lawfull) it ought to be done, as seemeth to haue bene done in S. Augustines tymes, when the minister asked those that presented the infante, and not the infant, whither it were faithfull, and those which presented answered in their owne persons, and not in the childes, that it was faythfull.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be mere cauilles and vnworthie the name of reasons. Those that shall reade the booke of Common prayer touching that matter, may easily perceyue that this reason might well haue bene blotted out of your booke. For the minister speaking to those that answere for the childe sayeth thus: VVherefore after this promise made by Christe, these infantes muste also faythfully for their parte, promise by you that be their sureties, that they will forsake the Deuill and al his workes, and constantly beleeue Gods holy worde, and obediently keepe his commaundementes: whereby you may

vnderstande, what is ment bothe by those questions, and answeres. But what will not malice quarrell with? and what is there so good and profitable, that may not be (by contentious persones) drawne into question? the question is asked in the name of the chylde, the Godfathers answere in their owne persons, signifying thereby that they will labour and endeuour so much as in them lieth, to bryng that to passe in the childe, which they haue promised for it, and in the name of it.
                        And why is it not as lawfull for suche questions to be asked in the name of the childe, as it is for the childe to make a rehearsall of his fayth, and to desire to be baptised in the same, by the mouth of the Parent, or some other in the Parentes name, as the Admonition affirmeth fol. 109. in these woordes? That the parties to be Baptised, if they be of the yeares of discretion, by themselues and in theyr owne persons, or if they be infantes by their parentes, (in whose roome if vpon necessary occasion they be absent, some one of the congregation knowing the good behauiour and sounde fayth of the Parentes) may both make rehearsall of theyr faith, and also if theyr fayth be sounde, and agreable to the holy Scriptures, desire to be in the same Baptised. Is it not as muche for the infant to professe his fayth (which you say he hath not) by his Parentes and by him also, to desire to be Baptised, as it is for the Godfather to answere interrogatories ministred vnto him, in the name of the Childe?
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Of Godfathers and their promise.
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Secondly, they require a promise of the Godfathers and Godmothers, (as they terme them) whiche is not in (Rom. 7. 15. 18. 21. Rom. 9. 16.) their powers to perfourme. We saye nothing of those that are admitted to be witnesses, what ill choyce there is made of them.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 191. Sect. 1. 2.
                        The seconde thing you mislyke is, that wee requyre a promise of theThe promise of the Godfathers restrayned to theyr power. Godfathers, and Godmothers, which is not in theyr powers to perfourme: to this cauillation I haue answered before, and haue declared bothe out of Dionysius Areopagita, and August. why they answere so in the infantes name, and why they make that promise, whiche I thinke they performe sufficiently, if they pretermit nothing that lieth in them to the perfourmance thereof: and so sayeth Dionysius, for such promises are not made absolutely, but 
                              Quantum in nobis est. So much as lieth in vs.
                        
                        To proue that it is not in the Godfathers to perfourme that which they promise, you quote the saying of S. Paule to the Rom. cap. 7. vers. 15. I allovv not that vvhich I do, for vvhat I vvoulde that I do not, but vvhat I hate, that I do. And vers. 18. For I knovve that in me, that is, in my fleshe, dvvelleth no good thing, for to vvill is present vvith me, but I finde no meanes. &c. And vers. 21. I finde then by the lavve, that vvhen I vvoulde do good, euill is present vvith me. In all these placesInfirmities be in all men. the Apostle declareth, that infirmities remayne euen in the faythfull by reason of the fleshe, and that they can not come to suche

perfection in this lyfe, as they doe desyre. But howe doe these places proue, that Godfathers are not able to perfourme that which they promise for the infant? Truely these proofes are to farre fetched for my vnderstanding. In the ninth to the Romaines, the Apostle sayth, That it is not in him that vvilleth, nor in him that runneth, but in God that shevveth mercie. In the which wordes he sheweth, that the cause of our election is not in our selues, but in the mercie of God. But what is this to the promise of Godfathers made at the baptising of Infantes? If you woulde haue a man to promise nothing but that which is in his power to perfourme, then must you simplie condemne all promises made by man, for there is nothing in his power to perfourme, no not mouing of his foote, not comming to dinner or supper. &c. Therefore as all other promises bee madeConditionall promises. with these secrete conditions, if God will, so muche as lyeth in mee, to the vttermoste of my power, if I lyue. &c. So is the promise in baptisme made, by the Godfathers likewise.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     There is nothing answered to this.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 107. Sect. 2. and Pag. 193. Sect. 1.
                     It is also manifest by these authorities, that Godfathers or suretyes were required at the baptising of Infantes: which Tertullian also signifyeth in his booke de Baptismo. But you your selfeOf Godfathers. confesse Godfathers to be of great antiqnitie in the Churche of Christ, for you say that Higinus brought them in, and Higinus was the ninth Bishop of Rome, and liued. Anno. 141,
                     
                     Touching the last, which you Rhetorically say, you will speake nothing of, that is, the euill choyse of witnesses; I thinke in part it is true, but you speake that without the booke, and therefore without my compasse of defense: For I meane not to take vpon me the defense of any abuse within the booke (if there be any) muche lesse without the booke.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 135. Sect. 1.
                     For Godfathers there is no controuersie betweene the Admonition, and master Doctors booke, which appeareth not onely in their corrections, but plainly in the. 188. page, where they declare that they rather condemne the abuse, whilest it is vrged more than greater matters, and which are in deede necessarie, this being a thing arbitrarie, and left to the discretion of the Church,Godfathers allowed by T. C. and whylest there is so euill choyse for the most part of Godfathers, which is expressedly mentioned of the Admonition, and whilest it is vsed almost for nothing else but as a meane for one friende to gratifie an other, without hauing any regarde to the solemne promise made before God and the congregation, of seeing the childe brought vp in the nurture and feare of the Lorde. For the thing it selfe, considering that it is so generally receyued of all the Churches, they doe not mislike of it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Peraduenture they are better aduised nowe than they were when they wrote

the Admonition. But it is good for the Reader to note that you make Godfathers a thing arbitrarie, and left to the discretion of the Churche: and yet was it inuentedGodfathers allowed thogh brought in by Pope Higinus. (as the Authours of the Admonition say) by Pope Higinus. So that some thing belike of the Popes inuentions may remayne in the Churche, thoughe the same bée not expressed in the worde of God. Indéede this is the libertie that you chalenge, to allowe what you list, and disallowe at your pleasure: all is perfect that you confirme of whome soeuer it was borrowed. And why may not I say the same for interrogatories ministred to the Infant? You adde this reason in the ende (Considering it is so generally receyued of all Churches) and yet page. 18. you disallow Sainct AugustinesThe Replyer vnconstant. 
                                 Pag. 18. Sect. 7
                            rule tending to the same effect, so that you may say and vnsay at your pleasure, and no man say vnto you, blacke is your eye: or Domine cur ita facis?
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Fontes, and crossing in Baptisme.
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 107. Sect. vlt.
                     You may as well finde fault with Pulpit and Church, as with
                           Of fontes. The Apostles baptised not in Basons. the fontes, and the reason is all one. In the tyme of the Apostles they did not baptise in Basons, as you doe nowe, but in Riuers and other common waters, neyther was there in the Apostles time any Churches for Christians, or Pulpits to preache in, and therefore you had best to plucke downe Churches, and Pulpits, and to baptise in common riuers and waters.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 135. Sect. 2.
                     As for Fontes I haue spoken of before, both particularly, and in generall. But whereas M. Doctor sayth, in the Ipostles tymes they baptised in no Basons but in ryuers, and common waters, I would know whether there was a riuer or common water in Cornelius, and in the Iaylers houses, where Paule and Peter baptised.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And I woulde also gladly learne, howe you can proue that they did baptise in Basons there: I doe not say that they alwayes baptised in Riuers and common waters, but that they did so and that most commonly, which no man can denie. But I require one sillable in Scripture to proue that they did baptise in Basons, not that IThe replyer put to the proofe of his ceremonies. disallowe it if tyme and place doe require, but bycause I woulde haue you to performe, that in your Ceremonies, which you require in ours, that is, to proue them directly by the worde of God.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 108. Sect. 1.
                     
                        Touching crossing in baptisme, I will onely recite vnto you theOf crossing in baptisme. 
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ucer.
                            opinion of M. Bucer, which is this. Signam hoc non tam quod est vsus in Ecclesijs antiquissimi, quam quòd est admodùm simplex, & presentis admonitionis crucis Christi, adbiberi, nec indecens, nec inutile existimo: si adhibeatur modò purè intellectum, & religiose excipiatur, nulla nec superstitione adiuncta, nec elements seruitute, nec lenitate, aut vulgari consuetudine.
                         I thinke it neyther vncomely nor vnprofitable to vse the signe of the Crosse, not onely bicause the vse therof is very auncient, but also because

it hath an expresse signification of the passion of Christ: so that it be purely vnderstoode and religiously receyued vvithout any superstition or seruitude of the element, or leuitie, or common custome.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 135. Sect. 3.
                     To proue crossing in Baptisme, M. Bucers authoritie is brought. I haue sayde before what iniurie it is to leaue the publike workes of Bucer, and to flie vnto the Apochryphas, wherein also they might driue vs to vse the like, and to set downe likewise his wordes whiche we finde in his priuate letters. But it is first of all to be obserued of the reader, howe and with what name those notes are called, which are cyted of M. Doctor for the defense of these corruptions: they are called by M. Doctors owne confession (Censures) which worde signifieth and implyeth, as much as corrections and controlments of the booke of seruice, and therefore we may take this for a generall rule throughout the whole booke of Seruice, that in whatsoeuer things in controuersie M. Doctor doth not bring Bucers authoritie, to confirme them that those things Bucer mislyked of, as for example in priuate Baptisme, and Communions ministerd in houses, for interrogatories ministred to Infants, and such lyke, for so muche as they are not confirmed here by M. Bucers iudgement, it may be thought that he mislyked of them, and no doubt, if eyther M. Bucers notes had not either condemned or misliked of diuerse things in the Seruice booke, we shoulde haue had the notes printed and set forth to the full. This I thought in a worde to admonish the reader of.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To your first cauill, I haue answered before, where you made the same. To your seconde of master Bucers Censures (though the booke be not so intituled) theM. Bucers Censures vppon the first booke in king Edwardes time. answere is short and plaine, it was his iudgement vppon the first Communion booke, in the time of king Edwarde wherein he misliked some things: but alloweth both priuate Baptisme, and the Communion ministred to the sicke, as I before declared, and you might haue remembred, if your memorie had not fayled you.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 135. Sect. 4.
                     Unto M. Bucers authoritie I could here oppose men of as great authoritie, yea the authoritie of all the reformed Churches, which shal also be done afterwarde. And if there were nothing to oppose but the worde of God, which will haue the Sacraments ministred simplie, and in that sinceritie that they be left vnto vs, it is enough to make all men to couer their faces, and to be ashamed, if that which thy shall speake be not agreeable to that simplicitie.
                     The reasons which M. Bucer bringeth I will answere, wh
                           〈1 line〉
                        ch in this matter of crossing are two: first that it is auncient, and so it is in deede: For Tertullian maketh mention of this vsage.Li. de resurrect. carnis. And if this be sufficient to proue the goodnesse of it, then there is no cause, why we shoulde mislyke of the other superstitions and corruptions which were likewise vsed in those tymes. For the sameLi. de corona militis. Tertullian sheweth that they vsed also at baptisme to taste of milke, and honie, and not to washe all the weeke after they had ministred baptisme.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be but wordes without proofe, Crossing in that maner and forme, that we vse it, verie well agréeth with the simplicitie of the worde of God. If it doe not so, shewe any worde agaynst it.
                        Your answere to that reason is very base, for it is not onely auncient, but it hath continued, and béene generally receyued: which you allowed before as a sufficient reason for Godfathers. As for milke and honie, the vse of them was neyther continued long, nor yet generall: and therefore the reason of them, and of the other is not lyke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 135 Sect. vlt.
                     But here I will note the cause, wherevppon I suppose, this vse of crossing came vp in the Primitiue Churche, whereby shall appeare, howe there is no cause nowe why it it should be reteyned, if there were any why it shoulde be vsed in the Primitiue Churche. It is knowne to all that haue read the Ecclesiasticall stories, that the Heathen did obiect to the Christians in tymes past in reproche, that the God which they beleeued of was hanged vpon a Crosse. And they thought good to testifie that they were not ashamed therefore of the same God, by the often vsing of the signe of the Crosse, which carefulnesse and good mynde to keepe amongest them an open profession of Christ crucifyed, although it be to be commended: yet is not this meanes so: for they might otherwise haue kept it, and with lesse daunger, than by this vse of crossing, and if they thought the vse of the Crosse to be the best meanes, yet they shoulde not haue beene so bolde, as to haue brought it into the holy Sacrament of Baptisme, and so mingle the ceremonies and inuentions of men, with the Sacramentes and institution of God. And as it was brought in vpon no good grounde, so the Lord left a marke of his curse of it, and whereby it might be perceyued to come out of the forge of mans brayne, in that it beganne forthwith, while it was yet in the swadling cloutes to be superstitiously abused. For it appeareth by Tertullian also in the same booke de Corona militis, that the Christians had such a superstition in it, that they woulde doe nothing, nor take nothing in hande, vnlesse they had crossed them, when they went out, when they came in, when they sat or lay downe, and when they rose, and as Superstition is alwayes strengthned, and spreddeth it selfe with the time, so it came from crossing of men vnto crossing of euerie thing that they vsed. Wherevpon Chrysostome commendeth the crossing of the Cuppe before a man drinke,Vpon the 1. Tim. 4. cap. and of the meate before it was eaten. But if it were graunted that vppon this consideration which I haue before mencioned, the auncient Christians did well, yet it followeth not, that wee shoulde so doe: for we liue not amongest those Nations whiche doe cast vs in the teeth or reproche vs with the Crosse of Christ. If we liued amongst the Turkes it were an other matter, and then there might peraduenture some question be, whether we shoulde doe as they did, and hauing the same sore, vse the same playster. But nowe we liue among the Papistes, that doe not contemne the crosse of Christ, but which esteeme more of the woodden crosse, than of the true crosse of Christ, (which is his sufferings,) we ought nowe to doe cleane contrariewise to the olde Chrystians, and abolishe all vse of these crosses, for contrarie diseases, must haue contrarie remedyes: if therefore the olde Christians to delyuer the crosse of Christ from contempt, did often vse the crosse, the Christians nowe to take away the superstitious estimation of it, ought to take away the vse of it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I thinke your supposition in parte to bée true: I am also perswaded that the originall cause of vsing this signe was lawfull and good, and yet the thing if selfe afterwardes abused, and the cause of vsing is cleane altered, and wholy conuerted to superstition: but the abuse béeing taken away, I sée no cause why it may not be vsed in Baptisme, in that manner and forme, as it is in this Churche of Englande, that is, In token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confesse the fayth of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight vnder his banner, agaynst sinne, the worlde, and the deuill, and to continue Christes faythfull Souldiour and seruant vnto his lyues ende. And though there be no Turkes among vs or Iewes, yet is it lawfull to vse suche Christian ceremonies to put vs in minde of our dutie. And notwithstanding the same might be done by other meanes, yet it hath pleased the Churche to thinke this meanes also conuenient, and therefore hath vsed hir libertie therein. As for Papistes,Difference betwene crossing in Papistrie, and in our church. we are farre enough off from them, for they pictured the signe of the crosse and did worshippe it, so doe not we: they vsed it to driue away spirites and diuels, so do not we: they attributed power and vertue vnto it, so doe not we: they had it in theyr Churches, so haue not we: they vsed it dayly and nightly for religion sake, we onely in Baptisme for a signe and token, as I haue sayde before: so that their abusing of it is sufficiently corrected. Neyther is there any man that knoweth not to what ende and purpose we vse it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 136. somevvhat past the middest.
                     Concerning the other reason of the profitable signification of the Crosse, I haue shewed that that maketh the thing a great deale worse, and bringeth in a newe worde into the Churche, whereas there ought to be no Doctor heard in the Churche but onely our Sauiour Christ. For 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        ese significations be good, then the Papistes haue to answere vs, that theyr Ceremonyes be 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ot dumbe, whiche haue as likely and as glorious significations as these are, and so indeede they 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ay that theyr ceremonyes are not dumbe ceremonies, for so much as they signifie so good things. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ut although it be the worde of God that we shoulde not be ashamed of the Crosse of Christ, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        t is it not the worde of God, that we shoulde be kept in remembrance and obseruation of that, 
                           〈1 line〉
                         two lynes drawne a crosse, one ouer another in the childes foreheade, but a fonde toy, and ydle 
                           〈1 line〉
                        uise of mans braine.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The signification of the Papisticall ceremonies, was onely knowne to themselues,Difference betwix
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               sticall 
                                 〈◊〉
                               nies 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            being vsed in the Church without any declaration of suche signification, and therefore they might worthily be counted dumbe, and vnprofitable, but it is not so in this, for the signification is ioyned with the signe, & published in a tongue knowne. The Papisticall Ceremonies were in number many, and they had annexed vnto them an opinion of worship, and a necessitie vnto saluation. &c. whiche made them wicked, but all these be farre from this, and other Ceremonies vsed by vs, and for as much as there is no worde of God agaynst it, and it hath a profitable signification, the Church may vse it though it be not expressed in the worde, as it may doe other rites, according to that that I haue proued before intreating of the authoritie of theTract. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            church in such matters.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Fourthly, they doe superstitiously and wickedly institute a newe Sacrament, which is proper to Christ onely, marking the childe in the foreheade with a Crosse, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confesse the fayth of Christ. We haue made mention before of that wicked deuorse of the worde and Sacraments,
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 192. Sect. 3.
                        Concerning the fourth toy, that is Crossing the childe in the forehead, which you call wicked and superstitious, I haue before declared Maister Bucers opinion: It may be left, and it hath beene vsed in the Primitiue Churche, and maye bee so still, without eyther superstition or wickednesse. Neyther doth it any more make a Sacrament (bycauseCrossing 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Sacra
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . it is in token that hereafter hee shall not bee ashamed to confesse Christ crucifyed) than your sitting doth at the communion in token of rest, that is a full finishing through Christ of the Ceremoniall
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . lawe. &c. I thinke you knowe that euerie Ceremonie betokening something, is not by and by a Sacrament, and therefore here is as yet no wicked diuorse of the worde and Sacraments, except it be made by you.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 134. Sect. vlt.
                     In the. 192. page, vnto the Admonition obiectiing that by this significafion it is made a Sacramēt.

M. Doctor answereth that euerte ceremonie which betokeneth something is not a Sacrament. I woulde knowe what maketh a Sacrament, if a doctrine annexed vnto an outward signe doth not make a Sacrament. And I am sure there was no outwarde signe neyther in the olde Testament, nor i
                           〈1 line〉
                         the newe which hath a doctrine 
                           〈1 line〉
                        oyned with it, which is not a Sacrament. For if he will take the nature of the Sacrament so straightly as Augustine doth, and that there be no Sacraments but when as to the element, there cometh the word, A monifest 
                              〈◊〉
                           , the Circūeision can be no sacrament: besydes that, seeyng that master Doctor hath condemned the allegorie and signifycation of sytting at the Lordes supper, saying that it is Papistieall, I maruell what priuiledge he hath or speciall licence, that he may allow that in him selfe and in his owne assertions, which he sayth is vnlawfull and papisticall in others, especially seeing the allegorie of the sytting was neuer vsed by the Papists, but this of crossing is. And if the licence of allegories be allowed, I see not why Oyle may not be brought into the Sacrament, as well as crossing, both bicause it hath beone a Sacrament of God before, and for that the signifycation thereof (betokening the giftes of the holy Ghost, and shadowing out the power and efficacie of those giftes) caryeth as great a shewe of wisedome and Christian instruction, as doth the crossing.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You are not ignorant, I am sure, that to the making of a Sacrament, besydesWhat is required to the making of a sacrament. the externall element, there is required a commaundement of God in his worde, that it should be done, and a promise annexed vnto it, where of the Sacrament is a seale: so it was in circumcision, and so it is in the Supper and Baptisme. And surely I maruell at this your saying, If we will take the nature of the sacrament straightlyCircumcision a Sacrament according to Augustines rule. as Augustine doth, and that there be no sacraments, but where as to the element, there commeth the worde, the Circumcision can be no sacrament. I thinke you are not well aduised, for what doth Saint Augustine require in a Sacrament? Doth he not requir
                              〈1 line〉
                            the worde, and an externall element? And are not both these to bée founde in circumcision? The externall element is the foreskinne: it is commaunded in Genesis. 17. And there is the promise annexed, whereof it is a seale and a Sacrament:Gen. 17. and what doth Saint Augustine requyre more in a Sacrament? But I will impute this saying of yours rather to some ouersight or lacke of due consideration, than to ignorance, for I thinke it vnpossible that a man of your profession shoulde be ignorant in the nature and definition of a Sacrament. A Sacrament, I meane not in the largest signification, but as it is properly vsed, and as we call the Lordes Supper and Baptisme Sacramentes. For Sacramentes in the proper signification, be mysticall signes ordeyned by God himselfe, consisting in the worde ofThe proper signification of sacraments God, in figures and in things signified, whereby he keepeth in mannes memorie, and sometymes renueth his large benefites bestowed vpon his Church, whereby also he sealeth or assureth his promises, and sheweth outwardly, and as it were layeth before oure eyes those things to beholde which inwardly he worketh in vs: yea by them he strengthneth and increaseth our fayth, by the holy Ghost working in our heartes. And to be short, by his Sacramentes he separateth vs from all other people, from all other religions, consecrating vs and binding vs to him onely, and signifyeth what he requyreth of vs to be done. Nowe euerie ceremonie signifying any thing, hath not these conditions and propertyes,Euery signifying ceremonie is not a 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              acrament. Wherefore euerie ceremonie signifying any thing, is not a Sacrament, and therefore crossing in Baptisme though it signifyeth some thing, yet it is no Sacrament.
                        The allegory of sitting is dombe and speaketh nothing: but to the signe of the crosse is added the signification in expresse woordes, as I haue before declared, wherefore there is more cause to condemne the one, than there is to cōdemne the other: More
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           uer sitting at the Lordes supper hath not bene vsed in the Churche that I can reade of, but crossing in baptising hath, wherefore that were to inuent a newe Ceremonie, and this is to reteyne the olde, so that the reason of their allegorie and of this Ceremonie is not lyke.
                        Of refusing 
                              〈1 line〉
                           yle in baptisme, the Churche hath iust cause: and it vseth hir libertie in reteyning crossing: neyther will it burden the Sacramentes with a multitude of vnnecessary and vnprofitable Ceremonies, and yet reteyne such as shall be thought moste conuenient.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 137. Lin. 3.
                     And to conclude, I see no cause why some crosses should be vnlawefull, and other some commendable: and why it should be a monument of Popery in woode and metall, and yet a Christian badge in the forehead of a man, why we should not lyke of it in streates and hyghewayes, and yet allowe of it in the churche.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        As there is great difference betwixt the paynting of an Image, to sette foorth an historie, and placing of it in the Churche to be worshipped, so is there also as great difference, or more, betwixt crossing a childe in the forehead at the time of baptisme, with expressing the cause and vse of it, and the placing of crosses in Churches or highways and streates.
                        The crossing of the childes forehead, is but for a moment, the crosse of wood and stone remayneth and continueth: the crosse in the childes forehead is not made to be adored and worshipped, neyther was euer any man so madde, as to imagine any such thing of it: but the crosses in churches, streates, and highwayes, of mettall and woode, were erected to be worshipped, and were so accordingly, and therefore there is no like perill in the one, as there is in the other.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Of the parties that are to be Baptised.
               
                  Chap. 4. The first Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition▪
                     
                     That the parties to be baptised, if they be of the yeares of Math. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 6. discretion, by them selues and in their owne persones, or if they be infantes, by theyr parentes (in whose rooine if vpon necessary occasion they be absent, some one of the congregation, knowyng the good behauiour and sounde faythe of the par
                           〈1 line〉
                        tes) may both make rehersall if theyr faythe, and also if their fayth be sounde, & agreable to holy scriptures, desyre to be in the same baptised. And finally, that nothyng be done in this or any other thing, but that which you haue the expresse warrant of Gods worde for.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 111. Sect. 1. 2.
                        I muse what you meane to saye on this sorte: The parties to be baptisedOf those that are to be baptised. if they be of the yeares of discretion. &c. You knowe that in this Church of England none tarry for baptisme so long, except it be in some secrete congregation of Anabaptistes. The place alledged out of the third of Matthew telleth how they that were baptised cōfessed their sinnes, it speaketh nothing of any confession of faith.
                        It is well that you admitte some to answere for the infant in theOf the parēts answering 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              or their children. absence of the parent, and why not in his presence to? what scripture haue you, that the Parent at the baptising of his childe should make a rehersall of his fayth, and desire that his childe should bee therein baptised? this I desire to knowe for myne owne learning, for I neither remember any such thing in scripture, neither yet in any auncient wryter: I do herein but desire to be instructed.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 139. Lin. 6.
                     And bicause I would haue all those thyngs togither that touche this matter of baptisine, I come to that which he hath in the next Section and in. III. page, where after his olde manner, he
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        
wrangleth and quarrelleth. For although the Admonition speaketh so playnely and so clearely, that as Hesiod. sayth, it myght 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         satisfie Momus, yet M. Doctor goeth about there, to bryng it in suspicion of Anabaptisme, bicause allowing in playne wordes the baptisme of infantes, they adde that if the parties be of discretion and yeares, them selues in their own persons, should demaunde to be baptised. For sayth he in this Church they tary not for baptisme so long: But is ther no cause or may there not be, when they that be of age may be baptised? It may be there are Iewes in Englande, which vnderstanding their blyndnes and confessing their synne, may desyre to be baptised, and 
                           〈1 line〉
                        here be dyuers Mores in noble mens & gentlemens houses, which are sometimes brought to the knowledge of Christe, whereby th
                           〈1 line〉
                        re is some vse and practise of this case.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Anabaptisme being so crafty an heresy, that it dissembleth many things, vntill itAnabaptisme a crafty heresy
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . haue sufficient ayde, a man can not be to suspicious of it, especially in those that walke in steppes so lyke vnto it. And yet I speake nothing in that place, that may bryng the A
                              〈1 line〉
                           thours of the Admonition into suspicion of Anabaptisme, vnlesse they suspect them selues, or that you would haue them suspected: for you knowe the olde prouerbe. Conscius ipse sibi. &c. It may be in deede that there be Iewes in Englande, & Mores, & Turkes 
                              〈◊〉
                            and that some of them being conuerted to the fayth, be afterward
                              〈1 line〉
                            baptised, and 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            it is so, but the case is very rare, and there is no man that doubteth but 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            to be examined in their fayth before they be admitted to baptisme. This is against nothing that I haue sayde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 111. Sect. 3. & Pag. 112. Sect. 1.
                     I knowe not what you meane when you saye (That in the absence ofOf the saythe a
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ood be
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                               of the Parentes. &c. the parentes some one of the congregation knowing the good behauiour and sound faithe of the Parentes, may both make a rehersal of their fayth: and also if their faith bee sounde and agreable to holy scriptures, desire in the same to be baptised) what if the parētes be of euil behauiour? what if it be the child of a drūkard, or of an 
                           〈1 line〉
                        arlot? what if ye parentes be Papistes? what if they be heretikes? whatWhether the chi
                              〈1 line〉
                            of a wicke
                              〈1 line〉
                            man may be baptised. if they erre in some point or other, in matters of fayth? shall not their children be baptised? herein you haue a further meaning than I can vnderstande, and I feare fewe do perceiue the poyson that lieth hid vnder these wordes: may not a wicked father haue a good childe? may not a Papiste or heretike haue a beleuing sonne? wil you seclude for the Parentes sake (being himselfe baptised) his seede from baptisme? Surely your fantasies, naye your daungerous errours wyll burste out one daye in more playne manner.
                     This reformatiō you seeke for and desire, were rather a deformatiō nay a confusion: and whylest you will nothing to bee done but that, for the whiche there is expresse warrant in Gods worde, you your selues prescribe that whiche is not to be founde in all Gods worde.
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Howe conuenient it were, seyng the chyldren of the faythfull onely are to be baptised, that the father should and myght, if conueniently, offer and present his chylde to be baptised, makyng an open confession of that fayth, wherein he would haue his chylde baptised, and how this is vsed in well ordered Churches.
                     
                        
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 193. Sect. 2.
                        But I knowe not wherto this tendeth that followeth: that is, How cōuenient it were, seeing that the children of the faithfull only are to be baptised. &c. Do you not comprehende those vnder the name of faithfull, which be baptised? for else it passeth mans vnderstanding, to knowe who bee faythfull in deede, bicause the vnbeleuers maye make a confession ofNo man knoweth who 
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              , who is n
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . faythe in wordes: and in this worlde it can not certainly by man be determined, who among Christians be faithfull, who be vnfaithfull. I praye you answere me this one question: If a chylde bee founde whose father and mother be vnknowen (as it hath happened sometimes in our remembrance) will you not baptise it bicause the Parentes be not forth comming, to make a confession of their faith? or bicause the sound faithe of the Parentes is vnknowen? but hereof I haue spoken in another place.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 137. Sect. 1.
                     After that M. Doctor hath cast him selfe in derision, at the feete of the authours of the Admonition, and desired to be taught of them whome he hath so contemptuously condemned as vnlearned, he doth by and by rayse vp himself into his ch
                           〈1 line〉
                        yre, and there sitteth doctorally, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        pposing the authors of the Admonition, as if they were his schollers: and vpon occasion of the sounde faythe and good behauiour of ye parentes of the infant, mentioned by y• Admonitiō, asketh first of al, what if the infant be the childe of a drunkarde? what if he be of a harlot? shall not sayth he, the infant be baptised? If it were not that M. Doctor in asking these questions, doth also answere them, & answereth thē farre otherwyse than ye truth doth su
                           〈1 line〉
                        fer, I would not be drawē from the causes which we haue in hande by these rogyng questions: nowe I can not leaue them vnanswered, bicause I see that M. Doctor doth make of the holy Sacrament of baptisme (which is an entri
                           〈1 line〉
                         into the house of God) and whereby onely the family of God must enter, a common passage whereby he will haue cleane and vncleane, holy and prophane, as well those that are without the couenan
                           〈1 line〉
                        e, as those that bee within it, to passe by: and so maketh the churche no housholde, but an Inne to receyue whosoeuer commeth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        All this is but a declaration of your modestie, and a signification of the mildenesse of your spirite, and therefore I wyll passe it ouer and leaue it to the Reader to be considered of. Onely I must tell you, that I make the holy Sacrament of baptisme no other kinde of passage, than God him selfe hath made it, and the Church of Christe hath euer vsed it. Good and euill, cleane and vncleane, holy and prophane, must néedes passe by it, excepte you will in déede in more ample and large manner tye the grace of God vnto it, than euer did the Papistes, and saye that all that be baptised be also saued: or else ioyne with the Anabaptistes in this, that after baptisme a man cannot sinne.
                        Who can tell whither he be holy or vnholy, good or euill, cleane or vncleane, elect or reprobate, of the housholde of the Churche, or not of the Churche, that is baptised, be he infant, or at the yeares of discretion? I tell you playne this assertion of yours sauoureth very strongly of heresy in my opinion: but let vs come to your reasons if you haue anye.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. pag. 137. Sect. 1.
                     I will answere therefore almoste in as many wordes as the questions be asked. If one of the Parentes be neyther drunkarde nor adulterer, the chylde is holy by vertue of the couenante, for one of the Parents sakes. If they be both, and yet not obstinate in their synne, whereby the Churche hath not proceeded to excommunication, (them selues beyng yet of the Churche) theyr chylde cannot,

nor ought not to be refused. To the seconde question, wherein he asketh what if the chylde be of Papistes or heretykes. If both be Papistes or condemned heretikes (if so be I may distinguishe Papistes from heretikes) and cut of from the church, their children cannot be receyued, bicause they are not in the coucnant, if either of them be faythfull, I haue answered before that it ought to bee receyued.
                     To other questions wherin he asketh, what if they erre in some poyntes of matters of fayth. If it be but an error, and be not in those pointes which rase the foundations of fayth, bicause they styll, notwithstanding their error are to be counted amongst the faythfull, their children pertcyne vnto the promyse, and therefore to the sacrament of the promise.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely these be very short answeres for so waighty questions, and so necessaryThe presump tiō of the Replier. poyntes of doctrine: wyll you presume thus to determine in matters of saluation and danmation, the doctrine being so straunge and vnheard of, without either scripture, reason, or other authoritie? are we nowe come to (ipse dixit)? nay it may not be so, you haue no such authoritie or credite ye I know. But let vs a little better cōsider your assertions, and marke your drifte, Page. 34. you saye that there are no whoremongers, norPag. 34. Sect. 1 drunkardes in the churche that are knowem, bycause the churche doth excommunicate them, wherby you seme to runne headlong into this heresye of the Anabaptistes, that, that is not the Churche of Christe, in the whiche are knowen drunkardes and whoremongers, & no excommunication vsed against them. The whiche heresye is well and learnedlyeCaluine. Bullinger. confuted by M. Caluine in his booke against the Anabap. and by M. Bullinger likewyse, Lib. 6. cap. 10. aduersus Anabap.
                        
                        Moreouer this your assertion séemeth to bring in rebaptisation. For if whoremongers,The assertion of the Replier tendeth to rebaptisation. drunkardes, and such lyke wycked persones by excommunication be so cut of from the Churche, that their children may not be baptised, then must it followe that their baptisme is cut of also: which if it be true, howe can they vpon repentance be admitted againe except they be rebaptised? and what is this else but to make baptisme, to be iterated as the Lorde▪ supper is, when as by the consent of all the Churches,Baptisme once ministred remaineth per petuall. there is but one baptisme, wherewith it is sufficient once to be Christened, séeing that baptisme once receyued doth endure for euer, as a perpetuall signe of our adoption. And how can you allowe the baptisme of heretikes to be good, if you disallowe the baptising of their children that be excommunicated? may an heretike excommunicated baptise, and is that baptisme good, and may not the children of hym that is excommunicated receyue the sacrament of baptisme? can any faulte of the parentes, hauing once receyued the scale of the couenant, seclude their chyldren from rcceyuing the same seale? you haue neyther example nor precept in scripture to iustifie your assertion with: it is against the nature of the sacrament, the practise of the Church, and the whole consent of learned wryters (some fewe excepted which erred in rebaptisation) and yet you boldely here set it downe, without any further proofe at all.
                        S. Augustine in his booke Contraepist. Parme. reasoneth wholy to the contrary, for there he proueth that heretikes whiche cut of them selues from the Churche, do neytherHeretikes loose not their baptisme. 
                           
                              amittere baptismum, nor ius dandi baptismum, that is, neither leese their baptisme, nor authoritie to baptise: and therevpon concludeth against rebaptisation, whiche must néedes followe if eyther of the other be taken away. The Donatistes them selues were at the length compelled to confesse, that heretikes deuided from the churche, did not 
                              amitte
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 e bapt
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 smum, leese their baptisme. And in the same booke August. hath this generall sentence, That the faulte of such heretikes, is in cutting of them selues from the churche, which may be corrected by returning againe to the churche, non in sacramentis quae vbicunque sunt, ipsa vera sunt, not in the sacramentes, which wheresoeuer they are, are true. This being so (as it is) then are you very nere to Donatisme, nay farre beyonde it, inThe Replier nere to Donatis
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e. saying that the chyldren of the heretykes, and suche as by excommunication are cut of from the Churche, maye not be baptised. Surelye if the Parentes beyng heretikes

and cut of from the Churche, do notwithstanding 
                              Retinere baptismum, keepe styll their baptisme, (as Saint Augustine sayeth) I sée not howe by any meanes you can iustifie the secluding of theyr chyldren from being baptysed: or if otherwyse I can not sée howe a Papiste beyng conuerted, can bee receyued into the Churche, without he bée anewe baptysed, or howe suche chyldren of knowen Papistes, and excommunicate persones, as haue bene baptised in this Churche of Englande or else 
                              •
                            here, from the beginning of the Gospell to this daye, can be coumpted Christians, vnlesse they be rebaptised.
                        And concernyng Papistes, whome you haue denyed to bée in the Churche,Pag. 34. Sect. vii. and to whose chyldren also you here denye baptisme, I wyll aske you but this one question, what you thynke of all those, whiche are not onelye chyldren to professed and knowen Papistes, but baptised also in the Romishe Churche? for if the chyldren of knowen Papistes, may not be baptysed, what shall wée saye of our selues, and of our Parentes and predecessours, who all, or the moste of them were professed Papistes? is not this the grounde of Rebaptisation, and Anabaptisme?
                        But that the Reader maye the better vnderstande your erroure, and the rather beléeue it to be an errour in dée
                              〈1 line〉
                           , I wyll set downe M. Beza his opinion of this matter, from whome you are lothe (I am sure) to be thought to dissent. In his booke of Epistles, Epist. 10 answering this question (whether the infantes of suche as are excommunicatedBeza li. Epist. Epist. 10. may be baptised, and in whose fayth, when as they of whome they are begotten, are not members of the Churche) determineth thus.
                        God forbidde that we should iudge all one and a lyke of all suche as are not called the members of the Churche, for there are foure kyndes of men farre differing among them selues. One is of them, whiche neyther by election, neyther in them selues are by anye meanes the members of Christe, whome we cal by the worde of God reprobate and the vessels of anger, and appointed to destruction, although many of them sometime in apparance, that is in outwarde profession, yea and a certayne semblance of faythe, continuing for a tyme, wherewith they mocke both them selues and other, are reckened among the members of the Churche, of whome Iohn sayeth, if they had bene of vs, they would haue taryed with vs.
                        The seconde is of those, whiche are chosen in Christe by eternall election, and therefore are the members of Christe, yet by purpose onelye not in deede: in whiche sense Paule sayth that he was seuered from his mothers wombe, when as notwithstanding, hee was a long tyme the member of Sathan persecuting Christ: and in an other place sayeth, that grace was giuen vs in Christe before euerlasting tymes: and agayne, that God loued vs when we were his enemies.
                        In the thyrde kynde wee counte them, that bothe by election and in deede are the sonnes of God, bycause as the Apostle sayth, they are ruled by the spirite of God.
                        Finally, in the fourth place wee recken those, who whereas they appertayne to the election of God, and be engraffed in Christ, yet bycause hauing fallen in some thing (as men often doe) they be an offence to the other members, therefore least the wound should bee deadlye, whiche Sathan and the fleshe hath gyuen them, neede a more sharpe remedye, and are therfore excommunicated or delyuered to Sathan, not that they should peryshe (for it is not possible that they should peryshe whiche are the members of Christe) But that godlye sorowefulnesse may cause repentance, eyther that their fleshe (that is the olde man) dying, their spirite may be saued in the daye of the Lorde.
                        These therefore be they whome we call excommunicated, and who for two respectes are not members of the Churche, one according to men, bycause they are excluded from the holy felowship of the faythfull: the other according to God, bycause that saying of Christe is sure, that, that is bounde in heauen, whiche is ryghtlye bounde of the Churche in the earth.
                        But it is an other thyng truelye to bee bounde in heauen, than to bee cast out of that true kyngdome of heauen, whiche neuer happeneth to anye of the electe. For that saying of Christe standeth, that those shall neuer bee caste out whome the Father hath giuen

the Sonne: and that of Lohn, if they had bene of vs, they woulde haue taried with vs: and that of the Apostle, the foundation of God standeth sure, hauing this seale, the Lorde knoweth who be 
                              〈1 line〉
                           is. Therefore as touching Christe, these are sayd not to be his, nor members of the Churche, not as the firste whiche are reprobate and damned, but bycause for a tyme as concernyng the force and efficacie of the spirite, they are without hym, as beyng so engraffed in hym, that they receyue not that lyuelye nouryshement of the spirite of Christe for a tyme, that is, tyll grace of repentaunce be gyuen them. To conclude, the difference betwixt these and the firste is such, as is betweene a legge of woode ioyned cunninglye to a true bodye (whiche notwithstanding is not a legge in deede, neyther is truely called a parte of that man) and betwyxt a true legge, that yet for a tyme receyueth not nouryshement in suche sorte, that vnles it be refreshed by the strengthe of some sharpe medicine, it wyll necessaryly putrific and cleane peryshe. VVherefore seeing these thinges be thus, and charitie byddeth vs to hope well of all, yea and also to take care for them, whiche are helde as captiues in the snare of the Deuyll: God forbydde that the Parentes beyng excommunicated, wee should conclude that theyr posteritie belongeth not to the kyngdome of God. Furthermore, there is great difference betweene those, whiche although they bee notorious offendours, neuerthelesse departe not from the Churche, and betweene those that are manifeste rennegates, ioyning them selues with the enimies to oppresse the truthe of the Gospell. Further, it were vnreasonable to esteeme of Papistes, muche lesse Christians excommunicated, no otherwise than of Turkes: for although it bee vnpossible to serue the Pope and Christ togyther, yet it is certayne that Poperie is an erring of the Christian Churche. VVherefore the Lorde hath in the middest of that goulfe of Papistrie preserued Baptisme, that is the first entering into the Churche: whereby it appeareth (as also the thing it selfe proueth in vs) that although Papisme be not the Churche, yet the Churche hathe bene and is (as it were) drowned or couered in it: whiche can not by anie meanes bee sayde of the Turkes, whiche neuer gaue theyr names to Chryst. Lastly, for so muche as the goodnesse of God is extended to a thousande generations, that is (as it were) without ende, it were harde if wee shoulde iudge of the children, whether they belong to the couenant of God or no, by the profession of their last Parentes. Therefore of all these argumentes ioyned togither, we conclude that the children of persons excommunicate, abyding yet in the Churche of God, can by no right bee debarred from Baptisme, if in case a meete suretie bee had, whiche will make promyse to the Church that they shall be vertuously brought vp, which I thinke ought to be done of the Ministers them selues, and other Godly men, rather than theyr Baptisme shoulde anie longer be deferred. Yet it shall not be amisse, if the Minister before he baptise the infant, taking hereof occasion, earnestly exhort the father that is excommunicated being present, to 
                              〈1 line〉
                           epentance before the assemblie, whiche is oftentymes practised in oure Churches. Hitherto Beza.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 4. the 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 137. Sect. 2.
                     And in the. 193. page, he asketh what if the Parentes of the childe be vnknowen, if it be, yet if godly men will present it to baptisme, with promyse of seing it brought vp in the feare of the Lorde, for so much as it is founde in a place where the churche is, and therefore by likelyhoode to apperteyne to some that was of the churche, I thynke it may be baptised, if the churche thynke it good in this last case.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And why should you but thinke so? what reason is there why it should not be baptised? But yet this answere of yours dothe nothing iustifie the Aomonition: Whiche would, The parentes to presente their chyldren, if conuentently, makyng an open confession of that faythe, wherein he would haue his chylde baptised: For this can not be done where the Parentes be vnknowen, neither is (in such case) any other man able to testifie of what faythe or behauiour the parentes were.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 4. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 137. Sect. vlt.
                     Then he goeth forth in the. III. Page to proue that the children of those, which he hath reckened may be baptised, and demaundeth whither a wicked father may haue a good childe, a Papist or Heretike father a beleeuing chylde? yes verily may they. So may haue, and hath the Turke and the Iewe, and yet their children are not to be receyued vnlesse their fayth doth fitste appeare by confession, But you say the Papiste an Heretike be Baptised, and so are not the Iewes and Turkes. Their baptisme beyng cut of from the Churche, maketh them as much straungers vnto it, as was Ismaell and Esau, whiche albeit they were circumcised, yet beyng caste out of the Churche, they were no more to be accompted to be of the body of Gods people, then those whiche neuer were in the Churche. Now you see It is poyson in deede, and the same whi
                              〈1 line〉
                           he I suspected. the poyson (as you terme it) which lieth hidde vnder these wordes, and if it be as you say poyson, let vs haue some of your triacle. In all the reste of that section, there is nothing but that, which he spake of before, onely the Eldership is 
                           〈1 line〉
                        amed, which commeth to be intreated of in the next section.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If their baptisme be so cut of, that it also taketh away the priuiledge from their children, howe can they be admitted agayne into the Churche without rebaptisation? S. Augustine in the place before recited, sayeth that Heretikes though they be cut of from the Churche yet they do retayne their Baptisme, whiche beyng true, there is no reason to seclude their children frō it. I cannot learne but that the Sonnes of Ismaell were circumcised: for it is written of the Egyptians (as P. Martyr doth note)P. Martyr in 4. Rom. that they circumcided at. 14. yeares of age, bycause Ismael was then circumcised: Which tyme of circumcision the Arabians obserued in lyke manner. And therefore it is not vnlike but that the Posteritie of Ismael was circumcised. And as for the Sonnes of Esau it is not like that they were debarred from circumcision, seyng Esau himselfe receyued the signe of the couenant, notwithstanding he was before reiected.Rom. 9. And that his posteritie were not so farre estraunged from the people of God as those that neuer were in the Churche, it may appeare by that which is written in Deutronomie, where the Israelites are willed to acknowledge them for their
                                 Deut. 23. vers. 7. 8. The papistes ly
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 e 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 o the 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  v
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 der Ieroboani &c. Brethren, and to admitte their children in the thirde Generation, into the congregation of the Lorde. And yet are not the Papistes like vnto Ismael and Esau: but rather the same with the Israelites vnder Ieroboam, &c. for as they professed the lawe of Moses, had circumcision, and were not in all poyntes straunge from the fayth of the Iewes: but yet ioyned therevnto Idolatrie, and the false worshipping of God: euen so the Papistes pretende the lawe of God, vse the Sacramentes, professe Christianitie, and are not in all poyntes straunge from Christian fayth, but yet haue corrupted the same with idolatrous worshipping, and diuerse other kindes of superstition, and errours. Therefore sayeth M. Beza very well in the wordes before recited,Beza Epist. 10. 
                           
                              Papismus est Ecclesiae Christianae aberratio. Papisme is the erring of the Christian Churche: And 
                              Ecclesia est velut immersa in Papatu, quod de Turcis dici nullo modo potest, qui nunquàm Cbristo nomen dederunt: the Churche is as it were couered or drowned in Papisme, whiche can by no meanes be sayde of Turkes, whiche neuer gaue their names to Christe or professed Christianitie. Wherefore if you had made a right comparison, you should not haue compared them to Ismaell and Esau, but to the reuolting Israelites, as M. Martyr dothe, saying thus expresly, 
                              Quales olim Israelitae, &c. Such are theMartyr. in. 3. cap. 1. Reg. Papistes at this day, if they be compared with the professours of the Gospell, as were the Israelites in respect of the Iewes. But full well you knewe that in so doing, your errour would soone haue bene espied: for though the Israelites were separated from the true Churche, yet were not their children cut of from the couenaunt, or debarred from the signe thereof.
                        
                           The poyson which (you say) we nowe see, and that lieth hid vnder these woordes, is,The poyson that is hidde in the Repliers doctrine. the debarring of children from Baptisme for their parentes offences beyng baptised, and rebaptisation: Both which you do in more playne manner affirme than the Admonition doth, and therefore for triacle to cure these venemous diseases I sende you to the learned workes of S. August. Contra epist. Parmeniani: de Baptis. contra Donatistas:
                            of M. Bullinger, Zuinglius, Caluine and others, which haue written against these poysoned poynts of the Anabaptistes and Donatistes.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Of the Seigniorie or gouernment by Seniors. Tract. 17.
            
               VVhether there vvere such as the Admonition calleth Seniors, in euery Congregation.
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 138.. Sect. 1.
                     As though M. Doctor were at vtter defiaunce with all good order, and methode of writing,Of Seniors. that which was giuen him orderly by the Admonition, he hath turned vpsidedowne. For where the Admonition speaketh first of the Elders, then of that which is annexed vnto them, which is the discipline (whereof excommunication is a part) considering that the subiect is in nature before that which is annexed vnto it, M. Doctor hath turned it cleane cōtrary, and first speaketh of excommunication, and then of the Elders. I will therfore (that the reader may the easelier vnderstand that which is sayd) folow the order of the Admonition, and first of all speake of the Elders or Seniors which ought to be in the Churche, and in speaking of them, I muste call to remembrance that diuision which I made mention on before, that is, of those which haue care and gouerne the whole congregation, some there be which do bothe teach the worde and gouerne also: some which do not teache, but onely gouerne and be ayders in the gouernment, vnto those which do teache. This diuision is moste manifestly set forth in the Epistle vnto Timothe: where he sayeth, the Elders1. Tim. 5. which rule well, are worthy of double honour, and especially those whiche labour in the worde and doctrine, where he maketh by playne and expresse wordes two sortes of Elders, the one whiche doth both gouerne and teache: the other which gouerneth onely. These therefore are the Seniors which are meant, whose office is in helping the Pastor or Bishop, in the gouernment of that particular Churche, where they be placed Pastors and Elders.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is no rare matter in handling any thing, first to entreate of that which is natura posterius: and we sée it commonly so vsed by Logicians, who firste treate of that parte which is called Iudicium, then of the other which is called Inuentio, notwithstanding Inuentio in nature is before Iudicium. But I will not spende incke and paper in answering so vayne a cauillation. The truth is, that I in mine Answere follow the order of the Admonition. For I proue that it was not the office of those Seniors to gouerne the Church, &c. bycause they had nothing to do with excōmunication being the chiefest discipline in the Church, seing the execution therof was committed to the Minister of the worde onely. So that I first take away authoritie frō their Seniors, & then answere the places which they abuse for the establishing of their authoritie.
                        My woordes be these: What Scripture haue you to proue that such Seniors as you meane, and Deacons had any thing to do in Ecclesiasticall discipline? but all this is from the purpose. Your diuision of Seniors, though I know that it hath learned Patrones, yet do I not vnderstande howe it agreeth with the woorde of God: for if we consider the writinges of the Apostles, it will euidently appeare that Presbyter is vsually taken for Episcopus, or Minister, or Pastor,
                           
                              Presbyter vsually taken for a minister. 1. Pet. 5. Act. 20. Tit. 1.
                            as 1. Pet. 5. Presbyteros qui inter vos sunt bortor, qui sum & ipse Presbyter: &c. pascite. &c. The Elders which are among you, I besech, which am my selfe also an Elder. &c Feede the the flocke. &c. And in the Act. S. Paule calleth the same men Seniors and Bishops: and by Seniors meaneth none other than Bishops and Pastors, as it is euident in that place. Likewise ad Titum. 1. he sayeth, that Titus was lefte at Creta, 
                              vt constituat
                              
                              opidatim presbyteros, That he should appoynt Elders in euery citie. And declaring what qualities they ought to haue, he addeth: 
                              Oportet Episcopum immunem esse à crimine. &c. A Bishop must be vnreproueable: &c. Whereby it is manifest that he taketh them bothe for one.
                        The onely place that hath any shewe for the proofe of your distinction, is that,Two kindes of Presbyteri. 1. Tim. 5.
                            
                           1. Tim. 5. Presbyteri qui bene praesunt, &c. The Elders that rule well are worthie double honour, specially they which labour in the worde and doctrine. Where although S. Paule maketh a distinction of Seniors, yet it is certayne, that vnder the name of Seniors, he doth comprehende such onely as be Ministers of the woorde or Sacramentes.Tract. 9. cap. 1. the. 15. diuisiō. & Tract. 6. Cap. 1. And I haue before sufficiently proued that the administration of the Sacramentes may be committed to some, to whome the preachyng of the woorde of God is not committed. And this distinction of Ministers doth this place. 1. Timot. 5. very well iustifie: for vnlesse the Apostle S. Paule had ment, that of Ministers some preached, some onely ministred the Sacramentes, he woulde not haue sayde, Maximè qui laborant sermone & doctrina onely, but, qui laborant sermone & administratione Sacramentorum: for so shoulde he playnely haue declared that there were some Presbyteri whiche did neyther labour in Preaching, nor in the Administration of the Sacramentes. This same distinction of ministers is also iustified by that whiche the Apostle speaketh. 1. Corinth. 1. Non misit me Christus vt Baptizarem. &c.
                            Meaning1. Cor. 1. bycause the worde was the greater, therefore he might not leaue the greater for the lesse. Nowe if all they that baptized had the gifte of preaching also, why might not and ought not they in like manner to say, Christe sent vs not to baptize, but to preach?
                        
                        S. Ambrose writing vpon these woordes: 
                              Aduersus Presbyterum, &c. Agaynst anAmbrose. 1. Tim. 5. Elder receyue no accusation. &c. Which immediately follow the other, doth vnderstand thereby Ministers and Priestes onely, for he calleth them 
                              Vicarios Christi, Christes vicars, and 
                              Antistites Dei: Gods Prelates. So doth M. Caluine in like manner expoundCaluin. in. 1. Tim. 5. the same woorde of Pastors, and Teachers. I know that in the exposition of this sentence, Qui bene praesunt presbyteri, &c. he maketh two kindes of Seniors, but yet doth he Instit. Cap. 8. Sect. 52. (where he purposely speaketh of Seniors) say that they were all preachers. Neyther do I sée any cause, why this woorde Presbyter shoulde not in both these places be taken in one and the same signification. Chrysostome also (ifChrysost. his woordes be well marked) vpon this place of Timoth. Presbyteri qui bene praesunt, &c.
                            it will appeare that he doth not extende this woorde Presbyter to any other, than to Ministers of the woorde and Sacramentes.
                        The woordes of Ierome be playne, for expounding these woordes, 
                              Maximè qui laborant
                              Ierome. 
                              &c.
                            He sayeth thus: 
                              Non dixit omnium qui habent verbum, sed qui laborant in verbo: Caeterùm omnes habentes praecipit ordinare. He sayeth not of all that haue the worde, but that labour in the worde: But he commaunded him to ordeyne, all that haue the worde. And surely I haue not read this woorde in any auncient Historie or Father, commonly taken in any other signification.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     In steade of Chancelours, Archdeacons, Officialls, Commissaries, Proctors, Doctors, summoners, Churchwardens and such lyke, you haue to place in euery congregation a lawfull and godly Seigniorie.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 125. Sect. 1.
                        But I pray you do thus much for me, first proue that there wasCertaine questions deman̄
                              ded to be proued. in euery cōgregation such as you call Seniors: when you haue done that, thē shew me that that office & kind of regimēt ought to be perpetuall,

and not rather to be altered according to the state and condition of the Churche: last of all, that those Seniors were lay men as we call them, and not rather ministers of the worde, and Bishops. When you haue satisfied my request in these three pointes, then wil I proceede further in this matter.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 138. In the midst.
                     Now that it is knowne what these Seniors be, in entreating of them I am contēt to answere M. Doctor three requestes which he maketh in the, 125. page, where he desireth that one would do so much for him, as first to shewe that these Seniors were in euery congregation: secondarily, he will haue it proued that this regiment is perpetuall, and not to be altered: last of all, he desireth to know, whether these Seniors werelay men, and not rather ministers of the worde and Bishops. This last is a fonde request, and such as is already answered, but he muste be followed.
                     For the first therefore, which is that there were Seniors in euery congregation, although M. Doctor in the. 114. page, & in the. 132. page cōstrayned by Ambrose authoritie, confesseth it in plaine wordes, yet bycause he requireth it to be shewed and maketh a iest at those places, which are alleaged out of the scripture to proue it, some thing must be spoken thereof.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You builde your platforme vpon marueylous slender proofes, & except the Reader will beleue your bare woordes, he shal finde great scarcitie of any other argumentes. For where haue you as yet proued your opinion of Seniors to be true? The place of S. Paule. 1. Tm. 5 doth not helpe you, being otherwise taken & expoūded of the aunciēt fathers: but I will follow your rase. The last question you say is fond & already answered: Answered as yet it is not, and the fondnesse of it will appeare, by the wisedome of your answere hereafter.
                        The woordes of Ambrose be, that the Synagogue, & after the church, had Seniors. &c.
                           in 1. Tim. 5. but he sayeth not that euery seuerall congregation had Seniors: for it was not so among the Iewes. Therefore it cannot be gathered of Ambrose, that euery particular parish had Seniors. Neyther is there any auncient Author that affirmeth it. Touching the hauing of Seniors in the Church, why it was then conuenient, and is not so now, I haue declared in the Answere to the Admonition.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 138. Somevvhat past the midest.
                     The first place is in the Actes, which is that Paule & Barnabas did appoynt by election. EldersAct. 14. in euery congregation, but it is A 
                              〈◊〉
                           . not like they did appoynt diuerse ministers or Bishops, which preached in euery congregation, which were not to be had for such a number of congregations as were then to be preached vnto: therefore in euery congregation there were besides those that preached, other Elders which did onely in gouernment assist the pastors which preached. And what should we folow coniectures here, when S. Paule doth in the place before alleaged declare,1. Tim. 9. what these elders are?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you haue no stronger place to cōfirme your Seniors by, than this, they will fallThe place Actes. 14. proueth nothing for Seniors. flat to the ground. For it is most certayne that Luke in this place by Presbyteros, doth only meane Pastors and Preachers of the woorde, as he doth also through the whole Actes speaking of Christians: and it is a straunge matter that you dare be bolde to grounde any point of gouernment or doctrine vpon so simple & slender coniectures. For what reason call you this: Paule & Barnabas did appoynt by election elders in euery congregation. &c. but it is not lyke they did appoint diuerse ministers or Bishops which preached in euery congregation, &c. therefore in euery congregation there were besides those that preached, other elders, &c. First I say, that this argument doth consist only vpō a vaine cōiecture, for it might be that the number of Preachers were suche, that euery congregation where Paule & Barnabas had to do, might haue mo preachers than one. But Lorde what moueth you, to play the Sophister in so serious a cause? & so to dally in a matter so manifest? for how can you conclude by any thing here spoken, that Paule and Barnabas did ordeyne mo than one Pastor or Presbyter in one congregation? for this that is sayde, that they ordeyned Elders or ministers in euery congregation, doth not importe

that they ordeyned mo than one, in euery congregation, but that they ordeyned for diuers congregations, diuerse ministers, that is, for euery congregation a Pastor. Doth not the Apostle S. Paule ad Tit. 1. vse the like kinde of speache when he saydeTit. 1. vnto him, For this cause I left thee at Creta, &c. Vt constituas opidatim presbyteros, &c?
                            Where it is manifest, as I sayde before, that he meaneth Bishops and Pastors: and yet his intent was not that Titus should appoynt for euery congregation many Pastors. This is méere cauilling: but to cut of all other doubtes, M. Caluine is sufficient to determine this controuersie, who expounding this place of the. 14. Acto. doth vnderstand it of Pastors only & Preachers. His woordes be these: 
                              Presbyteros bic vocari interpretor,
                              Caluine. 
                              quibus iniunctum erat docendi munus. I interprete those here to be called Presbyteros, vnto whome the office of preaching was committed. And a litle after: Now whereas Luke sayth that they were appoynted ouer seuerall churches, thereof may the difference betwene their office and the office of the Apostles be gathered, for the Apostles had in no place any certayne abiding, but went from place to place alwayes to found new churches: but Pastors were euery where addicted to their proper Churches. So saith Brentius likewise: 
                              Constituerunt
                              Brentius. 
                              per singulas Ecclesias Presbyteros, quos aliàs scriptura Episcopos, aliàs Pastores vocat. They appoynted thorough euery congregation Elders, whom the scripture sometimes calleth Bishops, sometimes Pastors. So that this place of the Actes speaketh not one woorde of your Seniors. And therefore you cannot expound it by that in the. 1. Tim. 5. though it serued your purpose, as it doth not. For Luke (to my remembrance) no where in the Actes, doth take this woorde Presbyter for any other than such as haue authoritie, to preach the worde & minister the sacramēts, except he meaneth ye elders of the Iewes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Let vs come now to the third part, which concerneth ecclesiasticall discipline: the officers that haue to deale in this charge, are chiefely three, Ministers, Preachers or Pastors, of whom before. Seniors or Elders and Deacons. Concerning Seniors, not only their office, but their name also is out of this English Church vtterly remoued. Theyr office was to (Act. 14. 4. 1. Cor. 12. 28.) gouerne the church with the reste of the Ministers, to consulte, to admonish, to correct, and to order all thinges apperteyning to the state of the congregation.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 113. Somevvhat past the midst.
                        To proue that the office of Seniors was to gouerne the Churche with the rest of the ministers, to consulte, to admonish, to correct and to order al things apperteyning, to the state of the congregation, you alleage Act. 14. & the. 1. Corinth. 12. In the 14. of the Actes it is writtē that Paule & Barnabas ordeyned Elders at Antioche in euery Churche, but there is not one worde spoken of their office, & therefore that text serueth not your purpose. You haue alleaged this selfe same place twice before, to proue that no minister of the worde ought to be placed in any congregation, but by consent of the people, & that the election of ministers ought to be by the congregation: now you alleage it to proue the office of your Seniors: can it both be meant of Seniors, and of the ministers of the worde, being as you say, distinct offices? will you thus dally with the scripture, and make it a nose of waxe (as the Papistes terme it) to wreast and wryth it which way you list? here you must needes confesse eyther contradiction in your selues, or falsification.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 138. Tovvardes the ende.
                     But M. Doctor sayth that there is no mention made of the office of such an Elder: therefore that place maketh nothing to proue that there should be such Elders in euery congregation: so M. Doctor write, he careth not what he wryte. Belike he thinketh the credite of his degree of Doctorship, will giue waight to that which is light, and pith to that which is frothe, or else he woulde neuer answere thus. For then I will, if this be a good reason, say, that for so much as S. Luke doth not in that place, describe the office of the Pastor or Bishop which preacheth the worde, therefore that place proueth not that in euery congregation there should be a bishop or a Pastor. Besides

that M. Doctor taketh vp the Authours of the Admonition for reasoning negatiuely of the testimonie of all the Scriptures, and yet he reasoneth negatiuely of one only sentence in the Scripture. An vntruth, for he maketh no such conclusion. For the would cōclude, that for so much as there is no duety of a Senior described in that place, therefore there is no duetie at all, and consequently no Senior.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Authors of the Admonition Fol. 112. to proue that the office of the Senior was, to gouerne the Churche with the rest of the ministers, to c
                              〈1 line〉
                           nsulte, to admonish, to correct and to order all thinges apperteyning to the state of the congregation, alleage the. 14. of the Actes, vers. 4. 1. Cor. 12. vers. 28. I declare in mine Answere how vnaptly these places are alleaged for that purpose, beyng not one woorde there spoken of any such office of Seniors: as it may appeare in the woordes themselues, beyng placed before. Nowe whether I make any suche reason as you frame in my name, or no, let the Reader iudge. The places be quoted in the Admonition to proue the office of Seniors, and not to proue that there were Seniors in euery congregation: and you being not able to salue that their vnskilfulnesse, make M. Doctor speake what you please, and shifte of the matter after your accustomed manner. I make not that conclusion you charge me with: if I do, set downe my woordes & conuince me: if I do not, who hath taught you to speake vntruly? my woordes I haue expressed: lette the Reader consider of them, and here also take a note of your truth and honestie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 139. Sect. 1.
                     Afterwardes he sayeth, that for so much as this place hath bene vsed to proue a Pastor or Bi
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        hop in euery churche: therefore it cannot be vsed to proue these Elders, so that (sayeth he) there must needes be eyther a contradiction, or else a falsification. The place is rightly alleaged for both, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        he one and the other, and yet neyther contradiction to themselues, nor falsification of the place: but onely a miste before M. Doctors eyes, which will not let him see a playne and euident truth, which is, the worde (Elder) is generall and comprehendeth both those Elders which teach and gouerne, and those which gouerne onely, as hath bene shewed out of S. Paule.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If it had these two significations, (as I haue proued that it hath not) yet that it is so taken in the. 14. of the Actes, I cannot reade in any writer, and I haue shewed M. Caluines and M. Brentius iudgements to the contrary, whiche in any wise mans opinion are able to counteruayle your credite and bare deniall. And surely in that place it cannot be taken but in one and the selfe same signification, except you will say that the spirit of God speaketh ambiguously, and vseth aequiuocations. Which were to derogate much from the simplicitie and plainenesse of the Scriptures. Wherefore the Authors of the Admonition in alleaging that text in some place to proue the election of Pastors, and in some other place to proue the office of Seniors, speake they know not what, and dally with the Scriptures, euen as you do in like manner, when you take vpon you the defense of so manifest a contradiction.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 114. Sect. 1.
                     In the. 1. Corin. 12. S. Paule sayeth, that God hath ordeyned in theGo
                                 〈1 line〉
                              rnours in the church. Church first Apostles, then Prophetes, thirdly teachers, then them that do miracles, after that the giftes of healing, helpers, gouernours, diuersities of tongues: here is not one worde of the office of Seniors, neyther yet of their names: for this worde, gouernours, teacheth vs, that Christ hath ordeyned in his church, some to beare rule & gouerne, but whether one in euery congregation or moe: whether ministers of the worde or other: whether Magistrates or Seniors, it is not here expressed: howsoeuer it is, it maketh nothing for your purpose.
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 139. Sect. 1.
                     And whereas M. Doctor sayth, that the place of the Corinths may be vnderstanded of ciuill1. Co. 12. Magistrates, of preaching ministers, of gouernours of the A manif
                              〈1 line〉
                           st vntruthe, for there is no such thing affir
                              〈1 line〉
                           ed. whole Churche, and not of euery particular Churche, and finally any thing, rather than that whereof it is in dee
                           〈1 line〉
                        e vnderstanded: I say first that he still stumbleth at one stone, whiche is, that he can not put a difference betweene the Churche and common wealth: and so betweene the Churche offycers, whiche he there speaketh of, and the offycers of the common wealth, those whiche are 
                           〈1 line〉
                        cclesiasticall, and those whiche are ciuill. Then that he meaneth not the minister whiche preacheth, it may appeare, for that he had noted them before in the worde (teachers) and last of all he can not meane gouernour of the whole Church, onlesse he shoulde meane 
                           〈1 line〉
                         Pope, & if he will say he meaneth an Archbishop which gouerneth a whole Prouince, besides that it is a bolde speeche without all warrant, I haue shewed before, that the worde of God alloweth of no suche office, and therefore it remayneth, that it muste be vnderstanded of this office of Elders.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Héere haue you manyfestly fals
                              〈1 line〉
                           yed my booke, and greatly abused me. For I haue not these wordes, of gouernours of the whole Church, and not of euery particular Churche: neyther any thing sounding that way: the Reader hath my wordes before his eyes, let him consider whether you haue reported them truely, or no. Surely if there were nothing else, your ofte leasings might sufficiently conuince your doctrine of méere vanitie and forgerie.
                        But to returne to your Replie.
                        First, I can not put any suche difference betwixte the Churche and a Christian common wealth, the Church officers and christian Magistrates, that they may not be comprehended vnder this worde vsed in this place by the Apostle. For I vtterly renounce that distinction inuented by Papistes, and maynteyned by you, whiche is, that ChristianThe Papists opinion of christian Magistrates. Magistrates doe gouerne, not in the respect they be Christians, but in the respecte they be men: and that they gouerne Christians, not in that they be Christians, but in that they be men. Whiche is, to giue no more authoritie to a Christian Magistrate in the Church of Christ, than to the great Turke. I am fully persuaded therefore, that there is no suche distinction betwixte the Churche of Christ, and a Christian common wealthe, as you and the Papistes dreame of. And therefore there is no cause why th
                              〈1 line〉
                            Apostl
                              〈1 line〉
                            maye not in this place, vnder this worde, Gouernours, comprehende as well ciuill Magistrates, as ecclesiasticall. The whiche notwithstanding, I doe not determinately affirme, as likewise I haue not done in myne Answere: for I would be glad to learne, and to heare some reason to the contrarie. Master Gualter seemeth to 
                              〈1 line〉
                           auour this opinion, for expounding this place, he sayth: He comprehendeth seuenthlyGualter in. 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  Cor. 12. in this order, gouernours, vnder whome are conteyned ciuill persons, whiche in worldly matters dyd ayde all men, and had the hearing of causes, if any fell out amongst the Christians. And a little after: There is no neede of suche publikely nowe a dayes, seeing there are christian Magistrats, by whose authoritie all these thinges may be better prouided for. Moreouer the Apostle may meane in that place Bishops or Pastors, of whome he made no mention before. For you will not haue the office of a Pastor, & of a Doctor confounded, wherefore you forget your selfe in saying, that in this worde, teachers, he meaneth the minister that teacheth, that is, the Pastor, for of him I am sure you meane. Last of all, I haue no where sayde, that he meaneth one gouernour of the whole Church, neyther haue I written one worde tending to that ende, but this I say agayne, whether the Apostle meaneth one ruler in euery congregation, or mo, is not héere determined: and I sée no cause, as I haue sayde, whye in this place of th
                              〈1 line〉
                            Apostle, thys word, Gouernours, may not eyther signifie the Christian Magistrates o
                              〈1 line〉
                            Ecclesiasticall, as Archbishops, Bishops, or whatsoeuer other by lawfull authoritie are appoynted in the Churche: neyther is there any reason to be shewed, why he shoulde rather meane your Seniors, than any other Magistrates. Sure I am that there be learned men whiche thinke that the Apostle in this worde dothe comprehende 
                              Ecclesiae gubernatores, tum ciuiles; tum ecclesiastic
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 s: The gouernours of the Church

as well ciuill as ecclesiasticall. Howsoeuer it is, the place béeing doubtful, it can not esta blishe the office of your Seniors, as perpetuall.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     In steade of these Seniors in (Rom. 1
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 8) euery Churche the Pope hath brought in, and yet we maynteyne the Lordship of one man ouer sundry churches, yea ouer many shyres.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 115. Sect. vlt.
                        You alleage in the margent these words in the. 12. to the Rom. (He that exhorteth, let hym vvayte on exhortation: he that distribute
                                 〈1 line〉
                              h, let him do it vvith simplicitie: he that ruleth, vvith diligence: he that shevveth mercy, vvith cherefulnesse.) To proue that in steade of these Seniors in euery Churche, the Pope hath brought in, and we yet maynteyne the Lordship of one man ouer many Churches. &c. I know not how this geare hangeth togither, or to what purpose you should alleage that place: it neyther proueth, that in euery Churche there was Elders, neyther that in place of them the Pope hathe brought in the the Lordship of one man ouer many Churches.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 139. Sect. 1.
                     The same answere may be made vnto that which he sayth of the place to the Romanes, whereCap. 12. speaking of the offices of the Church, after that he had set foorth the office of the pastor, and of the Doctor, he addeth those other two offices of the Church, wherof one was occupied in the gouernment onely, the other in prouiding for the poore, and helping the sicke. And if besides the manyfest words of the Apostle in both these places, I should adde the sentences of the writers vpon those places, as M. Caluine, M. Beza. M. Martyr, M. Bucer. &c. It should easily appeare, what iust cause M. Doctor hath to say, that it is to dally with the scriptures, & to make them a nose of waxe, in alleaging of these to proue the Elders, that al men might vnderstande, what terrible outc
                           〈1 line〉
                        ies he maketh, as in this place, so almost in al other, when there is cause, that he should lay his hande vpon his mouth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The like answere do I make to that place also that I made to ye former. M. Caluine
                           Caluine. sayth, that these words of the Apostle, 
                              Qui pr
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 est in diligentia: he that ruleth with diligence, may generally be extended 
                              ad praefecturas omne genus: to all kind of rule or gouernment. And M. Martyr vpon the same words, sayth, that he doubteth not, 
                              multas fuisse in
                              Martyr. Beza. 
                              ecclesia praefecturas: that there were many gouernments in the Church. M. Beza likewyse although he sayth that the Apostle in this worde vnderstandeth presbyteros, yet he addeth, 
                              qui & ipsi interdū doctrinae verbo praeerant: which also sometime dyd preach the word. M. Bucer sayth playnely, 
                              Est praeterea qui praeest, qui pascendi & regendi ecclesiā mun
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  accepit:
                              Bucer. Furthermore he doth rule, whiche hathe receyued the office of feeding and gouerning the Church. Wherby he must néedes vnderstand the Pastor, & not any vnpreaching Senior. But what kinde of argument call you this? he that ruleth, must do it with diligence, Ergo, there must be Seniors in euery parish. You should rather conclude thus, therefore those to whome God hath committed any office of gouernment, muste doe the same diligently and carefully.
                        So that although these learned mē do vnderstād this place of Seniors, yet do theyThe place Rom. 12. is generall. think, yt it may also be vnderstāded of other magistrates & gouernours: & therfore vpō their interpretatiōs you can not conclude any certentie of your Seniors. And M. Beza séemeth by ye name of Seniors, to vnderstād the ministers of the word, that is, Bishops & pastors: and there is no doubt, but that ye Apostle in this place doth admonish al to be diligēt in their office, that haue any kind of gouernmēt cōmitted vnto thē. Wherfore you may not restraine this to any one particular kind of gouernmēt, which y• Apostle hath generally spoken of al: for that were in déede to dally with the scriptures, & to abuse them as the Papists do, yea to make thē a nose of waxe, as I haue sayd before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 139. Sect. 2.
                     This I am compelled to write, not so muche to pro
                           〈1 line〉
                        e that there were Seniors in euery Churche (which is a thing confessed) as to redeeme those places from M. Doctors false and corrupt interpretations, for as for the proofe of Elders in euery congregation, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        esides his confession, I neede haue no more but his owne reason. For he sayth that the office of these Elders in euery Church▪ was in that tun
                           〈1 line〉
                         wherin there were no christian Magistrates, and when there was perfecution, but in the Apostles times there was bothe persecution, and no christiā Magistrates, therfore in their time the office of these Elders was in euery congregation.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If this be a good argument, S. Paule 
                              ad Rom. 12. sayth, he that 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              uleth, must doe it diligently: Ergo,
                            euery particular congregation muste of necessitie be gouerned by Seniors: Or this, the Apostle. 1. Cor. 12. sayth, that God hath placed in his Churche gouernours, Ergo,
                            euery parish must haue a Seigniorie: Or this, Paule and Barnabas in euery Churche ordeyned pastors, therefore in euery Church there must be a company of Seniors, to whome the whole gouernment of the parish is to be cōmitted: If (I say) these be good & sure argumēts, then haue I corruptly interpreted those places. But if these arguments be not sounde, if they haue no sequele in them, if they be agaynst the practise of the Church euer since it had christian Magistrates, and long before, especially for suche Elders as you meane, if this kinde of gouernment in many reformed Churches be not thought conuenient, if it spoyle the Christian Magistrate of the authoritie giuen vnto him by the worde of God, and finally, if it bring in confusion, then haue I truely interpreted those places, and according to my duetie and calling deliuered them from your corruptions. But the truthe of this matter shall more euidently appeare in that whiche followeth.
                        That whiche I haue sayde of the béeing of Seniors in euery Churche, I saye still: neyther is that the questiō, for I aske y• question of your Seniors, not of Ministers, (whome I call Seniors) neyther dyd I meane that in euery particular parish, there was suche a Seigniorie, but in euery chiefe Citie, nor that it was at all tymes in persecution, and where there was no Christian Magistrate, but 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ometimes: neyther that this kinde of gouernment muste be in suche times, but that it may be. And therefore you had done well, if you had not béene so sparing of your proofes, for all my graunte.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶VVhether the gouernment by Seniors ought to be perpetuall.
               
                  Chap. 2. the first Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 139. Sect. 2.
                     I come therefore to the seconde poynte, wherein the question especially lyeth, whiche is, whether this function be perpetuall, and ought to remayne alwayes in the Churche. And it is to be obserued by the waye, that whereas there are dyuers sorts of aduersaries to this discipline o
                           〈1 line〉
                         the Church, M. Doctor is amongst the worste. For there be that saye, that thys order maye be vsed or not vsed nowe, at the lybertie of the Churches: But M. Doctor sayth that thys order is not for these times, but onely for those tymes when there were no Christian Magistrates, and so dothe flatly pynche at those Churches, whiche hauing Christian Magistrates, yet notwithstanding reteyne this order still.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I say so still, and I am able to defende my saying, agaynst al that you haue shewed to the contrarie. And yet do I not pinche at any Church that vseth it (if there be any such) so that they haue the consent of the ciuill Magistrate, who may if he will depart from his right, & abridge himself of the authoritie cōmitted vnto him by God. But he néede not so do except he list: and whether it be wel done or no, I will not determine: this I am well assured of, that in a Monarchie, & in a kingdome such as this Realme of England is, it can not be practised, without vntollerable contention, & extreme confusion: except you could deuise to make euery seueral parish a kingdome within it selfe,

and exempt it from all ecclestastical & ciuill iurisdiction, of Prince, Prelate, & whomsoeuer? which vndoubtedly may séeme to be your séeking, as will appeare hereafter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 139. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 140. Sect. 1.
                     And to the ende that the vanitie of this distinction, which is, that there ought to be Seniors or Auncients in the times of persecution, & not of peace: vnder tyrants, & not vnder christian Magistrates may appeare: the cause why these Seniors or auncients were appoynted in the Church; is to be considered, which must needes be graunted to be, for that the Pastor not beeing able to ouersee al himself, & to haue his eyes in euery corner of the church, & places where ye Churches abode, might be helped of the Auncients. Wherin the wonderful loue of God towardes his churche doth manifestly appeare, that for the greater assurance of the saluation of his, did not content himselfe to appoynt one onely ourseer of euery churche, but many ouer euery churche.
                     And therefore seeing that the Pastor is nowe in the tyme of peace, and vnder a christian Magistrate not able to ouersee al himselfe, nor his eyes can not be in euery place of the parish present to beholde the behauiour of the people, it followeth that as well nowe as in the tyme of persecution, as wel vnder a christian Prince, as vnder a tyrant, the office of an Auncient or Senior is required. Onlesse you will say that God hath lesse care of his church, in the time of peace, and vnder a godly magistrate, than he hath in the time of persecution, and vnder a tyrante.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I say there may be Seniors in the time of persecution, when there is no christian Magistrate, not that there ought of necessitie to be. God hath prouided the ciuill Magistrate, and other gonernours, to punishe and to correct vice and other disorders in the Church: who hath his officers and deputies in euery place for that purpose, neyther may the Pastor, or any other, to whome that charge is not committed by the ciuill magistrate, vsurpe that office vnto them selues. Wherefore that cause by you alleaged, is no cause at all why there should be any suche Seniors, where there are christian Magistrates, neyther is that kinde of gouernment any parte of the Pastors charge.
                        The Pastor if he be a méete man, is able to 
                              〈1 line〉
                           o al that, that is required of a Pastor, else might it be sayd (which you before denied) that God appoynted offices & functiōs, and gaue not sufficient gifts to execute & do them. Neyther can it be sayd, that God hath 
                              〈1 line〉
                           esse care of his Church, when he placeth ciuill and Christian Magistrates in the stead of Seniors, than when he placeth Seniors, and leaueth it destitute of Christian Mastrates. For one of the most 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ingular benefites that God bestoweth on his Churche in this worlde is, that he giueth vnto it christian Kings & Princes, from whose office and authoritie, whosoeuer doth detract and withdrawe we any thing, iniurieth the ordinance of God, and sheweth him selfe vnthankfull for so great a benefite.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 140. Sect. 1.
                     In deede if so be the Auncientes in the time of persecution, & vnder a tyrant, had medled with any office of a magistrate, or had supplied the roome of a godly magistrate, in handling of any of those things whych belonged vnto him, then there had bene some cause why a godly magistrate beeing i
                           〈1 line〉
                         the churche, the office of the Senior, or at the least so muche as he exercised of the office of a magistrate, should haue ceased. But when as the auncient neyther dyd, nor by any maner might meddle with those things which belonged vnto a magistrate, no more vnder a tyrante, than vnder a godly magistrate, there is no reason why the magistrate entring into the churche, the elder shoulde be therefore thrust out. Where finde you this in all the scriptures For the Elders office was to admonish seuerally, those that did amisse, to comforte those which he sawe weake and shaking, and to haue neede of comforte, to assist the Pastor in ecclesiasticall censures of reprehensions, sharper or mylder, as the faultes required, also to assiste in the suspentions from the supper of the Lorde, vntill some triall were had of the repentance of that partie which had confessed him self to haue offended, or else if he remayned stubborne, to assist him in the excommunication. These were those things which the Elder dyd, which for so muche as they may do as well vnder a christian magistrate, as vnder a tyrant, as well in the time of peace, as in the time of persecution, it followeth that as touching the office of Elders, there is no distinctiō in the times of peace and persecution, of a christian Prince, and of a tyrant.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I would gladly know by what place of scripture you can i
                              〈1 line〉
                           stifie this office that youThe office ascri
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ed to Seniors, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               the 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              gistrate o
                                 〈1 line〉
                               his authoriti
                                 〈1 line〉
                               in ecclesiasticall matters. héere appoynt vnto Seniors. In so weightie a matter in my iudgement you shoulde haue done well to haue vsed some authoritie of scripture, or other auncient wryter. The Admonition sayth, that the office of Seniors was to gouerne the Church with the rest of the ministers, to consult, to admo
                              〈1 line〉
                           sh, to correct, & to order all things apperteyning to the state of the congregation: Which if it be true, I pray you what authoritie remayneth to the ciuill Magistrate in ecclesiasticall and Churche matters? In d
                              〈1 line〉
                           ede if you make such a distinction betwixt the Church & the cōmon wealth, the ci
                              〈1 line〉
                           ill Magistrate & the ecclesiasticall, as you do throughout your whole booke, it is no mar
                              〈1 line〉
                           ell though you thinkeNo more authoriti
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ed to a ch
                                 〈1 line〉
                              istian Magistrate, tha
                                 〈1 line〉
                               t
                                 〈1 line〉
                               the Turke. the office of Seniors to be perpetuall. For you giue no more authoritie to a Christian Magistrate in ecclesiasticall gouernment, thā you would do to the Turke, if you were vnder him. And therfore according to your platforme, the gouernment of the Church is all one vnder a christian Magistrate, and vnder the great Turke. But to l
                              〈1 line〉
                           aue the Admonition: what haue you spoken of the office of Seniors, which is not eyther proper to the Pastor, or cōmon to all Christians, or such as may be much better brought to passe, by the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate, than by the ignorance, simplicitie, and rudenesse of the most of your Seniors? But first let vs heare more of your 
                              〈◊〉
                            before we come to vtter the absurditie of your cause.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 140. in the midst.
                     But I will yet come nearer. That without the which the principall offices of charitie cannot be exercised, is necessarie and alwayes to be kept in the Churche: but the office of Auncients & Elders are such as without which the principall offices of charitie can not be exercised, therfore it followeth that this office is necessarie. That the principal offices of charitie cannot be exercised without this order of Auncients, it may appeare, for that he which hath faulted, and amēdeth not after he be admonished once pri
                           〈1 line〉
                        ately, and then before one witnesse or two, cānot further be proceeded against,Math. 18. according to the commaundement of our sauiour Christ, onlesse there be in the Church Auncients 
                           〈1 line〉
                        d Elders, therfore this principal office of charitie which tendeth to the amendment of him which hath not pr̄ofited by those two former admonitions, can not be exercised without them. For it is commaunded of our sauiour Christ, that in such a case when a brother doth not proffite by these two warnings, it should be tolde the Church. Now I would aske who be ment by the Church heere, if he say by the Church, are ment al ye people, then I will aske how a man can conueniently complayn
                           〈1 line〉
                         to all the whole congregation, or how can the whole congregation conueniently meete to decide of this matter. I do not denie but the people haue an interest in the excommunication, as shal be noted hereafter, bu
                           〈1 line〉
                         the matter is not so farre come, for he must first refuse to obey the admonition of the Church, or euer they can proceede so farre. Wel, if it be not the people that be ment by the Church. who is it? I heare M. Doctor say it is the Pastor, but if he will say so, & speake so straungely, he must warrant it with some other places of scripture, where the Church is takē for one, which is as much to say as one man is many, one member is a body, one alone is a companie. And besides this strangenesse of speech, it is cleane contrary to the meaning of our sauiour Christ, and destroyeth the soueraintie of the medicine which our sauiour Christ prepared for such a festred sore, as would neyther be healed with priu
                           〈1 line〉
                        te admonition, neyther wt admonition before one or two witnesses. For as ye fault groweth, so our sauior Christ would haue the nūber of those, before whō he shuld be checked & rebuked likewise grow. Therfore from a priuate admonition he riseth vnto the admonitian before two or three, & from thē to the church, which if we should say it is but one, then to a dangerouser wound should be layd an easier plaster, & therfore our sauiour doth not rise from two to one (for that were not to rise, but to fall, nor to proceede, but to go backwarde) but to many. Seeing then that the church here is neyther the whole congregation, nor the pastor alone, it followeth that by the churche here he meaneth the pastor, with the Auncients or Elders. Or else whom can he meane? And as for this maner of speech wherin by the church is vnderstanded the chiefe gouernours and Elders of the church, it is oftentimes vsed in the olde Testament, from the which our sauiour borrowed this maner of speaking, as in Exodus it is sayd, that Moses wrought his miracles before ye
                        4. chap. people, when mention is made before, onely of the Elders of the people, whome Moses had called togither. And most manifestly in Iosue, where it is sayd that he that killed a man at vnwates, shall
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           0. chap. returne vnto the citie vntill he stand before the congregation to be iudged. Where by the congregation, he meaneth the gouernours of the congregation, for it did not appertayne to all to iudge of this case. Likewise in the Cronicles, and diuers other places. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nd therefore I conclude, that for so1. li. 13. cha. muche as those be necessarie and perpetuall which are spoken of in those words (tell the Churche) and that vnder those words are comprehended the Elders or Auncients, that the Elders & auncients be necessarie and perpetuall officers in the churche.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Héere are many words without matter, & a great thing pretended to no purpose: for the principal offices of charitie, both hath bin & may be wel exercised without your Seniors:
                              Dic ecclesiae interpreted. the place Mat. 18. doth in no respect proue the contrarie. For it only teacheth an order howe to procéede charitably in priuate offences, & not in publike, as I haue shewed before. Moreouer to tel the Church, is eyther publikly to reproue those that haue bin priuately in that maner admonished, & wil not repent, or else to complayne vnto such as haue authoritie in the Churche, according to that which I sayde before of this place, in my Answere to ye Admonition. And héerein you ioyne with me, in that you take the Church there, for the chief gouernours of the Church, though we differ in ye persōs.Church, for the gouernors of the church. For you will haue it onely ment of the Pastor & Seniors, and I thinke it signifieth more generally any, which are lawfully appoynted to gouerne the church. But whether it be one or more that hath this authoritie committed vnto him, it is more to tell him than it is to tell twentie besides: because he béeing in authoritie, doth beare the office of a publike Magistrate, who hath power publikely to correct that whiche was priuately cōmitted: and therfore he that telleth one suche, may wel be sayd to tell the Church, bicause he telleth such a one as hath authoritie in the Church, and is a publike person. So that he riseth from priuate admonition to open complaint: from priuate witnesses, to a publike Magistrate: and therfore this is to rise, not to fal, to procede, not to goe backwarde.
                        But admit that mo than one is vnderstanded by the name of the Church (whiche I also confesse) yet doth it not followe, that it shoulde be your Seigniorie, whych you would haue in euery congregation to consiste of the Pastor, and some other of his parishe, but rather suche as Chrysostome calleth Prelates and Presidents, which are BishopsHom. 61. in Matth. & such other chiefe gouernours. But be it that this place admitted ye same sense, that you would haue it to do, yet do I answer you as M. Musculus answered ye Papists obiecting these words in effect to the same ende that you do, that is, to spoyle the Christian Magistrate of his authoritie in ecclesiasticall matters. 
                              Obijciunt illud Christi, dic
                              Musc. tit. de Magist. in lo. 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 om. 
                              ecclesiae: Et, si ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi velut Ethnicus & Publicanus. Respondeo, Ecclesiae dei tum Magistratu pio ac fideli d
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 stituebantur. &c. They obiect (sayth he) that place of Christ, Dic ecclesiae: tell the Churche: and if he heare not the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen and publicane. I answere, The Churches of God were then destitut
                                 〈1 line〉
                               of a godly and faythful Magistrate: wherfore the iudgements betweene brethren & brethren were exercised by Seniors in an ecclesiastical assembly, as it was also vsual in christian Churches plāted by the Apostles. But there is a far diuers cōdition of those Churches which by the benefite of God haue obteyned Princes and christian Magistrates, who haue the chieftie, power, the making of lawes, and gouernment, not only in profane matters, but also in diuine. But that is a most pestilent errour, whereby diuers men thinke no otherwise of the christian Magistrate, than of a profane gouernment, whose authoritie is to be acknowledged onely in profane matters. And surely you do not one iote in this poynt differ from the opinion of the Papists. Truthe it is, that the place of Matthew may be vnderstanded of Seniors: but it may as well be vnderstanded of any other that by the order of the church haue authoritie in the Church. And séeing that it admitteth diuers interpretations (as it dothe) there can no suche platforme of necessitie be grounded vpon it.
                        Moreouer when Christe sayde, Dic Ecclesiae, there was no christian Churche establis
                              〈1 line〉
                           ed, but he speaketh according to the state of the Iewes Churche that then was vnder the Heathenish Magistrates: as he also doth when he saythe: If thy brotherMatth. 5. trespasse agaynst thee &c. leaue thine offering before the alter. &c. And to this doth M. Caluin agrée in his Harmonie expoūding ye same place. And surely as of this place you may not conclude, that in the Churche of Christ there ought to be suche offerings and alters, so may you not on the other place conclude, that there ought alwayes to be Seniors. Naye muche lesse this, than the other: for this is doubtfull, and the other is playne.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 141. Lin. 11. & Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4.
                     Furthermore S. Paule hauing entreated throughout ye whole first epistle to Timothie, of ye orders which ought to be in ye church of God, & of the gouernmēt, as himselfe witnesseth in the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        hird1. Tim. 6. chapter of that Epistle, when he saith he wrote that Epistle to teach Timothie how he should behaue himselfe in the house of God) and hauing set foorth both Byshop, & Elder, and Deacons, as ministers and officers of the Church, in the shutting vp of his Epistle he for the obseruation of all the orders of that Epistle, adiureth Timothie, & with the inuocation of the name of God straightly chargeth him to obserue those things which he had prescribed in that epistle, I charge thee saith he) before God which quickn
                           〈1 line〉
                        th all things, and before Iesus Christ which witnessed vnder Pontius Pilate a good profession, that thou keepe this commaundement without spot or blemish, vntil the appearing of our Lord Iesus Christ. The weight of which sentence for the obseruing of those things which are mentioned in this epistle, that it may be the better vnderstanded, I will note the words seuerally.
                     First therfore it is to be noted, that he saith (I denounceor I charge) he doth not say (I exhort or giue counsell) leauing it to the libertie of Timothie.
                     Secondarily it is to be noted, that he calleth This cannot be true as shall be declared. the whole Epistle a commaundemēt, and therfore it is no permission, so that it may be lawfull for the churches to leaue it, or to keepe it.
                     Thirdly, when he maketh mention of 
                           〈1 line〉
                        e liuing God, & of Christ which witnessed a good profession vnder Pontius Pilate, he sheweth that the things conteyned in this Epistl are such, as for the maintenance thereof we ought not to doubt to giue our liues, and that they be not suche as we ought to keepe, so that we haue them without strife & without sweate, or easely, but such as for the keeping of them, if we haue them, and for the obteyning of them if we haue them not, I will not say 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ur honours, or our commodi
                           〈1 line〉
                        ies and wealth, but as I haue sayd, our liues oughte not to be deare vnto vs. For therefore doth he make mention of the confession of Christ vnto death that he might shew vs an example, and foorthwith speaketh of God, whiche rayseth from the dead, that by thys meanes he might comfort Timothie if he should be brought into any trouble for the de
                           〈1 line〉
                        ense of any of these things.
                     Fourthly, if we referre those words without spot or blemish vnto the commaundement (as I for my part thinke they ought to be) then there is a waight in these wordes not to be passed ouer, whiche is, that the Apostle will not only haue the rules here conteyned, not troden vnder the feete, or broken in peeces, but he will not haue them so much as in any one smal point or specke neglected. But I see how M. Doctor will wipe away all this, and say that these thinges, or some of them were to be obserued thus necessaryly and precisely vntill there were christian princes and peace in the church, but the print is deeper than that it wil be so washed away, and therfore it is to be obserued, what he sayth in the latter end of the sentence, where he chargeth Timothie, and in him al, that he should keepe all these things, not vntill the time of peace, or to the times of christian princes, but euen vntil the comming or appearing of our sauioure Christ, which is as long as the world lasteth. And therefore I conclude that the Seigniors or Elders of the Church (being a part of that order and gouernment of the Churche, which S. Paule appointeth in this Epistle) are necessary, perpetuall, and by no meanes to be chaunged.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Al this is but to blind ye eies of the Reader, being indéede without all pith & gr
                              〈1 line〉
                           ūd.The office of Seniors not mentioned in the. 1. Tim. much lesse commanded. For first wher hath the Apostle in al that Epistle spokē one word of the office of your Seniors, which you distinguish frō a minister of ye word? wher doth he giue any such cōmandemēt cōcerning his office? Wher doth he prescribe any such for me or kind of gouernmēt? if he kéepe silēce in this matter thr
                              〈1 line〉
                           ugh ye whole epistle, how dare you presume to say that to be cōmanded which is not mentioned, & to make so much adoe about nothing? surely if this kind of gouernmēt had bin so necessary, & for euer to be 
                              〈1 line〉
                           bserued, S. Paule wold not haue omitted it in this Epistle especially. You say that he hath set foorth, in that Epistle the office of an elder: if by an elder you meane a Bishop or a Pastor, it is true. If you meane your own elder, such as must gouern only & neither preach nor minister the sacramēts, it is very vntrue: and you haue no cōscience in speaking vntruth: for he speaketh not one word of that senior or of his office. If you reply or obiect that which is written. 1. Tim. 5. qui bene praesunt 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . &c.
                            I answer as I did before, that by presbyter in that place he meaneth such as be in the ministerie, and no other. If he do meane any other, yet doth he not describe the office of that Senior, neither giueth any precept of his continuāce, or rule of any such kind of 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           mēnt: & therfore cannot be included in that precept which you so greatly amplify: for the wordes of the Apostle be these, vt serues hoc praeceptum, so that you haue laboured much to proue a thing that is not, and therefore you haue laboured in vaine. Secondly,The whole epistle to 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              s not that commandement. you cannot extend these words of the Apostle to the whole Epistle, as though it were gyuen generally of the whole, and of euery thing therein contein
                              〈1 line〉
                           d: for then muste you of necessitie bring in widdowes and their office into the Churche

again: bicause the Apostle doth not only describe their office in that epistle, but also giueth direct precepts of them, & so doth he not of your Seniors. Likewyse his precepte of drinking wine, whiche he giueth there also, must of necessitie be obserued of all ministers, whiche haue the lyke infirmitie. These and suche other grosse absurdities must of necessitie followe, if you will haue all things in that Epistle necessarily for euer to be obserued, and the whole epistle to be that commaundement, that the Apostle here enioyneth to Timothie. cap. 6.
                        Neyther can I perceiue that any learned interpreter doth referre this commandementWherevnto that commandement is referred. to any other things conteined in this Epistle, than to those only that do appertaine to the pastorall office of Timothie: and some there be, that restrayne it to those things onely which are before spoken of in this. 6. chapter, & especially to ye precept against couetousnes. Chrysostome expounding this place sayth thus: VVhat is it to kepe the cōmaundement pure? Vt ne
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  vitae, ne
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  dogmatū gratia aliquid maculae contra
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 as,
                              Chrysostome. Caluine. That neither in respect of lyfe or doctrine thou haue any spot. To conclude M. Caluin interpreting it, sayth on this sort: By this word cōmaundement, he signifieth those thinges which he had hitherto spokē of the office of Timothie: wherof this is the sum, that he shuld shew himself a faithful minister to Christ & to the church. For what need is there to extēd this to the whole law? except peraduenture some m
                                 〈1 line〉
                               had rather to take this simplye for the function cōmitted vnto him: for whē we are appointed ministers of the churche, God doth therwith prescribe vnto vs what he would haue vs to do. So that seruare mandatum, to keepe the comaundement is nothing else, but faithfully to execute the office cōmitted vnto him: surely I do wholly refer it to the ministerie of Timothie. Wherby it is euidēt, that vnder this cōmaūdement euery thing in this epistle is not conteined, but yt only which doth appertain to ye office of Timothie. That which foloweth (immaculatus & irreprehensibilis) according to the most and best interpreters, is referred to Timothie, & not to the cōmaundement, cōtrarie to your iudgement: wherfore I also conclude, that nothing in this Epistle maketh one iote for your Seigniorie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the sixthe Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 141. Sect vlt.
                     So that we haue not only now the 
                           〈◊〉
                         of al ye primi
                           〈1 line〉
                        iue churches (which ought to moue vs if there were no cōmaundement) but we haue also a straight cōmandement, I say the only exāples ought to moue vs, for what way can we s
                           〈1 line〉
                        felyer follow thā ye cōmon high way, beaten & trodē by 
                           〈1 line〉
                         steps of al ye Apostles, & of al the churches? Things also grounded, & being preserued by the same meanes by the which they were ingendred, why should we think but yt the churches now wil prosper by ye gouernment, wherby it first came vp? But I say we haue not only the examples of the churches, but we haue also commandement & straight charge to kepe this office of elders and auncients in the church, & therfore it is not only rashnesse in leauing the way that the aposties, & churches by the apostles aduise haue gone, but disobedience also to depart from their commaundement, & to mainteyn & defend that we may do so, I can almost giue it no gentler name than rebellion.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Examples of churches ther may be some, but not of your kind of Seniors. Precept & cōmaundemēt for this kind of gouernmēt, there is not one in ye whole scripture, or any other approued authoritie. For I haue before shewed how little y• authoritie serue
                              〈1 line〉
                           h your purpose, y• which you would haue vs thinke to be so expresse a cōmaundement. Wherfore it is no rebellion to disallow of your order in the tyme of Christian magistrates, but it is rebellion to contend for it, to the abridging of that authoritie that God hath to Christian Princes committed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the seuenth Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 114. Sect. 2. &c.
                     I know yt in the primitiue church they had in euery church certain Seniors, to whome the gouernmente of the congregation was committed, but that was before there was any Christian Prince or magistrate that openly professed the Gospell, and before there was anye Churche by publike authoritie established, or vnder Ciuill

gouernment: I told you before, that the diuersitie of tyme and state
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ▪
                         of the church requireth diuersitie of gouernment in the same. It can not be gouerned in time of prosperitie, as it is in time of persecution: It may not be gouerned vnder a Christian Prince, which doth nourishe and maynteyne it, as it may be vnder a Tyrant, when it is constrained to 
                           〈◊〉
                         and seeke corners. It can not be gouerned in a w
                           〈1 line〉
                        ole realme, as it may be in one little citie or towne: it cannot be gouerned when it is dispersed through many places, as it may be when it is collected into some one narow and certaine place: To be shorte, it can not be gouerned when it is ful of hypocrites, Papists, Atheis
                           〈1 line〉
                        s, and other wicked persons, as when it hath verie fewe or none such: as cōmonly it hath not in tyme of persecution, when the gold is as it were by fyre tried from the drosse. He that according to this diuersitie of the forme, state, & time of the church, doth not allow a diuersitie of gouernment, doth confound and not edifie. I praye you what Seniors could you haue in most parishes in England fit for that office? But wise, not wilful men, haue to consider this: God hath giuē the chief gouernment of his church, to the christian magistrate, who hath to consider what is most conuenient: and we must therwith be content, so that nothing be done against faithe, and the commaundement of God.
                  
                  
                     TC. Pag. 142. Sect. 1.
                     Nowe I will come to M. Doctors reasons which he hath in the hundreth & fourteene, and a hundred and fiftene pages, where he graunteth that there were elders in euery Churche in times past, but saith that it ought not now so to be. For saith he, the times alter the gouernment, and it cannot be gouerned in the time of prosperitie, as in the time of persecution, vnder a christian prince as vnder a tyrant. Thus he sayth, but sheweth no reason, bringeth no proofe, declareth not how
                           〈1 line〉
                         nor why prosperitie will not beare the elders, as well as persecution, neyther why they may not be vnder a godlie prince as well as vnder a tyrant, v
                           〈1 line〉
                        lesse this be a reason, that bycause the godlye prince doth nourish the church as a ciuile Magistrate, therfore the Auncients may not nourishe it as ecclesiasticall ouerseers
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        My reason why it may not be gouerned vnder a Christian Prince, as it mayeThe Church may no
                                 〈1 line〉
                               be gouerned vnder 
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               stian Prince as 
                                 〈◊〉
                               a tyrant. vnder a tyrant, is this: God hath giuen the chiefe authoritie in the gouernmente of his church to the Christian magistrate, which could not so be if your Seignorie might as wel retein their authoritie vnder a Christian Prince, and in the time of peace, as vnder a tyrant, and in the tyme of persecution. For tell me I pray you what authoritie ecclesiasticall remayneth to the ciuill Magistrate, where this Seignorie is established? But that the Reader may vnderstande this not to be my iudgement alone, but the iudgement also of famous learned men, & the practise of w
                              〈1 line〉
                           ll reformed churches. I thought good in this place before I proceed any further, to report the opinions of Musculus and Gualter, touchyng this matter. Musculus in his common places, titulo de Magistratibus, affirmeth, that notwithstanding in the 
                              〈◊〉
                            tyme, theMusculus. churches were ruled by Seniors, yet they may not so be vnder christian rulers and Magistrates, who haue authoritie not in ciuill matters only, but in ecclesiastical also. His wordes I haue recited before. M. Gualter in his cōmentaries vpon. 1. Cor. 5.Supra in the 4. diuision. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            doth at large entreat of this matter: whose wordes bicause they haue pith in them, and proceede from him which is both learned and godlie, and of great experience, I will reher
                              〈1 line〉
                           e them as I finde them.
                        
                           There are also others which although they haue true christian princes, and want no lawes wherby licentious maners are corrected, yet they say they nede an ecclesiastical senate,Gualter. in. 1. Cor. 5. which might punish euery man, and haue authoritie also ouer Princes, that it might seclude them fr
                                 〈1 line〉
                               the Lords supper (if they haue giuē any publike offence) & not to admitte them againe vnto the felowship of the Church, but vpon their allowāce after publike satisfactiō.

And if any man do contrary them in their opinion, by and by they crie out vpon him as the enemie of all discipline, & as one vnwoorthy to haue any place in the Church: as though there could no other forme of discipline be appointed, but that whiche they haue inuented. But they must pardone vs, and let them not condemne vs rashly, which do dissent from them not without good reason. You sée therefore how your Seigniorie and kinde of gouernmente is liked, euen of zelous and godly ministers of reformed churches. Neyther do I remember that I euer read any authoure that dothe of necessitie require it: scripture (I know) you haue none for it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 142 Sect. 2.
                     Nowe seing M. Doctor can shew vs no cause why they may not as well be now, as in the time of the Apostles, as well vnder a Christian prince 
                           〈1 line〉
                        s vnder a Tyrant, I will shewe him that although they be always necessary, yet there is better cause why they should rather be now, than in the Apostles times, greater necessitie vnder a Christian prince, than vnder a tyrant. First of all in the Apostles times it is knowne that the gifts of the spirit of wisedome, discretion, knowledge, enduring of trauayle, were poured foorth more plentifully, then euer they were eyther before, or shall be after. By reason whereof, the Pastors and ministers of the churches that were then, were (I speake generally, and of the estate of the whole Church) better furnished with the gifts needefull for their ministerie, than are the ministers of these days. Whervpon I conclude that if the ayd and assistance of the Pastor, by the Elders, was thoughte necessary by the Apostles in those times, when the ministers were so wel, and so richly replenished with such gifts, much more is that ayde and assistance meete for the ministers of these days, wherein their gifts of discretion, & knowledge, and diligence are not so plentifull. For if they whose eye sight was so cleare to perceiue, whose hands so nimble to execute, had neede for their ayde, of other eyes and other handes, then the ministers now, whose eyes are dimmer, and hands heauier than theirs were, haue much more neede of this ayde than they had.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This reason is answered two ways, and that briefly: The first is, bycause there is not at this time in euery congregation so méete men, for that office of Seniors, as there was then: for God hath not now so plentifully poured the giftes of the spirit of wisedome, discretion, knowledge. &c. vpon so many in euery congregation according to your owne confession, as he did then: and therefore nothing so easie to fiad in euery congregation meete men to gouerne▪ a
                              〈1 line〉
                            it was then. Secondly, the ciuill and ChristianThe ciuill ma gistrate a better help to the minister, than the Seniors. Magistrate hath that whole authoritts now, that Seniors had thē, and much more, for he may punish with corporall punishment, and so could not they: he may compell and coustrayne, and so could not they: so that the Pastor may be much better ayded and assisted in doing his dutie, and in suppressing vice by the authoritie of the Christian Magistrate, than he eyther was then or could be now by the Seniors. Therefore this reason of yours is no reason at all, but maketh directly against you, if it be well considered.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 142. Sect. 3. 4.
                     Againe if S. Paule did charge the persecuted, and therefore poore churches, with the finding and prouiding for the Seniors in euery Church (as it appeareth in yt Epistle to Timothie, where1. Epistle. 5. he sayth that Elders which rule well, are woorthy double honoure, whereby he signifieth a plentifull reward, and such as may be fully sufficient for them and their housholds, as when he biddeth that the widdow which serued the Church in attending vpon the sicke, and vppon the strangers, should be honoured, that is, haue that wherewith she might honestly and soberly liue) if I say S. Paule would charge the churches then with mainteyning the Elders, whiche being poore, wereThe question is not of the abilirie to find Seni ors, but of the necesti
                              〈1 line〉
                           ie of ha
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ing them. not sometimes able to liue without some releefe from the Churche, bycause they were compelled oftentimes to leaue their owne affayres to wait of the affaires of the Church, howe much more ought there now to be Seniors, when the churches be in peace, and therefore not so poore, & when there may be chosen such for the most part throughout the real
                           〈1 line〉
                        e, as are able to liue without charging the Church any whit, as the practise of these days doth manifestly declare.
                     And if S. Paule that was so desirous to haue the Gospel 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , that is free and without charges as muche as is possible, and soloth to lay any burthen vpon the churches, especially those whiche were poore, did notwithstanding enioyne the maintenance of the Elders, vnto the churches poore and persecuted, how much more shall we thinke, that his mind was that the churches which liue in peace, and are rich, and may haue this office without charge, ought to receiue this order of auncients.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is a poore and féeble reason: the Churche founde Seniors in the time of persecution, Ergo, there ought rather to be Seniors vnder a Christian prince than in the time of persecution. Or this: the Church is now better able to finde Seniors, Ergo, it ought now rather to be gouerned by Seniors. You may make the same reasons also for wydowes and diaconisses, and as well induce the necessitie of them. But we aske not what the Church was able to do then, or what it is able to do now, but whether the same gouernment ought to be now that was then: and whether a Christian magistrate haue no more authoritie in the gouernmēt of ye Church now, than the heathenish and persecuting magistrate had then. Although if you consider the abilitie of some Parishes, and the vnwillingnesse of other some, you shall find that they be hardly able or willing to finde a fit Pastor, muche lesse would they be able or willing to fynde a number of Seniors besydes their Pastor.
                        The place of S. Paule 1. Tim. 5. is vntruly alledged for your purpose, for the Apostle meaneth of the Minister in euery congregation, and not of any number of Seniors, as I haue before declared. Neither haue yon one place of Scripture to warrant your interpretation, or application of that place.
                        God hath much better prouided for his church, by placing in it ciuill and Christiā
                           God hath prouided better for his church by giuyng chri stian magistrates, then by Seniors. magistrats, whose authoritie is so ample & large, than by placing Seniors: wherfore where Christian magistrates be, the gouernment of Seniors is superfluous, and the Church may not be burdened with vnnecessarie and vnprofitable charges: neyther may the authoritie which God hath giuen to the Christian magistrate, be writhen out of his hand, by a rude companie of Seniors in seuerall parishes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the tenth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 142. the laste lyne. &c.
                     Moreouer those that belearned knowe, that the gouernment of the Churche which was in the Apostles times, being partly in respect of the people that had to do in the elections & other things popular: partly in respect of the Pastors and Auncients Aristocratical, that is the rule of the best: I say they know that these gouernmentes doe easyly decline into their contraries, and by reason therof both the gouernment of those which were most vertuous might easily be changed into the gouernment of few of the richest, or of greatest power, and the popular estate might easily passe to a confused tumult. Now this incōmoditie were they more subiect vnto vnder a tyrant, than vnder a godlie prince. For they had no ciuile magistrate, which might correct and reforme those declinings when they happened. For the tyrants did not know of it, and if they hav knowne of it, they would haue bene glad to see the churches goe to wracke: therfore now we haue a godlie ciuil magistrate which both will and oughte to remedie suche declinations and conuersions of good gouernment into euill, it followeth that this estate and gouernment by Auncients, is rather to be vsed vnder a Christian prince than vnder a tyrant.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Those that be learned know, that the gouernment of the church is neither populare, norThe gouernment of the church monar chicall. Aristocratical▪ (as it is before declared where you haue affirmed the lyke) but a Monarchie. For in euery particular church where there is a christian Magistrate, he is chiefe and principall ouer the rest: and you your selfe confesse, that the Pastor is the chiefe of the Seigniorie, whiche ought not to be if the state were eyther Popular, or Aristocraticall. Of the vniuersall churche onely Christ is the head and chief, and therfore the state of it is Monarchicall. But of the state and kinde of gouernmente ofTract. 8. the church in euery kingdome or prouince, I haue particularly, and at large spoken in the treatise of Archbishops.
                        I shal not néed to will the Reader once againe to marke how you bend your force against a Monarchie. For your principle is, that the gouernment of the common wealtheC. T. bendeth his force against a monarchie. must be framed according to the gouernment of the churche: And therfore it maye not be a kingdome, but rather a Popular estate, or Aristocraticall, bicause the gouernment of the Churche (as you say) is so. But be it as you woulde haue it: what then? Forsooth it maye easylyer decline from a popular estate to a confused tumulte, and from an Aristocratical state to the gouernmente of a fewe, when there is no Christian Magistrate, than when there is a Christian magistrate, therefore it is more meete for the gouernmente of the Churche, to be populare or Aristocraticall vnder a Christian Magistrate, than vnder a tyrant.

Fyrste, I deny your argument as béeing voyde of all sense and reason. Secondly, I saye that no Christian Magistrate is bound to suffer in his dominion, so manie seueral and distinct kindes of gouernment: and to haue one kinde of gouernment in the Churche, and an other in the common wealth, seing that God hath committed the chief care of them both to one and the self same person. Thirdly, I denie your antecedent: that is, that a popular or Aristocraticall qinde of gouernyng the churche doth more easyly decline into their contaries vnder a tyrant than vnder a Christian magistrate: for men being in persecution, and in dayly expectation of death, are not so desirous to procure vnto themselues authoritie & dominion, as they be in the time of peace and prosperitie, Moreouer vnder a tyrant and in the tyme of persecution, those that be appoynted gouernours of the Church, be but for a time only, and during the pleasure of such as appointed them, and therefore can not vsurpe any vnlawfull iurisdiction ouer the rest against their willes. In such times of the Church rather disobedience and stubbornesse in the common sort, than tyrannie or oppression in the gouernours, is to be feared. Surely you would fayne haue reason for your popular cause, if you could tell where to fynde it.
                        And lette the Reader note the myght of this your reason: the popular and Aristocratical kind of gouernment may more easyly decline to their contraries vnder a tyrant than vnder a Christian magistrate: therfore ye gouernmēt of the church must be popular or Aristocratical rather vnder a Christian magistrate, thā vnder a tyrant. Nowsoeuer the antecedent is true, there is no sequele in the argument. For vnder a tyrant necessitie doth driue the Church oftentymes to one of these two kindes of gouernment, but when there is a Christian Magistrate, God hath appointed it to bée subiect to him.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the eleuenth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 143. Sect. 1.
                     Besides this, in the time of persecution all assemblies of diuers together were dangerous, & put them all in hazard of their life which did make those assemblies, & therfore if the pastor alone might haue ordred and determined of things perteining to the church by himself, it had ben lesse danger to him, & more saftie for others of the churche. And therfore if the seniors were then thoughte meere to gouern the church, when they could not come together to exercise their functions without daunger, muche more ought they to be vnder a Christiā prince, when they may mete together without danger.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be the homeliest reasons that euer I hearde, & the lightest to be vsed in so waightie a matter. For first, the Seniors might as safely méet together in the tyme of persecution, to exercise discipline, as the whole church to heare the word of God & to pray. Secondly, it was not so daungerous for foure or fiue to méet together. Thirdly, no daunger ought to be feared when a man séeketh to do his dutie. Fourthly, what kind of reason cal you this? the Seniors may with lesse daūger méet together to execute their fuuctions vnder a Christian Prince than vnder a tyrant: therfore there ought rather to be Seniors vnder a Christian prince than vnder a tyrant. I statly denie the argument. For vnder a tyrant the churche must haue that kinde of gouernment, that it may most conueniently enioy, with what daunger so euer it be ioyned: vnder a Christian Magistrate it must be subiecte to his authoritie, and gouerned by him, seing that God hath cōmmitted vnto him the chief care & gouernment therof: Wherfore the office of Seniors is nothing necessarie where ther is a Christian magistrate, but it is vsurpation rather of the office of the Magistrate, and a detracting from his authoritie: neyther hathe God in any place of the Scriptures commaunded obedience to those your Seniors, or described their office: but he hath done both expressely, touching the ciuill Magistrate.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 143. Sect. 2.
                     M. Doctor procedeth and sayth, it can not be gouerned in a whole realme, as it may be in a citie

or towne. This gouernment by Seniors is not only in one citie, but also hath bin of late throughout the whole realme of Fraunce, where there were any churches: and M. Doctor confesseth, that it was in all the prinutiue Churches, and therfore not onely in one realme, but almost thoroughout the whole worlde: and therfore the large spreading of the Churche, can not hynder it. So that the difference lyeth stil in the peace aud persecution of the churche, and not in the capacitie and largenesse of the place where the churches abyde. So myghte one reason agaynste the lawfull estate of a Monarchie: for he might say that although the rule of one be needful and conuement in a houshold, yet it is not conuenient in a towne, and although it be conuenient in a towne, yet it is not in a citie, and although in a citie, yet not in a realme.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you will so deuide these seueral cities, and Churches in one kingdome, that they be not vnder one gouernoure, ruled by the same lawes, members of one kingdome, but euery one of them as it were a common wealth within it selfe, (as it is inScon
                                 〈1 line〉
                               spoil
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               of 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                              . seuerall Churches within one kingdome in the time of persecution) then it is true that you say, and in this case were the primitiue Churches, and so were the Churches in Fraunce. But when as all the Townes and Churches in one kingdome, be subiect as wel in causes Ecclesiastical as ciuil, to one prince, ruled by the same lawes &c. then can you not establish this your Seigniorie without great confusion, and vntollerable iniurie to the minister of God: I meane the Christian Magistrate.
                        The authoritie of the Master of the housholde ouer his family derogateth nothing from the authoritie of the Prince, but doth confirme and establish it rather. But the authoritie of your Seniors in euery congregation, spoyleth the prince of his Iurisdiction, and maketh him subiect where he ought to be ruler, and therefore your reason is not like.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 143. Sect. 3.
                     To be short saith he, when he can say no more, it cannot be gouerned when it is full of hypocrites Papists, Atheists, and other wicked persons, as in the times of persecution when ther were few or none such. I haue shewed before how great want of knowledge it bewrayeth, to saye that Papists and Atheists be of the Church, and I loue not as M. Doctor both to vse often reperition, but if there be now moe hypocrites and other wicked and vnruly persons in the Churche, than there were in the time of persecution (which I will not denie) then there is greater cause noro why there should be Seniors in euery Church, than there was then when there were fewer. For the more naughty persons, and the greater disorders there be, the more ayde and help hath the pastor neede to haue both to find out their disorders, and also when they haue found them out, to iudge of the qualitie of them, and after also to correct them with the censutes of the Church, which standeth in such reprehensions priuate and open, and excommunication, as I haue before rehearsed.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What M. Doctor was able to say more, was vnknowne to you. If he woulde alledge as vaine reasons as you do, and spende paper in vttering his owne fansies without eyther scripture or other authorities, as your vsuall manner is, he would at the least haue séemed to say much, as you do, who indéede say nothing at all.
                        I say againe that there be in the Churche, that is, in the externall societie of the
                              Tract. 3 cap. 6 diuisi. 2. &. 4. The Magistrate may better 
                                 〈◊〉
                               offenders, thā the Semors. Gual. 1. cor. 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 .
                            Church, both Papists, Atheists, drunkards. &c. and your deniall of it I haue shewed before to be vaine. I say surther that those and such like offenders, may best be reformed by the ciuill Magistrate, and by corporall punishment: as for your Seniors they will not set a straw by them. For as M. Gualter sayth: They which cannot be brought into order by the authoritie of a lawfull magistrate, and by lawes, will much lesse suffer themselues to be punished by the commaundement of Seniors, or of an Ecclesiasticall senate, whome with all their solemnitie they will laugh to scorne.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 143. Sect. 4. &. vlt.
                     Afterwarde he asketh what Seniors may be had in most of the parishe in Englande fit for

that office? he asketh the same question in the. 133. page, wher he also addeth Pastors, asking where may be gotten such Pastors as the authors of the Admonition require, when as they require no other than those which the word of God requireth. Well then if this be a good reason why there should be no Elders in any Church, bycause fit men are not to be gotten in all parishes: it followeth by M. Doctors reason, that for asmuch as we haue not fit and able Pastors for euery Churche, that therfore we ought to haue no able Pastor in any Church.
                     And if he will graunt that we ought to haue able Pastors in as many places as they may be gotten: how can he denie that we should haue Elders in those Churches where fitte men maye be had.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The question is necessarie and cannot be so shifted of: But you are still like vntoDifference betweene the necessitie of Pastors and of Seniors. your selfe. The reason of hauing Pastors & of hauing Seniors is nothing like: For the office of a Pastor is perpetuall, so is not the office of your Senior. Pastors be necessarie in the Church of Christ, as well for the administration of the sacraments, as for the preaching of the word, and other Ecelesiasticall functions: so be not Seniors. The office of a Pastor is not only described in the scriptures, but commaunded also: shew where the office of your Senior is so. The office of a Pastor derogateth nothing from the authoritie of the Christian Magistrate: but the office of your Seniors spoyleth him of the one halfe, and in a manner of the whole, as shall hereafter more plainly appeare. Wherefore this may well be true, that although suche Pastors as are to be wished cannot be prouided for euery place, yet there must be suche as may be conueniently come by. But the same is not true in Seniors, being neyther necessary, nor (where a Chistian Magistrate is) profitable, but the contrary.
                        And these reasons will serue to denie that of Seniors, which we graūt of Pastors, séeing the office of a Pastor is commaunded as necessarie and perpetuall: and not the office of a Senior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 144. Lin. 2.
                     And I say further, where we haue an expresse commaundement layd vpon vs to do a thing, there all disputations must cease, of hardnesse, of impossibilitie, of profyte, or else of peace. For first God hathe not commaunded any orders in his Churche, whiche are impossible, and if they seeme hard, it must be remembred, that the best and excellentest things are hardest, and that there is nothing so hard, which diligence and trauaile to bring it to passe, will not ouercome: whiche thing if it be proued true in worldly affayres, the truth thereof will much more appeare in the matters perteyning vnto God, considering that if God with his blessing do surmountè all the difficulties in worldly matters, which are otherwise hard to be compassed, he will in his owne matters and matters perteyning to his glory, fill vp the valleys, although they be neuer so low, bring downe the hilies, although they be neuer so high, playne the ways be they neuer so rough, so that he will make of a way not passable in the eyes of flesh, a way tracked and easy to go in, and to walke towardes that kingdome, wherevnto he calleth vs.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be but words of course to no purpose. For firste you shoulde haue prouedThe office of 
                                 〈◊〉
                               no 
                                 〈◊〉
                               com
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . that the office of your Seniors is commaunded, which I vtterly denie. Then should you haue declared that the same commaundement is perpetuall: for many thinges are commaunded in the new testament, which be not perpetnall, as the washing of féete, Iohn. 13. to abstayne à sanguine & suffocat
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Act. 15. to elect and choose wydowes, to
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 13. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 15. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 5. minister in the Churche. 1. Timo. 5. and suche lyke. So that you haue craftily passed ouer two principall poyntes, and those whiche oughte to be the groundes of your cause. Fyrste therefore I denye that thys office of Saeniors is commaunded any where in the new Testamente: then I say that if it were commaunded, yet is it but a tempor ill commaundement. Those two pointes not being by you proued, the words you vtter are but in vaine.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 144. Lin. 15.
                     Besides that, I answere wheresoeuer there is a Churche, there are the riches of the spirite of God, there is with knowledge, discretion, and wisedome, and there are such as S. Paule calleth wise and can discerne and iudge. And wee see that when men are called to a lawfull and profyt
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        ble callyng, and especially to a publike callyng, God doth poure on his giftes of that person which is so called so plentyfully that he is as it were sodeynly made a newe man, whych if he dee in the wicked as Saule was, there is no doubt but he will doe it in those which are with the testimonie1. Sam. 10. of the church, & with experience of their former godlie behauiour, chosen to such offices of weight. So that there is not nor can not be any want to obey Gods commaundement, and to establish the order in the Church which God hath appointed, but our owne eyther negligence and slouthfulnes, or fearfulnesse or ambition
                           〈1 line〉
                        or some other leauen which we nourishe within our selues.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This lacketh proose: for sometymes the churche of God is, where there is neyther good Pastor, nor méete gouernour, as in the tyme of Elias. And though God somtymes bestow his gifts vpon y• person that is called to a lawful and a publike function as he did vpon Saule, yet doth he not alway so. God doth not of necessitie tye his graces toGod bestoa weth his gifts by meanes. offices: for as he in the beginning of his churche miraculously bestowed his giftes: so doth he now leaue the same, by outwarde meanes in parte to be obteyned, as by education, learning, instruction, reading, studying. &c. which meanes being neglected, God doth of his iustice permitte euill Magistrates and officers, which he also sometymes doth for the offences of the people, as may be séene in the most parte of the kings of Iuda, and of Ierusalem, and almost in all christian princes and gouernours vnder the Popes tyrannie: For I suppose you meane such giftes as be profitable for the Churche.
                        Surely if this were true that you here so boldly withoute proofe affirme, then should it not much skill what kind of men wer chosen to be either Pastors, or Magistrates, for howsoeuer they were before furnished with gifts, yet when they be onceThe absurditie of the R
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              plye. called, God will miraculously poure vpon them gifts necessary, though they be the rudest and ignorantest men in a whole countrey. Is not this to boast of the spirit as the Anabaptists do? but I thinke the Reader vnderstandeth, that God now worketh by ord
                              〈1 line〉
                           narie meanes, not by miracles. And though it be certaine that God dothe endue magistrates, such as feare him with singular gifts, yet doth he it by meanes as is said, and it is not at all times so, nor in all persons, but whē, where, and in whome it pleaseth him. Therefore to ground any generall doctrine vpon singular examples: or to stablish an externall kind of gouernment vpon Gods inward and secret working: to bind God vnto that of necessitie, that he doth bestow of grace and mercy: to make that common to al, which he of his infinite wisedome bestoweth vpon some: is not the part of a skilfull diuine.
                        But to let all this passe: you do still petere principium, and take that as graunted, which you cannot proue, that is, that the office of Seniors is an office established in the Church by the commaundement of God, and not to be altered: whiche I for my part can neuer graunt vnto you, except you haue more pithie reasons to proue it, than any that you haue as yet vttered.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 144. Lin. 26. &. Sect. 1. 2.
                     It is true, that we ought to be obedient vnto the ciuill magistrate, which gouerneth the church of God in that office which is committed vnto him, and according to that callyng. But it muste be remembred, that 
                           〈◊〉
                         magistrates must gouerns it according to the rules of God prescribed in his worde, and that as they are nourises, so they be seruantes vnto the churche, and as they rule in the churche, so they must remember to subiect themselues vnto the church, to submit their scepters, to throwe downe their crownes, before the churche: yea as the prophet speaketh, to lickeEsay. 49. the dust of the feete of the churche. Wherin I meane not, that the church doth eyther wryng the scepters oute of princes handes, or taketh theyr crownes from their heades, or that it requyreth princes to licke the dust of her feete (as the pope vnder this pretence hath done) but I meane as the prophete meaneth, that what soeuer magnificence or excellencie, or pompe, is eyther in them,

or in their estates and common wealthes, whiche dothe not agree with the simplicitie and (in the iudgement of the world) poore and contemptible estate of the Church, that that they will be content to lay downe.
                     And here commeth to my minde, that wherewith the worlde is nowe dec
                           〈1 line〉
                        iued, and wherewith M. Doctor goeth about both to deceyue himselfe & others too, in that he thinketh that the Church must be framed according to the common wealth, and the Church gouernment according to the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        uill gouernment, A dangerous doctrine. which is as much to say, as if a man should fashion his house according to his hangings when as indeede it is cleane contrary, that as the hangings are made fit for the house, so the common wealth must be made to agree with the Churche, and the gouernmente thereof with hir gouernment. For as the house is before the hangings, and therefore the hangings which come after, must be framed to the house which was before: so the Churche being before there was 
                           〈1 line〉
                        y common wealth, and the common wealth comming after, must be fashioned and made suteable vnto the Church. Otherwise God is made to giue place to men, heauen to earth, and religion is made (as it were) a rule of Lesbia, to be applyed vnto any estate of common wealth whatsoeuer. Seing An obscu
                              〈1 line〉
                           e, and deformed argument. that good men, that is to say, the Church are as it were the foundation of the world, it is meete that the common wealth which is builded vpon that foundation, should be framed according to the Churche, and therefore those voyces ought not to be heard, this order will not agree with our common wealth, that law of God is not for our state, this forme of gouernment wil not match with the pollicie of this realme.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These words would be well considered, for they conteine the ouerthrow of theThe ouerthrow of the princes autho ritie conteined in the Reply. princes authoritie both in ecclesiasticall and ciuil matters. But I will only giue a breefe note of them in this place, meaning to set foorth this matter more at large elsewhere. When he saith that the ciuill magistrate must gouerne according to his calling, and according to the rules of God prescribed in his word. &c. although the wordes be true, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           et if you marke vpon what occasion they be spoken, you shall perceiue the venome that lyeth hid vnder them: for he doth thereby insinuate, that the ciuill Magistrate may not intermedle with the office of the Senior, that is, with ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, for he taketh Seniors to be the officers appointed by God for that purpose: which is to be reaue the ciuill Magistrate of his authoritie, and to giue that to Seniors whiche the Pope vnder the like pretence doth arrogate vnto himselfe. And therefore w
                              〈1 line〉
                           ll and truly sayth M. Gualter in the place before recited. Those men (meaning suche asGualter. call for Seniors when they haue a Christian Magistrate) do distinguish betweene the Ecclesiasticall and ciuill iurisdiction in respect of the punishmente of sinnes, and the discipline of manners. But this distinction is taken out of the Popes shoppe, and in the holy scriptures it is no where to be found. For there is the same reason of the magistrate in the new Testament, that was in times past in the old, for so much as Christ hathe sayde that he came not to breake the law, but to fulfill it: But in times past the Iudges and kings, had power to punish those that offended, neyther did the priestes or prophets thrust themselues into that busines, but so farre foorth as perteyned to admonitions and reprehensions, which they applyed out of the word of God according to the qualitie of the offences: Therefore the same must be obserued in the new Testament, neyther is it needefull that the ministers of the word should haue a peculiar senate, or that they should chalenge vnto themselues by any meanes those things that belong to the ciuil Magistrate. M. Gualters meaning is, that the ministers of the word cannot chalenge the authoritie of pu
                              〈1 line〉
                           shing vice (otherwise than by admonitions and reprehensions, that is, that they cannot chalenge this kinde of gouernment of a Seigniorie) by the word of God, bycause all such authoritie is committed to the ciuill Magistrate: So that if Byshops haue it, they must haue it from him, as it is in this Churche of England. And therfore wel sayth M Gualter in the same place: there may be appoynted such as shall haue the correction of manners in such countries where the ordinarie magistrates cannot do all themselues, but those must be appoynted by the magistrate, and do all at his commaundement: and not vsurp any distinct Iurisdiction from the ordinarie magistrate.
                        
                        The second poynte to be noted is, when he sayth that Christian princes must subiecteThe prince made subiect to Seniors by the Replyer. themselues to the Churche, submitte their scepters, throw downe their crownes before the Churche. &c. the whiche kind of speach, the Pope himselfe vseth, and vnder the same pretence hath troden kings vnder his féete. And although T. C. seeme to mislike this

excessiue vsing of authoritie by the Pope, yet woulde be haue the same iurisdiction to remaine to his Seniors s
                              〈1 line〉
                           il, whome be vnderstādeth by the name of the Church, as appeareth in that which he spake before of these words of Christ Dic Ecclesiae: soPag. 140. in the latter end. that he woulde haue the Prince, subiect hir selfe to the Seniors of the Churche, and throw downe hir crowne before them, that is, to be con
                              〈1 line〉
                           ent to be ruled and gouerned, to be punished and corrected, to be excommunicated and absolued by their discretion, and at their pleasure. This no doubt is his meaning, neyther can it otherwise be: for if this kind of gouernment be once admitted, the Prince must néedes be of some peculiar Church and congregation, and therefore subiect to the Seigniorie of that Churche, except it please master Pastor (who is the chéefe) and the rest of hys neighbours the parishioners, to elect the Prince into the Seigniorie, and make hym one of them: and yet must the Pastor be his superior, and haue authoritie to cal him to consultations, and to direct him in matters of discipline, and whether he will or no he must be ordered and ruled by the Pastor and most part of the Seniors. And yet now I remember my selfe, the Prince cannot be of the Seigniorie, for T. C. al
                              〈1 line〉
                           ttlePa. 146. sect. 1. after graūteth that his Seniors be no lay men but Ecclesiastic
                              〈1 line〉
                           ll: so that indeede the Prince must be a seruant no master a subiect no Prince, vnder gouernment no gouernoure in matters perteyning to the Church.
                        And least any man should thinke that this is but my collection, (though it be mostGualter. true, and I will iustify it so to be) I haue she wed before that whiche M. Gualter affirmeth vpon the. 1. Cor. 5. as he also doth vpon the. 12. Chapter of the same Epistle saying, there be some which according to the example of the old and primitiue Church wold haue Seniors, and an Ecclesiasticall senate, that should haue authoritie ouer magistrates, if they at any time do not their duty. And in deede this is one of the chiefe causes why our men would so gladly haue a Seigniorie: for they would gladly be in hand with magistrates to make them stoupe and bow downe vnto them.
                        The third point is in this, that he would haue, the gouernment of the common wealthThe Replyer seeketh the 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              uerthrow of monarchtes. and the common wealth it selfe, framed to the Churche, and the gouernmente thereof, as the hangings are made fit for the house, whereby as it may seeme he would haue all monarchies ouerthrowen and reduced eyther to a popular or an Aristocraticall estate: for these two kinds of gouernment he only alloweth of, in the Church, as it appeareth by that which he hath thereof oltener than once or twise spoken before.
                        Now the lawes of man will beare this, I knowe not, but I am well assured theChrist & the Gospell 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              o enin
                                 〈1 line〉
                              les so 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . law of God will not suffer it. For Christe came not to ouerthrow kinds of gouernment, and ciuill policie, neyther doth the Gospell dissolue kingdomes, for S. Peter sayth. 1. Epist. 2. 
                              Proinde subditiestote cuiuis ordinationi 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 umanae propter dominum, siue Reg 1.
                              1. Pet. 2. 
                              &c. Submit yourselues vnto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be vnto the king, as to the superior. And so Paule. 1. Tim. 2. to the exhorte him to pray for1. Timo. 2. kings, which he would not haue done if the state of a kingdome could not agrée with the state of the Church.
                        But I will not amplify this matter. Let such consider of it, to whome it doth specially perteine. This is your reason to proue that the gouernmente of the common wealth, ought to be framed according to the gouernmente of the Churche: bycause there was a Church before there was a common wealth: but I denie the argumente: and your similitude (of house and hangings) dothe not proue it. All the Examples in the Scripture of common wealthes, being also the Churches of God, declare the contrary, neyther can you she we any state altered in thys manner, but only among the Anabaptists.
                        Of like weyghtis your other reasō, which is this: Good men, that is the Church, are as it were the foundation of the worlde, the common wealth is builded vpon that foundation, therefore the gouernmente of the common wealth must be framed according to the gouernmente of the Churche. This gere is to subtile for euery body to vnderstand: but the argumente is without all fashion, and it is neyther true in matter nor forme. For how pr
                              〈1 line〉
                           e y
                              〈1 line〉
                           u

that good menne are the foundation of the worlde? The fyrste menne were gréeuous transgressoures, the moste of them. The euyll menne in multitude and worldely prosperitie, haue from tyme to tyme in the worlde ouergrowen them. Moreouer, the Churche visible conteyneth bothe good and badde: and so doth the common wealth, and therefore it can not be sayde to be buylded of good menne more than of euill men. To conclude, if all this were true, yet dothe not the argumente followe. For the foundation giueth strength, but it giueth not the whole forme or fashion to that whyche is buylded vppon it. For a man maye make alterations in his house, though he doe not once moue or stirre the foundation. And surely howesoeuer you will dallie off these Collections vppon your manyfest wordes, similitudes, and reasons, with some deuised interpretation and shifte (for it will stande you in hande so to doe) yet what occasion you haue giuen therby to the common people, and other that be contentious, to mislyke of this present state and gouernmente, wyse men can consider. And to tell you playne, excepte you haue some mysticall sense in them, (whiche I can not conceiue) I sée not howe they can stande with your alleagiance. I speake of the wordes as you haue vttered them: I wil not enter into the depth of your meaning: And I will hope the best vntil I vnderstand further of your mynde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 133. Lin. 1.
                     Neyther is there any authoritie in the whole Bible, that enforceth or prescribeth that kinde of gouernment as necessarie or conuenient for all tymes: no more than there is to proue that in the Churche there must be always such as haue power to work miracles, or that haue the gift of healing and such like: whiche offices notwithstanding are mentioned as well as gouernours in the first to the Cor. 12.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 144. Sect. vlt.
                     Nowe to come agayn to M. Doctors reasons, he sayeth in the. 133. page, that if they vrge gouernors bicause they are spoken of in the. 1
                           〈1 line〉
                        . to the Cor. then they may aswell vrge the power 
                           〈1 line〉
                        o work miracles, the gift of healing. &c. for that they are likewise reckned vp in the same place. But doth not M. Doccor know, that although some things be extraordinarie, and for a time, yet other some things are ordinarie and to endure always? wil he say for that the gifts of miracles and of healing are extraordinarie, therfore the teachers which are there reckned together with the gifte of working miracles and of healing are extraordinarie? hath he forgotten that he (in deed vntruly) made before the office of Apostles & prophetes and euangelistes, a perpetual office, and yet they are there ioyned with these gifts which were but for a time, and therfore it is a very absurd argument to say, that for that some thing reckened with gouernours, is for a tyme, and extraordinarie, therfore the gouernours also be so.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And howe proue you, that the office of Seniors is more ordinarie, or of longer continuance than the office of Apostles, Prophetes, the power of working miracles, and of healing, which be in that place recited as well as those gouernours be, whome you call Seniors? You ought to haue proued the office of Seniors to be perpetuall: for that I denye and shewe my reason, that it can not be proued out of that place bycause other offices mentioned in that place to the Corinthians be temporall. But this béeing moste materiall, you passe it ouer, bycause you are not able to proue it. I hane tolde you before in what sense there may be both Apostles, Prophets, and Euangelistes. And if I can not necessarily conclude, yt the office of Seniors is temporal, bicause it is rehersed among those offices & gifts yt be tēporal, much lesse can you cōclude

that it is perpetuall, the moste of the offices and giftes with it expressed, béeing temporall.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 133. Lin. 9.
                     Well sayth Musculus in his common places, 
                           tit. de Magist. Si reuocas temporum illorum mores, primùm conditiones & statum quo
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               illorum reuoca. If thou vvilte vse the maners of that time, first cal agayne the condition and state of that time: That is, let vs be without christian Magistrates, as they were: let vs be vnder Tyrants and persecutors as they were. &c.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 145. Lin. 11.
                     As for Musculus authoritie, which is, that the times doe chaunge the orders, besides that I haue answered before, & besides that he doth not speake it of the Elders, I haue proued that it can haue no place heere, for somuch as the Elders are necessarie, and commaunded in the scripture.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Musculus in that place speaketh of the gouernment of the Church, and of the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate in matters ecclesiasticall: And proueth that the gouernment of the Church may not be now, as it was in the Apostles time.
                        And a little before speaking of the Seigniorie, he affirmeth as much, as it appeareth in his words before recited. You haue not as yet proued, eyther the office of Seniors nowe to be necessarie, or the same to be commaunded in the Scripture.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 20. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 133. in the midst.
                     You say it is more easie for the wicked by bribing to peruert and corrupt one man, than to peruert and ouerthrowe the fayth and pietie of a zelous and godly companie: and therefore better the gouernment of the Churche to be committed to many, than to one. If thisRetortion 
                              〈◊〉
                            absurdi
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ▪
                         reason be good, then the more there be that rule, the better is the gouernment, and so popularis status erit optimus reipublicae status: agaynst all both diuinitie and Philosophie: for we see that God him selfe in his common weale of Israell, did alwayes allowe the gouernment and superioritie of one ouer the rest, bothe in the time of Iudges, and after in the time of the Kings. And in the newe Testament we may also see that kind of gouernment most allowed of. 1. Pet. 2. But I will not heere reason with you in this matter, and call that into question, which hath bin by so many learned men determined, and by the examples of all good common weales confirmed.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 145. Sect. 1.
                     Unto the Authors of ye Admonition, saying yt it is easier to ouerthrow by bribing one mā, than the fayth & pietie of a godly companie, he answereth, that so it should come to passe, that the moe yt ruled the better estate it should be, and so the popular estate should be the best. But where do the authors of the Admonition say, that the more that rule, the better it is? Is it all one to saye, that the gouernment of a fewe of the best is better than the gouernment of one, and to saye, the more that rule the better? If it were to the purpose, it might be shewed bothe by Diuinitie and by Philosophie, which M. Doctor speaketh of, that that estate which he meaneth is not the best, and I haue in a

worde before spoken of, where I declared that the mixed estate is best, bothe by the example of the kingdome of Christ, and also of this our realme.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        But if this be a g
                              〈1 line〉
                           od reason agaynst the rule and gouernment of one, that the Admonition vseth, then the moe that rule the better it is, and this is all that I charge thē with. Whervnto you answere not one worde, but dally off the matter, by asking where do the authors of the Admonition say, that the moe that rule the better it is. I might dally with you in like maner, & say: where doth any man charge them with so saying? yet doth the same necessarily follow vpō their reason. They say not, the gouernment of a fewe of the best, but of a companie: which signifieth many: and why should not this argument be good? if the gouernment of a fewe godly men be better than the gouernment of one, bicause one is easier ouerthrowne by bribing than moe, then is also the gouernment of many godly men, better than the gouernment of a few, bicause a few may sooner be corrupted than many: and consequently by the same reason, the moe that gouerne the better. This reason you haue glaunced by, and not touched: and yet it enforceth a manyfest absurditie, agaynst the Authors of the Admonition. For it is too absurde to saye that a Popular estate is the best state: neyther will any affirme it, but those which woulde be Popular.
                        You are neuer able to shew eyther by Diuinitie or Philosophie, that there are moeThere are no more lawfull kinds of gouernmēt than three. lawfull kindes of gouernment than thrée: that is, Democraticall, Aristocratical, and Monarchicall, and of these, bothe the Scripture and Philosophie alloweth of the Monarchie, as simply the best.
                        The gouernment of this kingdome is a right and true Monarchie. Neither do youThe gouernment of thys realme a true Monarchie. know what a Monarchie is, when you call it a mixt estate: for that is called a Monarchie, where the chiefe care and gouernment of the common wealth is committed to one, as it is in this kingdome in euery respect.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 21. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 145. Sect. 1.
                     It is sufficient nowe to admonish you, that although it be graunted that the gouernment of 
                           〈◊〉
                         be the best in the common wealth, yet it can not be in the Church: for the Prince may wel be Monarche immediatly betweene God and the common wealth, but no man can be Monarch betweene God and his Church but Christ, which is the onely head thereof. Therfore the Monarchie ouer the whole Church and ouer euery particular Churche, and ouer euery singular member in the Church, is in Christ alone.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you meane of the vniversall Churche, onely Christ is the head, neyther hath heChrist the only head of hys vniuersall church. any Uicegerent to supply that vniuersall care ouer the whole Churche. But if you speake of particular Churches, as the Churche of Englande, the Churche of Denmarke. &c. then as the Prince is chiefe gouernour and head of the common wealtheThe Prince head of a particular church vnder God, so is he of the Churche likewise. For it is certayne that the christian Magistrate vnder Christ, hath as great authoritie, as the Magistrate had vnder ye law: But then the ciuill Magistrates had chiefe authoritie bothe in matters of the common wealth, and of the Churche also (as héereafter it shall more playnely appeare) therefore the Magistrate ought to haue the same nowe in like maner. T. C. doth butT. C. glaunceth at the magistrate. glaunce at the Magistrate, bicause he dare not speake playnly: but suche licentious spéeches (thoughe voyde of all reason and grounde) may peraduenture sinke déeper into the heart of the subiects, especially of the Papist (who hathe already conceyued the same opinion of the ciuill Magistrate) than will be rooted out in shorte time: so carefull are these men in procuring to the Prince due obedience, and so faythfull are they in maynteyning hir authoritie, according to their othe and duetie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 22. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 114. Sect. 2. &. Pag. 132. Sect. 3.
                     Both the names & offices of Seniors were extinguished before Ambrose tyme, as he himselfe dothe testifie, writing vpon the fifth of the fyrst to Timothie.
                     In deede as Ambrose sayth, writing vpon the fyfth of the fyrst to Timothie, The Synagogue, and after, the Church had Seniors, vvithout vvhose counsell nothing vvas done in the Churche, but that was before hys time, and before there was any christian Magistrates, or any Churche established.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 145. Sect. 2.
                     Last of al Vntrue, for it is not alleaged for that 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         to proue that there ought to be no Seniors in the church vnder a christian Prince, he citeth Ambrose authoritie both in the. 114. and. 132. pages, which sayth that the Synagogue or Church of the Iewes, and after that the Church of the Christians had Seniors, without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church: whervpon he concludeth, that for as much as they were not in Ambrose time, therefore they were not vnder a christian Prince.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is most vntrue. I alleage not Ambrose in eyther of those places to proue that Seniors ought not to be vnder a christian Prince, as the Reader may vnderstande euidently by my words. Only I confesse that there was Seniors, and I alleage Ambrose partly for that purpose, partly to shewe that both their names and offices were extinguished before his time: no man liuing can gather any other sense out of my words. Wherfore that conclusion vpon Ambrose wordes is yours, it is not myne: and I am sory that malice hath throwne you so déepe into ye pit of vntruth, that you can not be gotten out of it. No cloake or shadow can couer this deformitie of yours.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 23. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 145. Sect. 2.
                     And heere M. Doctor hathe in one sentence proclaymed bothe his great ignorance in the whole storie of the Church, and withall cyther a maruelous abusion, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         him selfe to be mislead by some vnaduised, prompter, or subtile foxe, that thought to deceyue him, or else a notable cuill conscience, whych wrastleth agaynst the truthe. His ignorance dothe appeare, partly in that he sayththat bicause there were no Seniors in Ambrose Church, and in those Churches about him, therefore there was none at all: but most manifestly in that he sayth, for so muche as there were no Seniors in Ambrose time, therfore there was none vnder a christian Prince, as though there were not many yeres before Ambrose time christian Emperours, when as betweene the time of S. Ambrose beeing Bishop, & the time of Philip, the sonne of Gordias the first christian Emperour, there is more than. 150. yeres, and betwene the time of Constantine the Emperour, and the time of Ambrose beeing Bishop, there be aboue. 80. yeres. And if M. Doctor had euer read the Ecclesiasticall stories, he mought haue An vntruthe, else name your stories. found easily the Eldership moste florishing in Constantines time, and other times, when as the peace of the Christians was greatest.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Except it were to set fóorth your owne knowledge, & to leaue a publike testimonie of your great humilitie and modestie, you would not so immodestly accuse M. Doctor of ignorance, though you had cōuinced him of it, as you neyther haue done, nor are able to do
                              〈1 line〉
                           , in that that he professeth. Likewise except your selfe vsed prompters, & patched your booke with other mēs collectiōs, you wold neuer so oftē charge me with ye same.
                        I did not say, as I told you before, that bicause there was no Seniors in Ambrose time, therfore there was none vnder a christiā Prince, but this I say, that ye Seniors which Ambrose speaketh of, were extinguished before Ambrose time, and were not in the time of christian Princes.
                        To what purpose do you accoūt y• time betwixt Philip & Ambrose, or Cōstantine and Ambrose? you should rather proue that this kind of gouernment by Seniors was in Philips dominiō, if he were christened (which may be doubted) or vnder Constantinus.
                        
                        
                           You say, if I had euer read the ecclesiasticall stories, I myght haue found easily the Eldership most florishing in Constantinus time, and other times, when as the peace of the Christians was greatest. You haue read the Ecclesiasticall stories, how chaunce that you shew it not. It is your parte to proue: you holde the affirmatiue. Bring foorth one Ecclesiastical historie that affirmeth this kind of gouernment to haue bin vnder Constantinus. You might at the least haue quoted the Author (with the booke and chapter) that so sayth, though you had disdayned to set downe his wordes. I denie not but it might be so in some time, and in some place vnder a christian Prince (and yet I know not how you will be able to proue it) but that is not the question. For our contention is, whether this kind of gouernment ought of necessitie to be vnder a christian Prince, or not, and whether it be conuenient so to be, though it be not necessarie, and not whether it hathe bin (which notwithstanding can not be proued) or may be.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 24. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 145. Sect. 3.
                     And that the Presbyterie or Eldership endured in the Church after Ambrose time, and in the time of peace, and as it is very like in Ambrose time, although not where he was, it may be shewed4. Tom. 2. lib. in Isaiā. playnly by Hierome (which followed Ambrose immediatly) who in his third chapter vpon I sayIt is in the. 5. tom. not in the. 4 sayth, that they had also the Presbyterie or Eldership in the churche.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Ierome speaketh not one word of your Presbyterie, his words be these: 
                              Et nos habemus
                              Hier. 2. lib. in Isaiam. 
                              in ecclesia senatū nostrū, coetū presbyterorū: And we haue in the Church our Senate, a company of Elders. Which he meaneth of Priests, and of Colledges of Cathedrall Churches, that were then in euery citie, and not of a Seigniorie in euery congregation, wherbyWhat Presbyterie Ierō meaneth. euery seuerall parish was gouerned. That this was Ieromes meaning, it appeareth in the same place vpō these words, Hariolum & senem, where he interpreteth the word Presbyter, sayth they be suche as S. Paule describeth in his Epistle to Tim. and those be ministers of the word and sacraments. So may we say that we haue senatum & coetum presbyterorum in this Church of England, whether you will meane it of Synodes and conuocations, or of Cathedrall & Collegiate Churches, which consist 
                              ex coetu presbyterorū: of a companie of ministers. And therfore Duarenus a learned writer speakingDuarenus. of this Seigniorie, sayth thus: And it is to be noted that there was a certayne Colledge of those Elders (he meaneth Priests, as it is euidēt in that which goeth before) in euery citie, ouer whom the Bishop had rule, suche as is at this day the Colledge of Canons, which seeme to haue succeeded into their place. And this company of Priests dothe Ierome call the senate of the Church.
                        
                        This Senate cōsisteth of Priests: yours of mē in no degrée of the ministerie: ThisDifferēce betwixte Ieroms presbyterie▪ and that the Replyer would establishe. Senate was only in euery citie, & the Bishop was the chiefe, yours must be in euery parish, & directed by ye Pastor. We reade not of any such iurisdiction that this Senate had ouer any, but ouer the Cleargie, yours must haue authoritie both ouer cleargie and laytie: wherfore this place of Ierome doth not helpe you one whit. But be it that this Seigniorie was ye same that you meane of, and that it was in Ieromes church, yet for as much as it was not in Ambrose his church also, it manifestly appeareth to be a thing indifferent, and not of necessitie to be vrged.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 25. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 145. Sect. vlt.
                     The same might be shewed by diuers other testimonies, which I omit, bicause that it may appeare by the former treatise touching the election of the minister, that this order of Eldership continued in the Church diuers hundred yeres after Ambrose tyme, euen as long almost as there was any sounde parte of the churche, from the head to the heele.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        But séeing that you haue hitherto brought foorth so few testimonies, scil. one only, and that to smal purpose, it had bin wel if you had not passed the rest ouer so lightly.

For it is soone sayde, that diuers other testimonies might haue bin shewed: but it had bin much for your credite if you had recited but one 
                              〈◊〉
                           , that we might at the least haue had two witnesses, but in déede you are not able. In your treatise of the election of ministers no such thing appeareth, except you will haue whole parishes of the Seigniorie, and the same to be without a Pastor, who should be the guide. For parishes do not vsually choose their Pastor vntill they be destitute. Neyther is there any mention made by you, or proofe in that treatise, that there was a Seigniorie in euery parishe, to whome the election was committed, and therefore you doe but speake this, pro forma tantùm.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 26. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 145. Sect. vlt.
                     Nowe I haue shewed the ignorance, it remayneth to shew how that eyther M. Doctor was maruellously himself abused, or else desireth to abuse ether. For if where as he tooke halfe Ambrose sentence, he had taken the other halfe with him, and had not sodenly stopped his breath, that he shuld speake no more, in stead of a false witnesse agaynst the Eldership, he should haue brought foorth as cleare and as 
                           〈1 line〉
                        lat a witnesse for the proofe of them, as a man could desire out of an auncient writer. The whole sentence is thys speaking of this office of Elders (although not vpon so good occasion)Ambrose vpon. 1. Ti. cap. 5. thus he sayth: Whervpon the Synagogue, and after the Churche had Elders, without whose councell nothing was done in the Churche, which Elders I know not by what negligence they are worne out, onlesse it be through the slouthfulnesse of the Doctors, or rather through their pride, whylest they onely would seeme to be somewhat.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        But if you be not able to alleage one place to proue that your seigniorie was in the time of christian Princes, except onely that place of Hieronie, M. Doctors ignorance is not so great, especially séeing that Ambrose, Hieronis auncient denieth the same to haue bin in his tyme. But if hauing one onely testimonie, and that making nothing for your purpose, but agaynst you rather (bicause it establisheth Collegiate Churches, which you would gladly throwe downe) then M. Doctors knowledge in thys matter, is more than you can with all your loftie spéeches & immodest words obscure.
                        I haue alleaged so muche of Ambrose faythfully aud truely, as proueth that which I alleage him for: Neyther haue I left out one worde that maketh agaynst that my purpose: for if you remember your selfe, you can not but sée and vnderstande that I only alleage Ambrose to proue, that there was sometime a Seigniorie, but yet dissolued and abrogated before his time. If that whiche followeth in Ambrose disproue this, then in déede you may say, that eyther I am abused, or desire to abuse other. But if it nothing derogate from my intent and purpose, then why do you falsly charge me, or why picke you a quarel agaynst me for omitting that which neyther doth me harme nor good. Disproue any thing by any words of Ambrose that I haue alleaged Ambrose for, if you can: if you can not, then temper your immoderate spéeches, & frame them according to the truthe.
                        If Ambrose so misliked ye abrogating of this Seigniorie, why did he not labour to restore it agayne: surely if it had bin a matter so necessarie, he béeing so godly and zelous a Bishop, would neuer haue suffered his Church to be spoyled of it, but it is euident by his words that it had not bin in practise long time before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 27. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 146. Sect. 1.
                     Now that I haue shewed the place, I will say no more, I will leaue it to M. Doctor to think of it in his chamber by himselfe, and so will conclude this question: that for so much as this order is such, as without which the principall offices of charitie can not be exercised, and that whyche is commaunded by the scriptures, approued and receyued by all the Churches in the Apostles tymes, and many hundred yeres after in the most florishing churches, both in time of peace, and in time of persecution, and that there are greater causes why it shoulde be in the time of peace, than in tyme of persecution, why rather vnder a christian prince, than vnder a tyrant, why rather nowe, than in the Apostles tymes, that in consideration of these things the Eldership is necessarie, and suche an order as the Churche ought not be without.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It forceth not greatly whether you say any more of it, or no: for as it nothing hindreth my purpose, so winneth it no credite vnto yours. And for asmuch as the Church may muche better be gouerned, and the principall offices of charitie much better exercised, by the ciuil Magistrate, than by these Seniors: and séeing that this kinde of gouernment is neyther commaunded in the scriptures, nor practised in the Church as a kinde of gouernment not to be altered, séeing also that it bringeth in confusion, derogateth from that authoritie that God hath giuen to the ciuil Magistrate, howsoeuer it hath héeretofore bin vsed, yet is there no cause, why it should nowe, or at any tyme vnder Christian Princes, be of necessitie reteyned.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 28. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 146. Sect. 1.
                     And so also is answered the thirde question, that for so muche as they were Churche officers(a) The place Heb. 13. is quoted only for the phrase, for it pro ueth nothing in question. and ouer the people in matters perteyning to God, and such as watched ouer the soules of men(a) Heb. 13. that therfore although they were not Pastors to preache the word, yet were they no lay men (as they terme them) but ecclesiasticall persons.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        M. Beza in an Epistle, that is prefixed before the confession of the Churches inBeza. Hel
                              〈1 line〉
                           tia, speaking of the Seigniorie, sayth, that there must be a great consideration had, that Princes and noble men, and suche as haue authoritie and preheminence in the Churche, be chosen to be of the Seigniorie: and will you make noble men and Princes ecclesiasticall persons, and suche as must watche ouer the soules of men? in déede those that be called Presbyteri, in the Scriptures be Ecclesiasticall persons, for they be ministers of the worde and Sacraments. And M. Caluine Institut. cap. 8. sect. 52.
                           Caluine. sayth, that all the Seniors were ministers of the worde. His words be these: 
                              Habebant ergo singulae Ciuitates Presbyterorū collegium, qui pastores erant & Doctores: nam & apud populū munus docendi, exhortandi & corrigendi, quod Paulus Episcopis iniungit, OMNES obibant: for euery Citie had a Colledge of Seniors, which were Pastors and teachers: for they dyd all exercise among the people, the offyce of teaching, exhorting, and correcting, which Paule dothe inioyne to Bishops. But howe can you make your Seniors ecclesiasticall, séeing your Seigniorie must consist of noble men, gentlemen, marchauntmen, husbandmen, handycraftesmen, as Taylors, Shomakers, Carpenters. &c. euen suche as the most part of the Parish will choose?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 29. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Then the sentence was tempred according 1. Ti. 1. 20. to the notoriousnesse of the fact. Nowe on the one 
                           〈◊〉
                         eyther hatred agaynst some persons carrieth men headlong into rash and cruell iudgement: or else fauour, affection or money mitigateth the rigour of the same, and all this commeth to passe bicause the regiment lefte of Christ Mat. 18. 7. 1. Co. 12. 28 Rom. 12. 8. 1. Ti. 5. 17. Act. 15. 2. 4 6. 22. 23. to his Churche, is committed into one mans hands, whome alone it shall be more easie for the wicked by bribing to peruert, than to ouerthrow the fayth & pietie of a zelous and godly companie, for suche maner of men in deede Exod. 18. 21 Deut. 1. 13. should the Seniors be.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 130. Sect. vlt. & Pag. 131. 132. & Pag. 133. Lin. vlt. & Pag. 134. Sect. 1.
                        You say, all this commeth to passe bicause the regiment left of Christ to his Church, is committed vnto one mans hands: and for the proofe of this, you note in the margent the. 18. of Mat. the. 12. of the first to the Corin. the. 12. to the Rom. the. 5. of the first to Timoth. the. 15. of the Acts, whiche places beeing examined, let the discrete Reader iudge howe aptly they serue for your purpose.
                        
                           In the. 18. of Math. Christ sayeth on this sort: If thy brother trespasse agaynst thee, go and tell him his fault betvveene him and thee alone, &c. In the which place it is by the consent of all interpreters manifest, that Christe prescribeth a rule of correcting priuate and secrete sinnes, and not of suche as be open and knowne to others. For he would not haue pryuate and secrete sinnes blased abroad & publikely reprehended, before the partie offending be in this order first priuately admonished: this maketh nothing for your purpose, it taketh away authoritie of iudging and condemning from priuate men, and not from publike magistrates.
                        In the. 12. of the first to the Corinth. verse. 28. these be the words of the Apostle: And God hath ordeyned some in the Churche: as first Apostles, secondly Prophetes, thirdly teachers, then them that do miracles, after that the gifte of healing, helpers, gouernours, diuersitie of tounges. How can you gather of these wordes, that all this commeth to passe (that is, hatred, fauour, corruption by money, and affection in iudgement) bycause the regiment lefte of Christe to his Churche, is committed to one mans hands? In these wordes the Apostle declareth that Christ hath lefte in his Churche gouernours, and thereof you may well conclude, that in the Churche there muste be some whiche shoulde haue authoritie ouer the reste. The Apostle dothe not hereAn vnperfect reason. say that in euery particular congregation Christ hath left many gouernours, no more than he sayeth that he hath left many pastors for one flocke: but in his Churche he hath ordeyned gouernours.
                        The gouernement of the whole vniuersall Churche, is not by Christe committed to one Bishop, or one Prince, nor the gouernment of the whole worlde, to one Emperour: for no one man can discharge such a cure, and therefore he hath appoynted in his Churche diuers Bishops, diuers Princes, many gouernours. But one Prince may suffise to gouerne one kingdome, and one Archbishop one Prouince, as chiefe and principall ouer the reste, one Byshop one Diocesse, one Pastor one parishe, neyther doth the Apostle speake any thing to the contrarie.
                        In the. 12. to the Romaines it is thus written: he that ruleth vvith diligence. What maketh this for your purpose, or how cā you wring it to your assertion?
                        In the. 5. of the. 1. to Timothie. The Elders that rule vvell are vvorthy of double honour. &c. Paule sheweth in these wordes that suche are worthy theyr stipende & reward, which rule well in the Church, and do their duties diligently: But what is that to your assertion?
                        The places alledged out of the fiftenth of the Actes, be of the like sorte. Wheresoeuer mention is made in the Scriptures of gouernoursLacke of discretion in al
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              ging of scriptures. or Elders, that you alledge to improue the gouernment of one man, wherein you shewe a great wante of iudgement. And yet there is no one person in this Realme (the Prince only excepted) which hath such absolute iurisdiction, as you would make your disciples beleue. But your meaning is, that Christe lefte the whole gouernment of his Churche to the Pastor, and to some foure of fiue of

the Parish besides, which you are not able to proue; & your places of scripture alleged signifie no such matter. In those places yt be gouerned by many, do you not see what cōtention there is? what enimitie? what factiōs? what partes taking? what cōfusion? what little good order obserued? what carelesnesse & dissolutnesse in al māner of behauiour? I could make this manifest by examples, if I were disposed.
                        In the. 18. of Exodus, which (place you quote to proue that Seniors ought to be zelous and godly) Iethro giueth Moses counsell not to weary himselfe in hearing all matters that be brought vnto him, but rather to commit the hearing and determining of smaller matters to others: And therefore verse. 21. he sayeth: Prouide thou among all the people, men of courage, fearing God, men dealyng truly, hauing couetousnesse, and appoynt suche ouer them to be rulers ouer thousands, rulers ouer hundredes, rulers ouer fifties, and rulers ouer tennes. &c. This maketh nothing for Seniors: Moses here was chiefe, these were but his vnder officers placed by himselfe. This place serueth well for the gouernment of one Prince ouer one whole realme, and giueth him good counsell what vnder officers he ought to choose. To the same effect and purpose is that spoken and written whiche you cite out of the first of Deuteron. verse. 13.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 146. Sect. 1.
                     The rest comprehended in these sections, is answered before, beyng matter whiche perteyned vnto the Archbishop.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Uery litle of it perteyneth to the Archbishop. The Authors of y• Admonitiō bring in all these places of Scripture, to proue the gouernment of your Seniors, but how aptly it app
                              〈1 line〉
                           areth, in that you cannot salue their follies in so vnapt allegatiōs. There be other thinges that require answere, but you haue shifted of all in saying, that they perteyne to the Archbishop & be answered before: when as neyther of both is true: for they perteyne to your Seniors and be no where as yet answered. But I leaue it to the Reader here to consider, why you haue not set downe my booke in your Replie.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The inconuenience of the Seigniorie in the tyme of Christian Princes, especially in the state of this Church. Chap. 3.
               Nowe that you haue spoken all that you can for your Seniors, giue me leaue a litle to declare the absurdities and inconueniences that must of necessitie follow, that kinde of gouernment.1. Difference & disagrement in orders and religion.
               
               First, euery seuerall parish must be as it were a seuerall Church, gouerned by seuerall orders, & ceremonies, yea and peraduenture professe seueral points of doctrine: for there muste be equalitie among ministers, and one of them muste not haue to do with anothers parishe. The whole gouernment of the Parish must remayne in the minister and certayne Seniors, who shall haue authoritie to correct vice, abolishe ceremonies, appoynt orders, abregate customes, make Ecclesiasticall lawes, as they shall thinke good for that congregation. So that whatsoeuer the Pastor and his Seniors deuise and agrée vpon, be it good or euill, common or singular, it must be obeyed vnder the payne of Excommunication.
               Secōdly, that Seigniorie being choosen by the Pastor & the parish, if the Prince or2. Confusion of 
                        〈◊〉
                     . any other noble man be of that congregation & choosen to that office by the most parte, he must not refuse it, but attende vpō it, be at M. Pastors calling who is the chiefe of the Seigniorie, & in that respect aboue Earle, Duke, Ring, or whosoeuer: moreouer

he must be contented to be lincked & ioyned in commission, with the basest sort of the people, if it please the parish to appoynt to him suche Colleags, as it is like they will: Yea and if they be in matters of discipline and gouernment by such simple Seniors ouerruled, (as it is most like they shall) they must therewith be contented.
               Thirdly, it burdeneth the parish more than they are able to beare, for wheras now3. Burden and charge of parishes. they repine at the finding of their Pastors, then they muste be enforced besides the Pastor to nourish Deacons, and sixe or seuen Seniors with widowes also.
               Fourthly, it bringeth in a new Popedome, & tyrānie into the Church, for it giueth4. Tyranny. to the Pastor & his fellow Seniors authoritie to exercise discipline, by Excōmunication, or otherwise against Prince, Nobles, & whosoeuer being of that congregation. So that vnlesse the Prince and Nobles be (as it were) at theyr becke, and ready at al times to accomplish their desire, they will sende out their thunderboltes of Excommunication agaynst them, euen as the Pope was wonte to do, after he had gotten that Iurisdiction into his hande that this Seigniorie claymeth.
               
                  Fifthly, it smelleth of Anabaptisme, as M. Gualter noteth. 1. Cor. 11 in these words,5. It smelleth of Anabaptisme▪ 
                     Gualter.
                   The Donatists of our tyme ought to consider these things more diligently, which do ouer rashly condemne whole cities and countries wherein the worde of God is preached▪ Sacraments rightly administred, publike prayer celebrated, the poore sufficiently prouided for, and finally where vice is by good and holy lawes forbidden and punished. All these thinges they esteeme as nothing, except there be a certayn new Magistracie appointed, which shuld haue authoritie ouer Princes also, not only to reproue, but also to excommunicate them.
               It taketh from the Prince al authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matters, & it giueth vnto6. Spoyling the Prince of hi
                        〈1 line〉
                      authoritie in cases Ecclesiasticall. him onely potestatem facti, not Iuris, as the Papists do: for the Prince must maintaine & sée executed, such lawes, orders, & ceremonies, as ye Pastor with his Seniors make and decrée: But in making and appointing orders & ceremonies, he may in no case meddle, as will hereafter more plainely appeare.7. Subuersion of the state & gouernment of the common wealth.
               
               It transformeth the state and gouernment of the cōmon wealth into a méere popularitie, for they say in their second Admonition Pag. 55. that some muste be gouerned by all, & not all by some, whervnto if that be ioyned which T. C. so oftē repeateth, that is, the gouernment of the common wealth muste be framed to the gouernment of the churche, as the hanginges to the house, it may be easily coniectured what they shoote at.Second Admonition. Pag. 144.
               
               The deciding of matters in cōtrouersie, by this Seigniorie, will be a great occasiō of partiall & affectionate dealing: of contention and discorde, while some shall incline one way, and some another. For it cannot be vnknowne, that there are many lightheaded8. Contention & parcialitic. and vnconstant ministers, & that the common sorte of people are not muche better affected, so that alteratiōs in doctrine, parciall dealing in discipline, vndiscrete exhortations, and admonitions, would trouble the whole Church, & set all the lande togither by the eares.
               
                  How contēptible in the end this kinde of gouernment would be, & how litle estéemed,9. It will in the end be contē
                        ned, & so good order neglected. wise men can consider. And M. Gualter well setteth out this inconuenience in these wordes: For they which cānot be brought into good order by the authoritie of a lawfull magistrate, & by lawes, much lesse will suffer thēselues to be punished, by the cōmaūdement of Seniors, and of an Ecclesiasticall senate, whom with all their solemnitie they willGualter in. 
                        〈1 line〉
                     . Cor. 5. laugh to scorne. On the other side, they which among the magistrates were remisse in executing the discipline of māners, and were too fauourable, will now be glad that this burden is transferred from them to others, and will wholy neglect it. And what will the Seniors do, when these men will not meddle? surely they wilbe a laughing stocke to a great many:
               
                  
                     Whyles Hares will prescribe to Lions a lawe,
                  
                  
                     And weaklinges would keepe fierce tyrantes in awe. as the Poete recordeth.
               
               Many also of the magistrates wil not only wincke at this, but wil laugh in their sleeues at the weake and ridiculous Domination of the new Senate. It will therfore so come to passe, that whereas before there was at the least some discipline, & sometimes some were terrified by mulctes and examples of punishments, now (that also beyng taken away) impunitie will begin to reygne, with a great and publike contempt of the sacred ministerie. Neyther do I☜ speake these things vnaduisedly, for examples do teach vs that these things are done, which are so notoriously knowne to all men, that I neede not to speake any more of these thinges.

But if in this immoderate licentiousnesse, those Seniors should proceede to excōmunicate all those, which set themselues against them, it is to be feared least at the length there be a greater nūber of excōmunicated persōs, thā of those which do cōmunicate with the church. VVherfore let the Seniors tell me what they thinke meete then to be done: I suppose they will answere: it shall thē be needeful to haue the authoritie of the magistrates that he might correct those wicked men, which by their malepertnesse and rashnesse do ouerthrow the Church. I agree also to this counsayle: But if this thing ought then to be done, whē as it can scarce be vvithout publike daunger, vvhy is not the authoritie left wholy vnto the magistrate, & the whole gouernment of publike discipline cōmitted to him before the matter come to this extremitie? Hitherto Gualter.
               It would bring in, too great extremitie of punishmēt: for wheras neither God nor10. Double punishment for one faulte. mā, nor any law doth punish one mā twise for one & ye self same fact, & it is against ye libertie of well ordered countries, to be subiect to the punishmêt of two diuers magistrates: by establishing this Seigniorie, this burden muste be layde vpon the peoples neckes. For let the Magistrate punish according to the lawes as seuerely as he can, yet ye Seigniorie will remit nothing of their censures, but procéede according to their manner, as it may be séene in the. 2. Admonition: fol. 47. And surely as M. GualterGualter in 1. Cor. 5. sayeth speaking of this incōueniēce of the Seigniorie in the former place: It seemeth to vs altogither very daungerous, to appoint two magistrates ouer one people: neyther see we any example whereby this may be proued: and surely I willingly and freely confesse that I cannot perceyue how profitable it would be.
               
               I omit to put you in minde how daungerous (namely in these dayes) alteratiōs of11. Alteration in this time daungerous, &c. gouernment & chaunge of states is in established cōmon wealths: likewise how vnreasonable a thing it is, to enforce the ciuill Magistrate to suffer in his dominion so many seuerall kindes of gouernments, orders, ceremonies, &c. in the Church, as there be parishes. Also how vnséemely it is, to deliuer his sworde out of his owne handes & to cōmit it to the discretion of the cōmon sort & multitude in euery seuerall parish, to displace noble men, gentlemen, wise, learned, and discrete men, & cōmit the whole gouernment of the Church to M. Pastor & his ignorant neighbours. The absurditie & incoueniences that of necessitie must ensue of this kinde of gouernment, where there is a Christian magistrate, be infinite, & wise men may easily cōceyue the rest, by that which I haue here already spoken. Yet would I not haue any man to thinke that I condemne any churches, where this gouernment is lawfully & without daunger receyued, onely I haue regarde to whole kingdomes, especially this Realme, where it cannot but be daungerous.
            
            
               ¶ That there is no one certaine kinde of Gouernment in the Church which must of necessitie be perpetually obserued. Chap. 4.
               I know it wilbe obiected that ye ordinaūce of God must take place, whatsoeuer incōueniēces follow, & that this kinde of gouernmēt is the ordinance of God, & therfore may not for any respect be omitted. But I haue denied, & sufficiētly declared before, yt this kind of Gouernment is no where in scripture cōmaūded, & that it neither is, nor can be perpetuall. And although I haue sufficiently proued this, in one, or two places before (& the contrary is yet vnproued) as I had occasion to speake of it, yet I trust it shall not be grieuous to the Reader, if in a worde or two, I here knit vp the matter.
               First, I affirme that there is not one sentence in the whole scripture, wherevpō ye
                  1. No commaundement hereof in scripture. perpetuitie or the necessitie of this kinde of gouernment, may be grounded. For the place in. 1. Tim. 5. doth neither cōmaunde any such kinde of gouernment, nor prescribe any forme or manner of it: besides, the place is doubtfull & diuersly expounded: and therfore no such perpetual rule can be gathered of it. Moreouer ye Apostle only in that place sheweth, that such as rule wel are worthie of double honour, &c. so that I maruaile how any man can of those wordes conclude either such a Seigniorie as now isChap. 1. the. 1. Diuision. imagined, or any perpetuitie of it. But of this place I haue spoken before.
               Secondly, it is wel know, that the manner & forme of gouernment vsed in the Apostles2. The gouernment in the Apostles time cannot nowe be exercised. time, & expressed in the scriptures, neither is now, nor cā or ought to be obserued,

either touching the persons or the functions: for we haue neither Apostles, Prophets, workers of miracles, giftes of healing, diuersitie of tounges, widowes, or such like, all which perteyned to the gouernment of the Church in the Apostles time, and were partes of it, as appeareth▪ 
                  1. Cor. 12. Eph. 4. 1. Tim. 5. And seing that the Church is not boūd to this forme, so plainly expressed in these places of scripture, I see not how you can binde it, to the selfe same forme of gouernment vsed in the Apostles time.
               Thirdly, this worde gubernationes mentioned, 1. Cor. 12. whervpon you would groūd3. The worde (gubernationes) implieth not the Seigniorie, but by coniecture. your Seigniorie, may (as some learned men think) signifie any kind of gouernment: cuē the ciuil Magistrate. Certayne it is, that only by méere coniectures it is drawne to signifie this new deuised Seigniorie, & therfore cannot inferre any necessary cōclusiō. Furthermore it is by the spirite of God placed among those functions yt be temporall, and by the iudgement of all learned men ceased: for thus the Apostle sayeth: Deinde potestates, deinde dona sanationum opitulationes, gubernationes. genera linguarum: now it were1. Cor. 12. a very straunge matter, that all the rest should be temporall, and onely gubernationes perpetuall: sure I am that the argument which so concludeth, may easily be denied, and by no probabilitie proued.
               Fourthly, we sée manifestly, that in sundrie poynts, the gouernment of ye Church,4. The Apostolicall gouernment hath of necessitie bene altered. vsed in the Apostles time, is, and hath bene of necessitie altered, & that it neither may nor can be reuoked: whereby it is playne, that any one certayne forme or kinde of externall gouernment perpetually to be obserued, is no where in the Scripture prescribed to the Churche: but the charge thereof is left to the Christian Magistrate, so that nothing be done contrarie to the woorde of God.
               This is theopinion of the best writers, neyther do I know any learned man of a5. The generall opinion of the best writers. Musculus. loc. Com. tit. de Magist.
                   contrarie iudgement. M. Musculus speaking of those Seniors sayth that they were vsed in those Churches only, that were destitute of Christian Magistrates: which haue the chieftie and power, &c. not only in prophane, but in diuine matters. And after answering an obiection of 1. Cor. 6. he sayeth: that we must needes distinguish betwene the state of the Church in those dayes, and that whichis now. I haue before declared M. Gualters iudgement of this matter in his Cōmentaries vpon the. 1. Cor. 5. And vpō the. 11. chapt.Gualter. hom. 56. in. 1. Cor. speaking generally of the gouernment of the Churche, he sayeth thus: VVherefore as concerning the doctrine of fayth and saluation, we acknowledge no traditions of the Apostles, but those whiche are conteyned in the creede, &c. But as concerning the externall forme of the Churche, wee denie not that they haue taught euery where, many thinges of the order of Ecclesiastical assemblies, of the administration of Sacraments, and of the whole gouernment of the Churche. VVhereof bicause there cannot be one forme in euery place obserued, they did in suche sorte appoynt them, as they sawe to be requisite for the condition of any Citie or Countrie. And it is certaine that the Churches in all ages haue vsed their libertie in these thinges: & therfore they are to iniurious which at this day eyther vnder the name of the traditiōs of the Apostles, or for any other pretence, go about to binde all Churches to one and the selfe same forme. And vpon the. 12. chapter, where he againe speaketh of the Seigniorie, heIdem. sayeth, There be diuers which will needes institute Elders, or an Ecclesiasticall 
                        〈1 line〉
                     enate according to the exāple of the old & primitiue Churche, which also should haue authoritie, ouer the Magistrates thēselues, if at any time they did not their dutie. But it behoueth them first to shew that those their Seniors haue this power, wherof Paule doth presētly speake, which thing seing it doth by no meanes appeare, and yet notwithstanding they deliuer vnto Satan whom they wil, they do like as if some would go about to clense the leprous, raise the dead, & worke other miracles bicause these things were vsually done in the primitiue Churche. And y• which he speaketh touching this matter also vpō the. 14. chapt. of ye same Epistle is not vnworthie ye noting: whereof I haue before made mention, That their ambitionIdem. is (there) reproued which go about to bring all churches, to the forme of their discipline & gouernmēt, & crie out that there is no discipline there, where al things are not agreable to their traditiōs & orders: But these mē receiue a iust reward of their arrogācie, when as they that come frō thē to other coūtries, do go beyond all mē in saucinesse, neither bring they any thing with thē from home, but a vayne & intollerable contempt of all good men, neyther can they abide to be corrected by any admonition of others.
               
               
                  M. Caluine speaking of the gouernment of the Church Instit. Cap.
                   8. Sect. 120. sayeth thus: Scimus politiam pro varietate temporū recipere, imo exigere, varias mutationes.
                   VVe know that the pollicie (of the Church) doth receiue, nay rather doth require diuerse alterations.Caluine. Beza. M. Beza likewise Lib. confess. Cap.
                   5. Sect. 17 is of the same minde touching the gouernmēt of the Churche: There was another cause of the Ecclesiasticall assemblies, that they might ordeyne canons of Ecclesiasticall discipline, and (that I may cōprehende many things in few wordes) that they might appoynt ecclesiasticall policie, for the diuerse circūstances of times, places, and persones. For it is necessarie all thinges should be donne orderly in the house of God: of the vvhich order there is one generall reason to be taken out of the worde of God, but not one and the same forme agreable to all circūstances. And Section.
                   32. speaking of this Seigniorie, he sheweth that it was necessarie in the Churche, whilest there was no Christian magistrate. For so he writeth: But thereIdem. were Elders chosen by suffrages, or at least by the approbation of the whole cōpanie, as it is very euident out of Ambrose, which complayneth, that certayne men had transferred this authoritie to themselues: and 
                     〈1 line〉
                  ut of Cyprian likewise, by whom we may also vnderstand, that the Bishop did rule ouer the colledge of Elders, not that he should there reygne, but that by their cōsent he might rule the Policie of the church, especially for so much as at that time the Churches of Affrica were not helped of the Magistrate, but were rather cruelly vexed of them. And Sect.
                   35. speaking generally of the gouernment of the Churche, he sayeth: Neyther must we simply looke what was done of the Apostles in the GouernmentIdem. of the church, seyng there are most diuerse circumstances, and therfore vvithout preposterous zeale, all thinges canot in all places and times be called to one and the same forme: but rather the end and inuariable purpose of them must be looked vnto, and that manner and forme of doing things is to be chosen, which doth directly tende therevnto. This is the iudgement of these learned men, neyther do I know any that thinketh the contrarie, except such as make poste haste to that braunch of Anabaptisme.
               
               Sixtly, either we must admitte another forme now of gouerning the Church than6. The iurisdietion of the christian magistrate implieth a chāge of the firste kinde of gouernment. was in the Apostles time, or els we must seclude the Christian magistrate, from all authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matters, & attribute no more to him therein, than was attributed to Nero in the Apostles time: for in those dayes there was no Christian Prince to gouerne the church. But Christian Princes haue & must haue, ye chief care & gouernment of the Church next vnder God: Ergo, the same forme of gouernment cannot be now, nor ought to be, that was in the Apostles time.
               Thus it is euident that the grounde whereof T. C. hath buylded his whole booke, is a false ground, contrarie to the Scriptures, the practise of the Church, the opinionsThe grounde of the Replie. of learned men, and the lawfull and iust authoritie of christian Princes, and therefore the building is ruinous and cannot stande.
            
         
         
            ¶ Of certayne matters concerning discipline in the Churche. Tract. 18.
            
               Of Excommunication, and in vvhom the execution thereof doth consist.
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Let vs come now to the third part, which concerneth ecclesiasticall discipline: the officers that haue to deale in this charge, are chiefly three, Ministers, Preachers, or Pastours, of wheme before. Seniors or Elders, and Deacons. Concerning Seniors, not only their office, but their name also is out of this English Church vtterly remoued. Their office was to Act. 14. 4. 1. Cor. 1
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 28. gouerne the churche with the reste of the Ministers, to consulte, to admonish, to correcte, and to order all things apperteyning to the state of the congregation.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 112. Sect. 3.
                        What Scripture haue you to proue that such Seniors as you meane, & Deacons had any thing to do in Ecclesiasticall discipline?

I thinke the only discipline that we haue in the whole new testamēt (except you will make admonition & exhortation a part of it) is Excō
                           munication: and the execution of that is only committed to the ministers of the worde. Math. 16. Iohn. 20. Examples hereof wee haueOnely 
                                 〈◊〉
                               misters may excōmunicate▪
                            1. Cor. 5. 1. Tim. 1. & ad Titum. 3.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 146. Sect. 2.
                     Now I returne back againe to excommunication, which M. Doctor thinketh to be ye only discipline in the church, but he should vnderstande, that beside y• part of priuate discipline (which is ordinarily & daily to be exercised by euery one of ye pastors & elders, as admonition & reprehension) there are thre principal partes which are exercised of thē ioyntly & together, wherof the first is the election or choise, & the abdication or putting out of ecclesiastical officers. The seconde is in excommunication of the stubborne or absolution of the repentant. The thirde is the decision of all such matters as doe rise in the church, either touching corrupt manners or peruerse doctrine.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I speake of ye publike discipline of ye church, not of priuate admonition & reprehension, which may be called by ye name of Discipline, but neither are they properly, nor vsually so called, except you wil also say ye publike preaching & reading of ye scriptures is discipline: these be things annexed to discipline, but vnproperly termed by ye nameWherin discipline cōsisteth of discipline. Your partition of discipline into those three parts, in my poore iudgemēt, is very vnskilful: for discipline cōsisteth in punishing & correcting of vice: neither yet is the deciding of controuersies in matters doubtfull, properly called discipline, for discipline is exercised in punishing & correcting ye persons, not decioing ye causes. Wherfore I thinke you haue forgottē your self, & in steade of ye part, haue deuided ye whole, that is, you haue made a diuision of gouernment, wheras you tooke vpon you to deuide discipline, which is but a part of ecclesiasticall pollicie or gouernment.
                        Reade the generall confession, of ye Christian churches in Heluetia, & tell me what it differeth from any thing ye I haue said. Call to your remēbrance that which your selfePag. 1. 4. li
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . 9 haue spoken, pag. 14. where you call other censures of the church, but forerunners to excommunication, but this is a contention only about words, & therfore inough is said of it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 146. Sect. 3.
                     As touching the election, & consequently ye throwing out, it hath bene shewed before, that together with the church, the Eldership hath the principal swaye. For ye decision of controuersies when they rise, it may apeare in the. 15. of the Actes, yt the Presbyterie or Eldership of the church hath to determine of that also. Now it remaineth here, that wheras M. Doctor saith, that the excommunication and consequently the absolution or restoring to the church again, doth perteme only to the minister. ye I shew that the presbyterie or eldership, & the whole church also, hath interest in the excommunication, & consequently in the absolution or restoring vnto the church. But here by the waye it is to be 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            not worthy the noting. noted, that in saying that it belongeth to ye minister, he confesseth ye disorder in our church, wherin this power is taken away from the minister and giuen to the Byshop and his officers.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Of Election of ministers, & so of their reiection, & throwing out, sufficient hath bin spokenTract. 3. before, & your manner of electing by better reasons confuted, than it was by you proued: for the decisions of controuersies when they arise, it may appeare in the. 15. of ye Acts, that the best way is to call Synodes & Councels of learned mē, as it was there practised, & not to cōmit such matters to the pastor of euery seuerall parish, & certaine of his neighbours whom you call the Seigniorie: for if it had bin so, what néeded Paule and Barnabas haue takē so long a iourney frō Antioche to Ierusalē for ye deciding of their cōtrouersies, séeing yt they & the Seigniorie (if there had bin any such) might haue ended the same at home in Antioche? This place vndoubtedly ouerthroweth your Seigniorie, except now you wil take it (as it is in ecclesiastical writers oftētimes takē) for a Synode or cōuocatiō of bishops & priests: so ye not your Seigniorie which is in euery parishe, but general or prouincial Coūcels & Synodes must haue ye deciding of cōtrouersies: else as I sayd before, why should Paule and Barnabas come from Antioche to Ierusalem to haue their controuersies determined?
                        Your note by the way, is not worth a rushe, for when I say yt the execution of discipline

is onely committed to the ministers of the word, you cannot therevpon cōclude, that euery minister hath authoritie to exercise it in the church. It is one thing to saye, only ministers haue authoritie to excōmunicate, & to saye that all ministers haue authoritie so to do: only ministers may be Bishops, & yet all ministers be not Bishops: only Lawyers may be Iudges, & yet all Lawyers be not Iudges: only citezens may be Aldermen, Sherifes, & Maiors, & yet all be not so: wherfore by the waye here you ouersot your selfe. And yet I thinke that all ministers haue power to excommunicate, if the Church thinke it good, to committe that authoritie vnto them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 146. Sect. 4.
                     Now that this charge of excommunication belongeth not vnto one, or to the minister, but chiefly to the Eldership and Pastor, it appeareth by that which the authors of the Admonition alleage out of S. Mathew, which place I haue proued before to be necessarily vnderstanded of the elders of the18. Chap. churche.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue tolde you before, how that place of Mathew is to be vnderstanded, & what it is, to tell the Church, namely either to reproue the partie openly before the congregation or else to complaine to such as haue authoritie in the church, & to whome ye executing of discipline is committed, which is by the order of the church of Englande, the Bishop. And therefore the Bishop alone both by the lawes of God, and of this churche of England (which hath giuen vnto him by consent in Parliament that authoritie) may exercise this discipline.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Then it was sayd tel Math. 18. 17 the church: now it is spoken, complayne to my Lordes grace, Primate and Metropolitane of all Englande, or to his inferiour, my Lorde Byshop of the Diocesse, if not to hym, shewe the Chauncellour, or Officiall, or Commissarie, or Doctour.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 135. Sect. 1.
                        As it was saide then, so ought you and may you say now: in priuate offences, yf priuate admonitions wyll not serue, then muste you declare them to the church, either by reprehending of them publikely, before the whole congregation (if you be called therevnto) for that isChurche signifieth those that haue authoritie in the churche. one kynde of telling the churche, or else by complayning to suche as haue authoritie in. the church, for in that place of Mathewe (as all learned interpretours both olde and newe do determine) the churche signifieth such as haue authoritie in the churche. Therefore when you complayne to my Lordes grace, Lorde Bishop of the Dioces, or their Chauncellors, Commissaries. &c. You tell the church, that is, suche as be appointed to be publike Magistrates in the churche, according to the very true sense and interpretation of that place.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 146. Sect. vlt.
                     It is moste absurdly sayd of M. doctor in the. 135. page, that by the church is vnderstāded either my Lordes grace, or the Byshop of the Dioces, or the Chauncellor or Commissarie. And that when a man complayneth vnto one of these, he may be well sayde to complayne vnto the churche, whiche is the more vntollerable, for that beyng so straunge a saying, and suche as may astonyshe at that heare it, he neyther confirmeth it by no reason, by no lyke phrase of scripture, by no authoritie of any Godly or approued wryter, olde or newe, whiche notwithstanding he seeketh for so diligently, and turneth the commentaries in his studie so paynefully, whē he can haue but one against twenty, and but a sillable where he cannot haue a sentence.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue shewed sufficient authoritie for my saying, euen the consent of all learned interpreters: who by the church in that place vnderstande such as haue chiefe authoritie in the church, which in this church of Englād (as I haue sayd) are bishops. ChrysostomeChryso
                                 〈1 line〉
                              t. Hom. 61. in Math. sayth as much as I do, so that it néede not to séeme so straunge that it should astonishe all thee heare it, his wordes be these: 
                              Dic ecclesiae, Praesulibus scilicet, & Praesidentibus. Tell the churche, that is, the Prelates, and Presidents. But you thinke to ouerlode me with vnséemely wordes, howbeit that will not carry away the cause: I am so vsed to them by you and yours, both in speache and writing, that I estéeme them now (I thanke God) as I do the dust of my féete. If I seeke the writers so diligently, and tourne the commentaries in my studie so painfully, why do you so oft accuse me of ignorance, & wante of reading, & taking my pleasure? Ex ore tuo te iudico. &c. & mendacem memorem esse oportet.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 146. Sect. vlt. &c.
                     It may be the clerelier vnderstanded, that the presbyterie or eldership, had the chiefe stroke in this excommunication, if it be obserued that this was the pollicie and discipline of the Iewes, and of the Synagogue from whence our sauiour Christ tooke this, & translated it vnto his church, that when any man had done any thing that they helde for a taulte, that then the same was punished and censured by the elders of the church, according to the qualitie of the faulte, as it may appeare in S. Mathew, for although it be of some (and those very learned) expounded of the ciuil iudgement, vet forCap. 5. so much as the Iewes had nothing to do with ciuill iudgementes, (the same being altogethe
                           〈1 line〉
                         in the handes of the Romaines) and that the worde Sanedrim, corrupted of the Greeke worde 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         which S. Mathew vseth, is knowen by those that haue skill in the Rabbines, and especially the Iewes Talmud to signifie the ecclesiasticall gouernours, there can be no doubt but he meaneth the ecclesiasticall censures. And if the fault were iudged very great, then the sentence of excommunicationCap. 9. was awarded by the same Elders as appeareth in S. Iohn. And this was ye cause why our sauiour Christe spake so shortly without noting the circumstances more at large, for that he spake of a thing which was wel knowen and vsed amongst the Iewes whome he spake vnto.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is very vnlike that our sauiour Christ would borow any such manner or forme of gouernment from the Iewes: séeing the same was neither before prescribed vnto them by God, nor yet at that time rightly vsed, but moste shamefully abused: and yet (if it were so) it quite ouerthroweth your purpose. For the Iewes Seigniorie was only at Ierusalen, yours must be in euery parishe: besides that, there is a great differ
                              〈1 line〉
                           ce in the persons.
                        Howbeit I do not vnderstand how you can drawe the place in the. 5. of Mathew to your purpose, for if you meane these wordes (Quicun
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  dixerit fratri suo Racha, obnoxius
                              Math. 5. 
                              erit concilio: He that calleth his brother Racha, shalbe in daunger of a councell) as I am sure you do, Christ doth not there prescribe any forme of gouernment or order of punishing, but he declareth the degrées of vncharitable dealing towardes our brethren, & the increase of punishmentes according to the same.
                        
                           M. Bullinger in his Cōmentaries vpon that place saith, that the word 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           ,
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               Bullinger. doth signifie consessum Iudicum & buiusmodi consessum qualis apud Graecos erat Amphictyonum qui de grauissimis solebant consultare causis. And he addeth, that Christ hereby signifieth, that as the faulte increaseth, so doth the punishment also.
                        
                           M. Caluine likewise in his harmony vpon the Gospel saith that Christ in this place,Caluine. 
                           alluding to earthly iudgementes doth testifie, that God wilbe iudge euen of secret anger to punishe it. And bicause he proceedeth further, which vttereth his anger in bitter speache, he saith that he is giltie, coram toto coelesti consessu, before the celestiall assembly, that he may sustaine the greater punishment.
                        
                        
                           Noua Glossa saith, that 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            doth signifie an assemblie of iudges, and that in suche
                           Noua Glossa. 
                           assemblies as at Athens in the court of Mars, weightier causes were wont to be handeled, and punishmentes for offenders, consulted vpon. There, saith that commentarie, Christe by the name of a councell, alluding to the manners and customes of men, teacheth that those are more greuously to be punished, which more vtter and expresse their anger.
                        
                        
                           Beza sayth, that 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            signifieth that kinde of gouernment, wherein there was. 23.
                           Beza. 
                           Iudges, to whome did apperteine the hearing of waighty causes. And the marginall note

of the Geneua bible vpon this place is this: Like iudgement almoste, the Romains obserued, for Triumuiri had the examinatiō of small matters, the Councell of. 23. of greater causes, and finally great matters of importance were decided by the senate of. 71. iudges, whiche here is compared to the iudgement of God, or to be punished with hel fire. Which fully agréeth with M. Beza his interpretation, who sayeth also: that it is according to the Hebrewe commentaries.
                        
                        Now how you can pul this to your Seigniorie, or to Ecclesiastical gouernours only, and especially to excommunicatiō, I cannot learne or reade in any wryter: & these whome I haue here named, teache a farre other sense and meaning of the wordes of Christe than you do.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 147. Lin. 15.
                     And that this was the meaning of our sauiour Christ in those wordes it may appeare by ye practise which is set forth in the Epistles to the Corinthians. For it is certaine that S. Paule did both vnderstande and obserue the rule of oure Sauiour Christe. But he communicateth this power of excommunication with the churche, and therefore it must needes bee the meaning of oure Sauiour Christ, that the excommunication should be by many, & not by one, and by the churche and not by the minister of the churche alone. For he biddeth the church of Corinthe twise in the first Epistle,1. Cor. 5. once by a metaphore, another time in plaine wordes, that they should excommunicate the incestuous persone. By metaphore, saying This is not 
                              〈◊〉
                            of the in 
                              〈◊〉
                            persone purge out your olde leauen, in playne & flat words when he sayth, take away that wicked man from amongst you. And in the second Epistle vnderstanding of the repentāce2. Cor. 2. of that man, he entreateth them that they would receiue him in again, shewing that he was content to release the bond & chaine of his excommunication, so that they would do the same, & therfore considering the absolution or reconciliation of the excommunicate, doth pertayne vnto ye church, it followeth that the excommunication doth in like manner apperteine vnto it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           M. Caluine speaking of the wordes of Christ, Math. 18. wherein I am sure you will haue the same order of gouernmēt to be expressed, that is in this place of Math. 5. doth make great differēce betwixt the order there prescribed by Christ, & that practised by the Apostle. 1. Cor. 5. bicause in that place, Christ committeth the matter to a few, & in this place the Apostle séemeth to commit it to the whole multitude. M. Caluines words be these, A question may be asked what he meaneth by the name of the Churche: for PauleCaluine in. 18. Math. commaundeth the incestuous Corinthian to be excōmunicated not of any chosen number, but of the whole company of the godly: wherfore it is probable that here the iudgement is committed to the whole people: But bicause then as yet there was no church which professed Christ, neither any such order appointed, and the Lord speaketh according to the vsuall and receiued custome: There is no doubt, but that he alludeth vnto the order of the olde church, as also in other places, he frameth his talke according to the knowen and vsuall manner. So that, that excommunication vsed in the churche of the Corinthians, can in no respect be the practise of the rule of Christ in either of the places, neither yet according vnto it: wherefore you write without iudgement, you wote not what.
                        S. Paule did publikely excommunicate in the presence of the whole churche, and vsed them as witnesses of his iust dealing: but his wordes be playne that the right & power of excommunication remained in him selfe.
                        
                           When S. Paule sayth vnto the Corinthians, Expurgate vetus fermentum. &c.
                            purge out the olde leauen, he speaketh not of the incostuous Corinthian, but exhorteth them1. Cor. 5. to newnes of life: you shall heare howe M. Caluine expoundeth that place: Bicause he had borowed a similitude of leauen, he reteyneth it still: although he doth digresse from theCalui. 1. Cor. 5. matter which he hath in hande vnto a generall doctrine, for he speaketh no more of the incestuous persone, but generally exhorteth them vnto puritie of life. &c.
                        Lorde howe carelesse you are in peruerting the true sense and meaning of the scripture, that you may violently drawe them to your purpose.
                        When he sayth: Put away that wicked man from among you, he doth not will them to excommunicate him, but to shunne and auoyde his company, and not to suffer him to come among them bycause he was excommunicate. And as he in this place moueth them to a detestation of him, so in that place of the second Cor. 2. after his repentance &

receiuing again into the churche, he exhorteth them to embrace him and to loue him This may and ought to be done, the authoritie of excommunication resting in one, for the people without such exhortations will hardly conceiue a good opinion of hym whom they haue knowen to be so greuous an offendour.
                        Wherefore the Apostle here moueth them to forgiue him, & to loue him: he doth not giue them any authoritie to deliuer him from the bonde of excommunication, for that he did himselfe, as it may euidently appeare by the circumstance of the place.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 113. Lin. 10.
                     I reade in the fift chapter of the first to the Corinthians, that the incestuous Corinthian was excōmunicated publikely in the presence of the whole congregation. But I reade neither of Senior nor Deacon, called as officers to the same. S Paule himselfe sayeth:Paule alone had lus excō
                           municandi. 
                        
                           Ego quidem vt absens corpore, presens spiritu, iam decreui tanquam presens, vt is. &c. I truly as absent in the bodye, but present in spirite, haue determined as present, that he. &c. Which manifestly argueth, that Ius excommunicandi, was in Paule & not1. Corinth. 5. in the rest. But all is scripture that you speake, howe farre soeuer it is from the true meaning and sense of the scripture.
                  
                  
                     T. C. pag. 147. Sect. 1.
                     Nowe, wheras M. Doctor vpon those wordes of S. Paule, that he being absent in body, and present in spirite, had determined. &c. concludeth that the right of excommunication was in S. Paule, and not in the rest, it is as much as if he should saye, S. Paule Maledict
                              〈1 line〉
                            glossa quae corumpit textum. as muche as laye in hym excommunicated, therefore S. Paule excommunicated: or S. Paule excommunicated, therfore the church did not. For what if S. Paule did excommunicate him so muche as laye in hym, should he therfore haue bene excommunicated, if the church of Corinthe & the minister there would haue admitted hym to the supper, and not abstayne from samiliar companying with him? You will saye he should haue bene bounde in heauen and before God, although the churche of Corinthe had not put him forth. It is true that the Apostles denunciation of Gods vengeaunce vpon the impenitent sinner, is ratified in heauen, and so should he also haue bene▪ if S. Paule had sayde nothing, and yet S. Paule did not excommnnicate the incestuous persone, but so much as laye in him, and as farre as his ryght stretched: not being therefore yet excommunicated by S. Paule, it followeth that the church had a stroke in the excommunication.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        S. Paule did excōmunicate him, & if the church of Corinthe had kept him in amōgst them notwithstanding, yet had he bene excommunicated before God: and they should haue shewed thē selues, to haue bene a stubborne & rebellious people: In déede, if youExcommunication is more than excluding from the eternall societie. take excōmunication for excluding from the externall societie of the church only, then the people if they be stubborne & wilful, may stoppe & hinder the executiō of that discipline, but in so doing they forget their dutie. But if by excommunication you vnderstande bynding in heauen (as you ought to do) then had the incestuous persone bene truely excommunicated, though both the minister and the people had sayde the contrary. Wherefore it is true that the ryght of excommunicating remayned in Paule, though the people did giue their consent vnto it, by secluding hym from their companye, and from the sacramentes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 147. tovvardes the end.
                     
                        Againe to proue that the church hath nothing to do with excōmunication, it is not enough to say, that S. Paule had the right of excommunication: But you should haue shewed that he on
                              〈1 line〉
                           ly had
                        
opinions shoulde no otherwise be put to silence, than by excommunication, and ought no further to be punished, doe not reason sufficiently and aptly. For there is one dutie of the Bishop, and another of the Magistrate. Paule wryting vnto Titus doth not intreat of the office of a magistrate, but sheweth what is conuenient for a Bishop. Although a moderate meane is alwayes best: that they which are not past care, be not so much kept in order by force, as by ecclesiasticall discipline. But you thinke your owne worde to be a sufficient warrant agaynst all men. You may well studie the wordes of the Scripture, but me thinke you do not greatly passe for the right vnderstanding of them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 113. Lin. 4.
                     
                        Basilius Magnus in his seconde booke de Officijs. cap. 27. testifyeth the same.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 148. Lin. 32.
                     As touching Basiles place in the seconde booke of Offices, when the booke commeth forth and is printed, then it shall be answered, as for me I know of none such that is extant now.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I confesse the name to be mistaken: it is an ouersight, and yet no greater thanIn his Epistle Sect. 8▪
                            yours is in alledging Iosias for Ezechias. And both this, and that which followeth of Theodorete for Theodotus, were corrected as well in the bookes of the first edition, as in the seconde, before I had your warning. The placing of one name for another is not so great an ouersight, but that it may somtime happen to those which are verie circumspect, and euen vnto your selfe, as Iosias for Ezechias, in the beginning, (*) and Gregorie for George, afterwarde: so that herein you are not inferiour to me, and thePag. 97. Sect. 3 Ambrose. one may well be set agaynst the other. But let these tryfles go: it is Ambrose in his booke 
                              de Officijs cap. 27. whose wordes be these: Let the Bishop vse the Clearkes, and especially the Ministers which are indeede his sonnes, as his owne members: let him assigne euerie one to that office whereunto he shall see him to be meete. The part also of the bodie which putrifyeth is with griefe cut off, and it is long looked vnto; if it can be cured with medicines▪ but if it cannot, thē is it cut away by a good Phisition. So it is the propertie of a good Bishop, that he be desirous to heale the weake, to take away sores that creepe on, to burne some, and not to cut them away: last, to cut away with griefe that which cannot be cured.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 148. in the ende of the. 1 Sect.
                     To the rest I will answere with this pratestation, that if all men shoulde doe contrarie to the order of God, yet their authoritie or 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        ght not to haue the weight of a feather, which I haue sayd before, and do vnderstand it 
                           〈◊◊〉
                        , where I do not expresse it, and with this I come to master Doctors authorities.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This I acknowledge to be true▪ 
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            you make this protestation before there be cause? Whē any authoritie 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            to the order of God, reiect it and spare not: but yet you must shew vs that 
                              〈◊〉
                            of God, to the which it is 
                              〈1 line〉
                           trarie▪
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 113. Lin. 5.Theodorus alone excommunicated.
                     
                     
                        Theodorete Bishop of Laodicea, did by himselfe alone excommunicate

both Appolinaries for keeping companie with that wicked Sophister Epiphanius, as Sozomenus writeth Lib. 6. cap. 25.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 148. Sect. 2.
                     As for Theodoretus Bishop of Laodicea, which Sozomene maketh mention of, in his sixth booke, I finde none such, but there is mentioned of one Theodotus, who is sayde to haue separated or excommunicated Apollinaris, but it doth not appeare there that he alone of his owne authoritie did excommunicate him. And there be great reasons in that Chapter, to proue that he did it not of his owne authoritie, for immediately after his heresie was knowne, Damasus bishop of Rome, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, caused a Synode to be gathered at Rome, where his heresie was condemned. Now for so much as the custome of Synodes and Councelles is, when they condemne the heresies, to excommunicate the heretikes, You vnderstand not the storie: for at this time Apollinaris was not fallen into his heresie. it is to be thought that that Councell did excommunicate him, and that Theodotus Bishop of Laodicea, did execute that decree and excommunication. And in deed Sozomene doth so expound himselfe, when immediately after he had sayd that he did excōmunicate him Vntruth, for these wordes are not spoken of Theodorus, but of Georgius his 
                              〈◊〉
                           , who excomunicated Apollinaris the seconde 
                              〈◊〉
                           . he addeth 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , which is that he declared him excommunicate, whiche indeede properly belongeth to the Minister, when the excommunication is decreed by those to whome it apperteyneth, which thing may yet better appeare by the maner of speach, which is vsed in another place, where speaking of Uictor excōmunicating Theodotus, he vttereth it by this 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         which is to promulgate or pronounce the sentence whiche was decreed by others.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Sozomene in that Chapter doth plainly declare that both the Apollinaries wereBoth the Apollinaries excommunicated by Theodotus. excommunicated by Theodotus, not for any heresie, but bicause they kept companie with Epiphanius that wicked Sophister. Neyther was Apollinaris as yet fallen to his heresie, as it is manifest in the storie: for being vpon repentance absolued by Theodotus, he was afterwarde againe excommunicated by one George, the successor of Theodotus in his Bishoprike, bicause he kept companie with Athanasius, whome George being an Arrian coulde not abide. In this time of his excommunication, bycause he could not by any intreatie perswade George to receyue him into the Church againe, of purpose he published an heresie, for the which he was afterwarde condemnedSozom. lib. 6. Cap. 25. in a Synode at Rome. And therefore sayth the storie: If George had receyued Apollinaris being repentant, like as Theodotus had done before, I suppose that this heresie had not bene raysed of him. So that you are farre wyde, and giue great suspition that eyther you haue not read the storie, or else of purpose meane to delude the Reader.
                        The wordes that the storie vseth to signifie, Theodotus excommunicating them, be these, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : did separate them from the Church. The wordes which you haue recyted be not spoken of Theodotus, but of George his successor, who also did excommunicate Apollinaris, not both the father and the sonne, as Theodotus did, but onely the sonne (as I haue sayde) before he fell into his heresie, and therefore before he was condemned at Rome. So that he did not (as you say) execute the decrée of that Councell, but did himselfe excommunicate.
                        Neyther doe the wordes helpe you one whitte by any meanes, for what other thing can you gather thereof, but that he pronounced the sentence of excommunication agaynst him? euen as it is the maner in our Church, though he be excommunicated by the same person onely, which pronounceth the sentence. And if that the right of excommunication had not béene in George onely, why is there mention that hée woulde by no meanes be intreated to absolue him? For I am sure that you willPag. 147. lin. 29. graunt (and indéede you haue before so affirmed) that absolution is of the same qualitie in this respect with excommunication: and it is there witnessed, that Apollinaris did oftentymes desire him to receyue him againe into the felowship of the Churche. So that it is manifest, that in those dayes, the Bishop alone did excommunicate.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 113. Lin. 9.Ambrose excōmunicated.
                     
                     So did Ambrose excommunicate Theodosius the Emperour, and

is therefore in all stories greatly commended.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 148. in the ende.
                     As for Ambrose although he be greatly commended for excommunicating the Emperour, yet he was neuer commended for that he did excommunicate him himselfe alone, and if he did excommunicate him himselfe alone, yet his fault was the lesse, for somuch as he beeing desirous of an Eldership, could not as it seemeth by his complaint which I haue spoken of before obteyne one. And although the stories do not make mention that there were others whose authoritie came into this excommunication, yet it followeth not, that there were no other. And howe often will you stumble at that which you do so sharpely reproue in others, which is in making of argumentes of authoritie negatiuely? And if you will not graunt this maner of reasoning in the Scripture, in matters perteyning to the gouernment of the Church, which are all comprehended in the scripture, howe woulde you reason of a common storie, whiche neyther can nor doth professe to speake all those things, which fall into that matter which it wryteth of? But what if so be it be proued, that Ambrose did not this of his owne authoritie, but by the authoritie also of others, will you then confesse that he is commended of all those which wryte storyes for so doing, and confesse that the vse and practise of the primitiue Church was farre from this that is now? For proofe whereof I will giue you a place which Ambrose the best witnesse of this matter hath in one of his Epistles, whereEpist. 38. he sheweth that as soone as the murther which Theodosius had caused to be done at the Citie ofAmbrose falsisyed. Thessalonica was heard, by & by the Bishops of Fraunce came, and there was holden a Synode, where also Ambrose sayeth, that his communicating with Theodosius coulde not absolue him, for that as it may appeare, the Bishoppes in that Synode had in excommunicating him, ordeyned that he shoulde not be absolued, vntill such time as he had done repentance, whiche he did afterwardeAmb. li▪ de obitu Theo. with confession of his fault before the Congregation, and asking forgiuenesse of it. So it appeareth that that which he did, he did it by the sentence of the Synode, and not of his owne authoritie alone.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is not to be read in any storie, or other wryter, that Ambrose euer sought to haue an Eldership in his Church: for if he had so done, it is not like but that he might haue obteyned it, béeing of that credite and authoritie with the Emperour: onely in speaking of the Eldership which consisteth of Priestes onely: he sayeth that he cannot tell vpon what occasion it grewe out of vse. &c. but this is from the purpose.
                        Ambrose is commended for excommunicating Theodosius, and▪ for excommunicating himAmbrose excommunicateth alone. alone, as it may appeare in Theodorete lib. 5. cap. 18. and Sozomene lib. 7. cap: 24. For if he had vsed the assistance of other, the commendation of his courage and boldnesse, had not béene so notorious and famous: neyther is it like that the people durst ioyne with their Bishop in such an enterpryse agaynst theyr Emperour, and if it had béene done by any councell of Byshops or Synode, to what ende and purpose should Ambrose carrie away all the fame and commendation, not one worde once mentioned in any storie of any other assistante vnto him in that action? But what néede I vse these wordes, séeing the historie reported both by Theodorete and Sozomene doe verie plainly testifie the same.
                        My argument is not negatiue from authoritie, but affirmatiue: for all storyes that I haue read do attribute this whole action of excommunicating Theodosius to Ambrose alone. Reade the places of Theodoret and Sozomene, before mentioned, and you shall sée that a man may safely conclude affirmatiuely, that Ambrose alone did both excommunicate and absolue him. Some of the late wryters that haue occasion to speake of this matter, do testifie the same, as namely Master Gualter vpon the. 1. Cor. 5. and therefore reproueth Ambrose his fact. But bicause you here charge me with so often reasoning from authoritie negatiuely, name one vnto mée that I haue so vsed, or tell mée why hitherto you haue onely espyed this? Remember that you are a diuine of whom it is required to speake truly.The Synode dso not excommunicate
                        
                        But say you: what if it be proued that Ambrose did not this of his owne authoritie? and I say what if it be manifestly layde before your eyes, that you haue not rightlyTheodosius.
                           
collected of those places of Ambrose, and that they make not for your purpose, which you haue here alledged for your proofe? First your quotation in the margent is false: for Ambrose hath not one worde of that matter in his. 38. Epistle, but that might be the fault of the Printer. That which he sayth, is in his. 28. Epistle, the whiche also you haue falsified, for there is not one worde spoken of any excommunication vsed by that Synode, agaynst Theodosius: onely Ambrose sayth, that when the Synode heard of it, euerie man lamented it, and tooke it in euill part: and that he himselfe could not admit him into his Communion, nor absolue him from that offence without due repentance. And that is his meaning when he sayth: Non erat facti tui absolutio in Ambrosij communione. Whiche also the wordes following and the scope of the whole Epistle doth declare. For in that Epistle Ambrose doth exhorte Theodosius to repentance for that fact, and after these wordes that I haue recyted, followeth immediately this sentence: The grieuousnesse also of the fault shoulde beeAmb. Epist. 28. layde vnto my charge the more, if no man shoulde say that the reconciliation of our God were necessarie. Art thou ashamed to do that, O Emperour, that the kingly Prophete Dauid did? Whereby it is plaine, that Ambrose in his letters signifieth vnto the Emperour, that he must first repent him and be reconcyled vnto God, before hée may admit him to communicate with him. Neyther doth Ambrose say: that these Bishops were by and by gathered togither as soone as this murther was heard of: neyther was there any such cause of that Synode: but they béeing gathered togither vpon other occasions and before the murther was committed (as it will appeare if you marke the wordes of Ambrose well) newes was brought vnto them of the murther, whiche they greatly lamented as I sayde before. There is not one worde it that Epistle, whereof it can be gathered that eyther that Synode did excommunicate him, or ordeyne that he should not be absolued, vntill such tyme as he had done repentance: how much betwere it for you to repeate the wordes of the Authour: but then should you spill your grace in counterfeyting.
                        The seconde place of Ambrose lib de obitu Theodos. alledged to proue that Theodosius afterwarde confessed his fault before the congregation, and asked forgiuenesse of it, is more than néedes: for that is not denyed of any man: and Theodorete lib. 5. cap. 18. doth set that his submission and confession out in these wordes. So in the endeTheod. li. 5. 18. Sainct Ambrose absolued him, and the most faythfull Emperour beeing bolde to enter into the Churche, prayed, not standing or kneeling, but lying prostrate vppon the grounde hee vttered these wordes of Dauid: My soule cleaueth vnto the dust, quicken mee according to thy worde. And pulling his heare with his handes, and beating his face, and watring the grounde with the droppes of his teares, he asked forgiuenesse. But this proueth not that the people had anie authoritie in excommunicating of him. In this Church of Englande, though the Bishop alone doe excommunicate,Excommunicate persons not receyued before publike confession and repentance. yet he that is excommunicated for any notorious cryme, is not receyued into the Churche againe, before he haue made a publike confession in the open Congregation, and asked pardon and forgiuenesse of his offence. Wherefore there is nothing yet alledged of any such force, to proue that Ambrose alone did not excommunicate Theodosius.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 15. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.Act. 11. 30. Act. 15. 2. 4▪ 6. &c.
                     
                     The sixtenth. In that the Lord Bishops, their Suffraganes, Archdeacons, Chauncelors,Ro. 12. 7. 8 Phil. 1. 1. Officials, Proctors, Doctors, Sumners, and such rauening rablers, take vppon them, whiche is most horrible, the rule of Gods Churche, spoyling the Pastor Mat. 18. 17. 18. of his lawfull iurisdiction, ouer1. Co. 12. 28 1. Thes. 5. 12 13. his owne flocke, giuen by the worde, thrusting away most sacrilegiously that order whiche Christ hath left to his Church, and which the primitiue Church hath vsed.1. Tim. 4. 14▪ 1. Tim. 5. 17
                     
                     
                        
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 220. Sect. 1.
                        And first you shewe yourselfe greatly offended, that the Pastor is spoyled of his lawfull iurisdiction ouer his flocke: & therfore you brust out into these wordes of heat, rauening rablers, horrible, sacrllegiously, and such like. It had bene well if you had tolde vs, what that lawfull iurisdiction of the Pastor ouer his flocke giuen by the worde had beene: For the places of Scripture which you quote for that purpose, do not plainly enough set out that matter. In the. 18. of Mathew vers. 17. after certaine admonitions in priuate offences, Christ sayth: 
                              Dir Ecclesiae: tell the Church. In whiche place (as I tolde you before) the Church doth signifie such as haue authority in the Church, or else publike reprehension in the open congregation by such as be called thereunto. It giueth not any peculiar iurisdiction to the Pastor, for any thing that I can learne. And in the same Chapter. 18. verse, where Christ sayth: vvhat soeuer ye binde on earth, shall be bounde in heauen, &c. according to your iudgement vttered before, it is ment of the whole Church, and not of the Pastor onely. You haue before denied that one man can excommunicate, and therefore this place maketh nothing for your assertion.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 149. Lin. 21.
                     In the. 220. and. 221. pages, he speaketh of this thing afresh, but hath no newe matter, but maketh a bare rehearsall of the places of the Admonition, asking after his accustomed maner of confuting, what maketh this, or what proueth that? onely whereas he sayde before, and proued (as he thought) that the Minister had onely to doe with excommunication, beeing pressed there by the Admonition eyther to defende or renounce his Chauncelors, &c. He had rather denie both the truth and himselfe, than he woulde haue any of that horrible confusion and prophanation of the holy discipline of God brought in by Poperie, threatning the ouerthrowe of the whole Churche, and seruing for nothing but for the nourishing of the ambition and ydlenesse of a fewe, to be driuen out of the Church. Of the which I will vpon occasion speake a worde, if first I shewe that the vse of the auncient Church hath beene not to permit the excommunication to one, but that the sentence thereof shoulde come from the gouernours and elders of the Church, vnto whome that did especially apperteyne. Although I cannot posse by that which maister Doctor sayeth, that for so much as the Authours of the Admonition had alledged the wordes (tell the Churche) to proue the interest of the Churche in excommunication, that therefore they coulde not vse the same to proue the interest of the Pastor, as who shoulde say that the Pastor is not one of the Churche. But of the absurditie of this, I haue spoken sufficiently before, and howe all men doe see the vanitie of this reason, that bycause the people haue an interest by this place, therefore the Pastor hath none.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I do indéed speake of this matter there againe after a sort: for I am driuen vnto it by the order of the Admonition. But in all those words there by me vttered, touching excōmunicatiō, I do not once aske, what maketh this, or what maketh that (as you charge me) although I might iustly vse these kinde of questions, as sufficient answeres, to such vnskilfull quotations, as they paint theyr margent with: and somtimes indéed I make such demaundes, but it is to shewe the fondnesse of their allegations.
                        I defende no Chauncelors. &c. that vsurpe any office, wherevnto they be not lawfully called, but I woulde not haue the Scriptures abused to confute them, least thereby (séeing the weaknesse of our reasons) they be animated rather to procéede, than perswaded to leaue of. I doe not thinke that Chauncellours ought to excommunicate (with this kinde of excommunication, that wée talke of) except they bée Ministers, and so muche haue I vttered in my Answere: but I will not disquiet the Church for it, by séeking reformation extraordinarily, neyther will I bée wilfull, if I can heare any sounde reasons to remoue me from this perswasion:

wherfore you doe in this cause, and in this place vniustly charge me.
                        The place in the eightéenth of Sainct Mathew, is vnderstāded of those, to whom the discipline of the Churche, is by the authoritie of the Churche committed, that is in this churche of Englande, the Bishop. And therfore that place can not proue that there is any iniurie done to the Pastor, or that hée is spoyled of his lawful: iurisdiction: and this is the effect of my answere, whereat you only cauill as your nature is.
                        I saye in déede that this place was before alleaged in the Admonition to proue that the whole Churche shoulde excommunicate, and not one man onely, and therefore I sée not, howe the same place maye aptly bée alleadged, to proue anye iurisdiction of the Pastor ouer his flocke, séeyng it gyueth to the flocke equall iurisdiction with the Pastor, and not to the Pastor any superioritie ouer them, if the interpretation vsed in the Admonition be true.
                        Let the Reader consider the wordes of my Answere to the Admonition: and trie whether there be any suche absurdities in them or no. Surely it is a fault both in you and the Admonitors, to make the Scripture so pliable to your fansies, and the same place to serue as many turnes as you lyst.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 149. past the middst.
                     But I come to shewe the vse of the primitiue Churche in this matter, wherof we haue a manifesteThis place of Tertullian is verie corruptly alleaged. as will appeare▪
                         testimonie in Tertullian. If (sayeth he) there be any whiche haue committed suche aTertull. in Apol. 39. c. saulte, that he is to be put awaye from the partaking of the prayer of the churche, and from all holie matters or affayres, there doe beare rule or be presidentes certayne of the moste approued auncientes or elders, which haue obteyned this honour, not by money, but by good reporte.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Here you haue separated those things whiche Tertullian hath ioyned, and you ioyne together in one sentence that whiche Tertullian hath separated, for thus hée writeth: And it is a greate argumente and example of the latter iudgement, if any manTertull. in Apolog. cap. 39. hath so offended that hee is banished from the communication of prayer, of companie, and of all holie affaires. Here Tertullian maketh a full poynte: and beginning a newe sentence he sayth: Approued seniors haue authoritie to rule, which haue obteined this honour, not by money, but by a good reporte. &c. And these wordes be so distinguished from the other, that B. Rhenanus placeth his commentarie betwixte them. And yet you ioyne them with a péece of the former sentence, whiche you haue also mangled: and so make as though Tertullian shoulde saye, that these Seniors didde excommunicate, where as there can no suche matter be gathered of his wordes. For there were other poyntes of Discipline for them to execute, and other matters of gouernmente to looke vnto. And he that shall well weigh the wordes of Tertullian, shall perceyue that he meaneth by these approued elders, none other but ministers whiche do gouerne the congregation, when they come together to prayer, and other holie actions, the whole order wherof, he dothe in that place describe.
                        But be it, that they had to do also in excommunication (which I will not denye) for I did neuer so giue the authoritie of excommunicating to the Bishop alone, thatThe Bishop may haue assistance ioyned with hym. I thinke he may not haue other assistance ioyned vnto him for the execution of it, (if the order of the Churche so require:) yet this proueth not, but that the Bishop maye excommunicate alone, if that authoritie be giuen vnto hym by the order of the churche. This place rather maketh agaynst you, for fyrste it is lyke, that these Seniors were ministers of the woorde and Sacramentes: then it is certayne that the multitude hadde not to doe in the execution of thys Disciplyne, whyche you laboure to prooue. There canne no greate certaynetie bée gathered

of this place, whether one or moe did excommunicate: excepte you will also conclude that Churchewardens and sydemen (bycause they be officers to see good rule kept in the Churche) haue interest in excommunications, together wyth the Byshop. Wherefore I doe requyre a more manyfeste proofe of you: For thys place maye wyth more probabilitie be otherwyse expounded, and therefore enforceth nothyng.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 17. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 149. tovvardes the ende.
                     And that the Auncientes had the ordering of these thyngs, and the peoples consente was required, and that if the case were a verie difficulte case, it was referred vnto the Synodes or Councells, and that the ministers dyd not take vpon them of theyr owne authoritie to excommunicate, and that those whych did receyue the excommunicate without the knowledge and consentLib. 3. ep. 8. 10. 14. 19. 1. lib. 3. ep. of the churche were reprehended, it maye appeare almoste in euerie page of Cyprians Epistles, and namely in these, whiche I haue noted in the margent.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Thus you driue me to séeke that whyche in those Epistles by you quoted, I can not fynde, howe muche better dealing had it bin to haue sette downe the wordes of Cyprian, that they myght haue ben viewed and considered.
                        In the. 8. Epistle of the thirde booke, Cyprian doth fynde himselfe gréened with one Therapius, bycause he gaue peace to one Uictor a Priest, before he had shewed himselfe fully repentant, and had satisfied for his offence: before also the tyme was come appoynted vnto hym to make satisfaction, lykewyse without the request and knowledge of the people. Whereby it appeareth that Therapius did absolue Uictor before the tyme appointed, and secretly withoute the knowledge of the people: but this proueth not your purpose. Therapius is iustly reproued for breaking the order appoynted by the Churche, and for absoluyng Uictor before his tyme, and in a corner, without the knowledge of the people: but this proueth not that the Byshoppe maye not excommunicate: but the contrarie rather, for Cyprian in the ende thoughte this absolution to be sufficiente, as it appeareth in these wordes. But weyghing the matter by long aduise, it seemed sufficiente to chyde our felloweLib. 3. epi. 8. Therapius, for that he didde this thyng vnaduisedlye, and to haue instructed hym that hereafter he committe not the lyke. But yet we thought not good to withdraw the peace whyche was once giuen, (howesoeuer) of a Priest of God: and for this cause wee haue permitted vnto Victor, to vse the Communion deliuered vnto hym. Whereby it is manyfeste, that the absolution of Therapius was thoughte good, and that he had authoritie to absolue alone, but that it was done not according to the order then in the churche appointed.
                        In the tenth Epistle there is nothyng spoken of Excommunication or absolution:Epist. 10. onely Cyprian sayeth, that he made no answere to the Letters of Donatus and Nouatus, and Gordius, bycause at his fyrste entraunce into his Bishopryke, hée had determined to doe nothing without their Councell, meanyng the Priestes, and Deacons to whome he writ, and withoute the consente of the people. What can you conclude hereof touchyng excommunication? Cyprian here sheweth him selfe to haue iurisdiction ouer other Churches, and authoritie ouer other Ministers, and that he wyll doe nothing in doubtfull matters in theyr churches, without the consent of the ministers and people. But this is nothing toiuchng excōmunication, neyther dothe it proue but that he myghte doe thynges without theyr consentes, for why shoulde he else saye: 
                              statui: I haue determined: signifying therby, that it was in his power to do otherwyse if he woulde.
                        In the. 14. Epistle he reproueth certayne Priestes, for receyuyng into the churchEpist. 14.
                           
without the consent of their Bishop, suche as had fallen in the tyme of persecution, and that before they had any iust tryall of their repentance, adding that none ought so to be receiued, but 
                              Per manus impositionem Episcopi & Cleri: by the imposition of the handes of the Bishop and Cleargie. I can not sée any thyng in this Epistle, that giueth the people any interest in excommunicating or absoluyng. But this is euidently to be collected out of it, that no suche thyng ought to be doone withoute the authoritie of the Bishop.
                        In the. 19. Epistle he wryteth, that he will not take vpon himselfe alone to restoreEpist. 9. those to the Churche agayne, who falling in the tyme of persecution, were condemned by the iudgement of al the Cleargie. I knowe not howe you wyll frame this to your purpose: for who euer denyed but that the Synodes mighte excommunicate? and who will graunt, that suche as be orderly and lawfully excommunicated by manie, shoulde be absolued and reconciled onely by one: and yet in that they desyre this at Cyprians hands alone, it argueth, that the manner was at that tyme for one man to absolue: but Cyprian refused to doe it, for that it was a common cause, and they hadde bin Excommunicated by the common consente of the Cleargie.
                        In the thirde Epistle of his fyrste Booke, I fynde nothing that maketh for you, or against me, wherfore you must take the paines to recite his wordes, before youLib. 1. epist. 3. can deserue any credite. Thus whylest you would séeme to saye muche, you doe but abuse the Reader, and in the ende saye nothing perteining to the controuersie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 18. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 149. Sect. vlt.
                     In Augustines tyme it appeareth also, that the consent of the Churche was required: for in3. Lib. contra epi. Parmen. the thirde booke against the epistle of Parmenian, he sheweth that if the multitude of the church be not in that fault, for whyche one is to bee excommunicated: that then it helpeth much to make the partie bothe afrayde and ashamed, that hee bee excommunicated or anathematised (as hee calleth it) by all the churche, and in his bookes de Bap. contra Donatistas, in diuers places, hee is so farre from permitting the excommunication to one man that he seemeth to fall into the other extremitie, which is to make the estate of the churche to popular, and the people to haue to greate a sway. For there he sheweth, that if the moste of the people be infected with the faulte, whyche is to be punished by excommunication, that then no excommunication oughte to bee attempted, for An vntruth. bycause a sufficient number of voyces will not bee obteyned for the excommunication. By which testimonies, besydes the institution of God, and the practise of the churches in the Apostles tymes, appeareth manifestly what hath ben the vse of the churches touching excommunication, as long as there was any puritie in the churche.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           Augustine in that third booke contra epistolam Parmeniani, sayth, that he would haueWhen excommunication should be vsed. excōmunication then vsed, when the vse therof can make no schisme in the churche. that is, when the cryme for the which a man is excommunicated, is such, as al men for the moste parte, do abhorre and detest: so that the offender can not haue so manyAug. lib. 3. contra episto. Parm. fautours as are able to make a schisme in the church: for then (sayth S. Augustine) may this discipline be executed without the breache of peace and vnitie, and withoute the hurt of the people, when the multitude of the congregation of the church is free from that crime, that is excōmunicated. For then (the multitude) helpe rather the Bishop reprouing, than the wicked partie resisting, than it profitably absteineth from his companie, so that no man doth so muche as eate with him, not for raging enuie, but for brotherly correction and then also is the partie himselfe stricken with feare, and healed through shame, when as (seeing himself accursed of the whole churche) he can fynde no companions amongst the multitude, with whom he might reioyce in his sinne, and insult ouer good men.
                        Wherby it is euident that S. Augustine meaneth him to be excommunicated of theHow ye whole church is said to excommunicate. whole churche, not whome the whole churche doth ex officio excommunicate, but whose Excommunication the whole Churche dothe well lyke of, whose facte

the whole Churche dothe deteste, and whose companie and fellowshippe the whole Churche doth auoyde and eschue. Surely if a man marke the woords of Augustine diligently, he may well perceyue that Sainct Augustine giueth Ius excommunicandi, to the Bishop: for else why shoulde he saye, that when the people be frée from that cryme: they rather helpe the Bishop correctyng, than the wicked person resistyng: But the discrete Reader may soone vnderstande howe farre Sainct Augustine is in this place from confirming your assertion.
                        S. Augustine wryteth seuen bookes De baptisme contra Donatistas, and will you not vouchesafe to name one of them vnto me? nor yet to recite his words, that I might knowe wherevppon you ground this popular kinde of gouernment falsely ascribed vnto him? it may be that Augustine in your vnderstandyng, attributeth more to the people than he doth in déede: and it is not vnlyke, but that lacke of diligent reading hath driuen you into this iudgemente of him. But I will giue you a medicineHowe Augustine is to bee vnderstode in ascribing binding and l
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              syng to the people. for this disease, euen out of these bookes that you name. In the sixte Booke and fourth Chapter, he séemeth to giue authoritie to all Christian people to remit and to retayne synnes, and these wordes of Chryst: 
                              Si cui dimiseritis peccata, dimittuntur ei. &c. To whom soeuer you forgiue sinnes, they are forgiuen vnto him. &c. to be spoken to all Christians, but he openeth his owne meaning, and teacheth you howe to vnderstande all suche lyke kynde of speaches: for thus he sayeth in the same Booke and chapter. VVhen sinnes are remitted vnto him that is truely conuerted vnto God,August. lib. 6. contra Donatist. cap. 4. they are remitted by those, to whom he is ioyned by his true conuersion, for the same holye spirite dothe forgiue them, whiche is giuen to all Sainctes, ioyned in loue among them selues, whether they knowe one an other corporally or not: lykewyse when any mannes synnes are reteyned, they be reteyned of those from whome hee that hath his sinnes reteyned, dothe separate himselfe by dissimilitude of lyfe, and wickednesse of hearte, whether they knowe him corporally, or knowe hym not. Here you may learne what Sainct Augustine meaneth by his popular state, and howe hée is to be vnderstanded, when he sayeth, that eyther the whole Churche, or the people do excommunicate, or absolue.
                        
                           I woulde you had noted vnto mée, where I might fynde this saying of Sainte Augustine, that if the moste of the people be infected with the faulte which is to be punished by excommunication, that then no excommunication oughte to bee attempted, for bicause a sufficient number of voyces will not be obteined for the excommunication. For I promise you I can not as yet come to the sight of it in those bookes of S. Augustine by you named: neyther can you tell me (as I thynke) where to fynde it: but this is your vsuall maner and custome.
                        
                        
                           In déed in his thirde booke contra Epist▪ Parmeniani, and second chapt. he hath a placeAugust. lib. 3. con
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 p. Par men. cap. 2. somethyng lyke to this of yours, but it is from your purpose, neither doth it tende to any suche ende as you alleadge it, for the wordes be these: Re vera si contagio peccandi multitudinem inuaserit, diuinae disciplinae seuera misericordia necessaria est, nam consilia separationis & inania sunt, & perniti
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 sa, atque sacrilega, quia & impia & superba fiunt, & plus perturbant infirmos bonos, quàm corrigunt animosos malos,
                            Verily if the contagion of synne hath infected the multitude, the seuere mercie of godlie discipline is necessarie, for the purpose of separation is both vaine, pernicious and sacrilegious, bicause they are bothe wicked and presumptuous, and doe more trouble the good that be weake, than correcte or amend the euill that be stubborne. Sainct Augustine doth not here alleadge this for a cause, that sufficiente voyces can not be obteyned for excommunication. as you pretende: but he thinketh Excommunication to be altogether in vayne, where the infection is generall.
                        
                        But that it maye further appeare the doctrine that I affirme touchyng the authoritieEx
                                 〈1 line〉
                              mmunication by bishops proued by the practise of the primi
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                               churche. of Bishops in excommunicating to be true, and to haue bene the vsuall practise of the Churche in the beste tyme and state of it: I thoughte good in thys place to adde to my former testimonyes and answeres, the authoritie of certaine Councels, wherin the practyse of the Churche doth euidentely shew it selfe.
                        
                           And fyrst to begynne with the Canons attributed to the Apostles, and so ofte alleadged by T. C.
                        
                           In the. 32. or as it is in some bookes the. 33. of those Canons, it is thus decréed:
                           Can. Apost. 32. If any Priest or Deacon bee excommunicated of his Bishop, it maye not bee lawfull for any other to receiue him, but only the partie that hath separated him, except that Bishop dye whiche hath excommunicated him: in this Canon power to excommunicate, and also to absolue, is in plaine wordes committed to the Bishop alone.
                        
                        
                           The fifte Canon of the Councell of Nice speaketh of this matter in these wordes:
                           Con. Nicae. can. 5. Concernyng those that are separated from the Communion, be they Clearkes or lay menne, by the Bishops whiche are in euerie prouince, Lette the sentence stande according to the canon whych doth pronounce those that are eiected of some, not to be admitted of other. But lette it bee examined whether the parties be excommunicated through the indignation, or contention, or frowardnesse of the Bishop: and for this cause, that the examination may be duly had, let there be in euerie Prouince a Synode celebrated twice in the yeare. The wordes be manyfeste: and what néede suche pr
                                 〈1 line〉
                              sion for to examine the dooings of the Bishoppe, if hée hadde not authoritie to Excommunicate alone?
                        
                        
                           The sixte Canon of the Councell of Antic
                                 〈1 line〉
                              he is this: If any man hath bene excommunicatedCon. Anti
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ch. Can. 6. of his owne Bishop, lette him not bee receyued of any other, before he bee absolued of his owne Bishop, or shall defende himselfe in a Synode, and (the Synode beeing persuaded) receyue an other sentence. The same decree is to bee obserued agaynst laye men, and Priests and Deacons, and those that be in the number of the Cleargie: Why shoulde the Councell saye? 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ee that is excommunicated of his owne Bishop. &c. if the authoritie and power of excommunicatyng did not belong to the Bishop alone?
                        
                        
                           In the seconde Councell of Carthage, Canon. 8. it is lykewyse determined, ThatCon. Carthag. 2. can. 8. if a Priest beyng excommunicated or punished by his owne Bishop, shall presume to celebrate, he shall be accurssed.
                        
                           In the sixte Councell of Carthage Can. 10. the same is affirmed.
                           Con. Carthag. 6. can. 10.
                        
                        
                           In the Councell holden at Sardica Can. 13. (or as it is in s
                                 〈1 line〉
                              me 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ookes. 16.) it is in lyke manner decréed: That if a De
                              〈1 line〉
                           con or a Priest, or any of the 
                              〈1 line〉
                           leargie be excommunicatedCon. Sardic. Can. 13. of his owne Bishop, and shall flee to an other Bishop, vnderstanding that he is excommunicated of his owne Bishop, he may not giue vnto hym the communion, dooyng therby iniurie to his brother and fellowe Bishop.
                        By all these Canons and auncient Councels it is euident, that from time to time euen in the best and purest state of the church, Bishops alone haue had authoritie to excommunicate.
                        And least T. C. shoulde here flée to his olde shifte, and newly deuised distinction,The Bishop did excommunicate alone, not as 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              rator of the action. that this is attributed to the Bishop, bycause he was the chiefe of the action, and did moderate it, and not bycause the authoritie and power of excommunicatyng remayned in him alone, althoughe the manyfest woordes of the Councells ouer▪ throwe it, and it is not to be iustifyed by any learning or good authoritie, yet that theCon. Sard. Reader may the better vnderstande the vanitie of it, I will recite the. 14. Canon (orcan. 14. as it is in some bookes the. 17. canon) of this Councell of Sardica, wherein it dothe plainly appeare, that the Bishop alone did excommunicate. The canon is this: If there shall be founde a Bishop prone to anger (which ought not to be in such a man) and being soone moued against a Priest or a Deacon, shall caste him out of the churche, or excommunicate him, it must be foreseene, that he be nor rashly condemned and excommunicated: therfore lette him that is cast out, haue libertie to complain to the Metropolitane of the same Prouince: if he be absent, then to the next Bishop. &c. and that Bishop which hath iustly or vniustly secluded him, must be contente to haue his doings examined, and his sentence either confirmed or corrected, &c. What néed these affections be seared in the Bishop, if he could not excōmunicate without the consent of a Seigniorie, or of the people? For the Seigniorie might wel inough withstand this his hastynesse. Wherfore it is playne that the Bishop alone may excommunicate.
                        
                           But yet to cutte off all further cauilling, I woulde haue you to vnderstande that I doo not so giue the authoritie of Excommunicating to the Bishop alone,The authoritie of excommunication ascrided to the Byshop not in
                                 〈1 line〉
                              nite, but l
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ces. or to any one manne, that I thynke hée maye excommunicate when he lyste, withoute iuste cause and due proofe of the same: my meanyng is not to make hym bothe accuser aud Iudge: I doe not thinke that he oughte to excommunicate any before the partie be orderly and lawfully conuicted of suche crime or crimes, as are to be punished by that Censure. And that you maye knowe that I affirme nothing herein but the verie same that Saincte Augustine hath affirmed before me,The practise in Augustins time. and to the intente the worlde maye sée that my opinion in this poynte is not straunge or voyde of sufficiente authoritie, I will sette downe his woordes, as I fynde them in his booke De vtilitate & necessitate poenitentiae, and reported of Beda inAugustinus. To. 10. ho. 50. his Commentaries vpon the fyrste Corinth. 5. Althoughe some thinges be true, yet the iudge muste not beleeue them, vnlesse they bee sufficiently proued. And wee can forbidde no man from the communion (although thys prohibition be not mortall but medicinable) excepte he eyther willingly confesse it, or be accused and conuicted, eyther in some secular or ecclesiasticall courte: for who dare take vnto hymselfe to be both accuser and iudge? And this is my iudgement of the authoritie of Bishops in excommunicating.
                        The abuses crept into this Church in the executing of it, I doe not defende (as it is manyfeste in my Answere) but wishe them by due order and authoritie with spéede reformed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 19. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 150. Lin. 7.
                     And it is to bee obserued here, that bothe in this parte of the discipline, and also in all other partes of it (as I haue shewed) as in harder and difficulter causes, things were referred vnto the Synodes prouinciall, nationall or general, as the case required: so if the elders of any Church shall determine any thing contrary to the word of God, or inconueniently in any matter that falleth into their determination, the parties which are greeued may haue recourse for remedie, vnto the elders and Pastors of diuers Churches, that is to say vnto Synods of Shires, or dioceses, or prouinces, or nations of as great or of as small compasse as shall be thought conuentent by the Church, according to the difficultie or waight of the matters, which are in controuersie, whyche meetings ought to be as often as can be conueniently, not only for the decision of such difficulties which the seuerall presoyteries cannot so well iudge of, but also to the end that common counsell might be taken for the best remedie of the vices or incommodities which eyther the Churches be in, or in daunger to be in. And as those things whiche cannot be decided by the eldership of the Churches, are to be reserued vnto the knowledge of some Synode of a shire or diocese, so those which for their hardnes cānot be there decided, must be brought into the Synods of larger compasse, as I haue shewed to haue bin done in the Apostles times, and in the Churches which followed them long after.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        So shall there be turbarum & contentionum satis: much vnquietnesse: for one or two busy Pastors, suche as your schole can yelde good store of, woulde inuent matter ynoughThe tumultuous and dis orderly order propounded by ye Replyer. to trouble the whole Church: and Pastors should then be compelled to be as much absent from their benefyces, by reason of those Synods, as they be now vpon other occasions. Lord what a tumultuous Church would this be, if this plat for me might take place? In the meane while the Prince shoulde be a cyphar, and onely wayte to vnderstand what kynde of Religion ceremonies, and gouernment these Seigniories and their Synodes would prescribe vnto hir to mainteyne and defende: for the must haue potestatem facti onely, not Iuris: she must take lawes, she must giue none: she must execute whatsoeuer it pleaseth master Pastors and their Seniors to commaund hir, else wil they stirre vp the whole countrey against hir, at the least she must be excommunicated: me thinketh I see the very beginning

of a newe Popedome.
                        Haue you shewed this cōfused order to haue bin in ye Apostles time or in ye primitiue Church?T. C. ascribeth his owne deuise to the Apostles. Where haue you shewed it? or when will you proue it? Synodes there were indéede: and necessary it is that when occasion serueth they should be: but your Seigniorie in euery Towne or parish vnder a Christian Prince neuer was, neyther is it possible that without confusion it should be, as I haue before declared. But what audacitie is this, to ascribe an order inuented by your selfe (vpon the whiche, scarse thrée of you do agrée, if you were well examined, and in the which your selfe, or euer it were long, would espie some thing to be altered) vnto the Apostles?
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Byshops Courts, and their officers.
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 150. Sect. 1.
                     These things standing in this sort, al those courts of Byshops and Archbyshops must needes fall, which were by Antichrist erected, against this lawfull iurisdiction of eldership, as the court of faculties, and those which are holden by Chauncellours, commissaries, officialls, and such like, the describing of the corruptions whereof, would require a whole booke, of whiche I will note the principall heads and summes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And not these courts only, but all the courts in England would be deuoured vp of your Seigniorie: yea each the Princes regall authoritie, as may appeare partly by that which is said before, and partly by that which shall follow hereafter. For what iurisdiction will not your Seigniorie vsurp? what matters would it not presume to determine? what degrée of person would it not tread vnder foote? but let vs heare what you say of these courts.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 150. Sect. 2.
                     First for that they enter into an office, which perteyneth not vnto them, but to euery particular Church, and especially to the eldership and gouernours of the Church, and therfore although they should do nothing but that which were good, lawfull and godly, yet can they not approue their labours vnto men, much lesse to God, putting their sickle in another mans haruest. For neyther by the truth of the word of God, doth that apperteyne vnto them, neyther by M. Doctors own iudgment (if his yea were yea, and his nay nay) considering that he sayd before, that this iurisdiction belongeth to the ministers. And although it should perteyne vnto the Byshop (as he is called) to whome notwithstanding it doth not apperteyne, yet were it not lawfull for him to translate thys office vnto another, and to appoynt one to do it, when he listeth, no more than he can appoynt them to do his other offices of ministring, as preaching the word and ministring the sacraments.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your seuerall gouernment by eldership in euery parish, I vtterly reiect: as neyther iustifiable by Gods worde, nor any example of any churche at any tyme, vnder a Christian prince, in that maner and forme by you prescribed.
                        The courte of faculties medleth not with excommunications.
                        The courtes of Chauncellours. &c. haue many moe matters to deale withall than excommunication, for that is but one parte of discipline, that they vse or ought to vse, only vpon an extremitie, concerning the whiche discipline and the ministers therof, I am of the selfe same same iudgement that I was before, and my yea is yea,Gualter in .1▪ Cor. 5. and my nay is naye. And yet it I will tell you what I haue read since in M Gualters commentaries vpon the. 1. Cor. 5. If any would appoynt some kynde of separation, or shuttyng out, which should be executed by a lawfull magistrate, and should rather be ciuillA kynde of ciuill excommunication. than ecclesiasticall, we will not be against them. For the lawes of our cities also doo punish

them with excommunication, which are very negligent in hearing sermons, and in the vse of the Lords supper, and furthermore whiche do offend the Church with their wicked life. For such if they liue in the citie, they are throwen out of the felowship of the wardes or companies so that they can buy and sell with no man: neyther are they capable of any honoure or publike office: But if they dwell in the countrey, they are kept from the vse of the commō pastnres and woods. And this way is most meete for vs, let other cities and countries do that which they thinke to be most profitable for their people: for so much as it is euident, that the same forme of discipline cannot be appoynted and obserued in all places. I wish the other remoued from those Courtes, and this in the place of it. But that Byshops may lawfully vse the true ecclesiasticall excommunication, I haue proued before. Denie it you as oft as you will, you can shew no sound reason or ground of your deniall.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the thirde Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 150. Sect. 3.
                     And other thing is, that in these courtes (which they call spiritual) they take the knowledge of matters which are 
                           〈1 line〉
                        eere ciuill, thereby not only peruerting the order whiche God hath appointed in seuering the ciuil causes from ye ecclesiastical, but A manifest vntruth. iustling also with the ciuill Magistrate, and thrusting him from the iurisdiction, which apperteyneth vnto him, as the causes of the contracts of marriage, of diuorces, of willes and testaments, with diuerse other such like things. For although it apperteme to the Church and the gouernours thereof, to shew out of the word of God which is a lawful contract or iust cause of diuorse, and so foorth, yet the iudiciall determination, and definitiue sentences of all these, do apperteine vnto the ciuill Magistrate. Herevnto may be added, that all their punishmentes almost are penalties of money, whiche can by no meanes apperteyne to the Church, but is a thing meerely ciuill.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        We giue to the ciuill magistrate authoritie in ecclesiasticall causes: and we acknowledgeEcclesiasticall courts executed in the prin ces name. all iurisdiction, that any court in England hath or doth exercise, be it ciuill or ecclesiasticall, to be executed in hir maiesties name and righte, and to come from hir as supreme gouernoure, so farre are we off from iustling with hir, or thrusting hir from the iurisdiction which perteyneth vnto hir: neyther do we make any such distinction betwixt ciuill and ecclesiasticall causes, as the Pope and you do. And therfore weWho they are that iustle with the ciuill magistrate. are not they that detract any thing from the ciuil magistrate, but it is the Pope and you: who both thrust him from the iurisdiction, that by the law of God and all equitie he ought to haue in Ecclesiasticall matters. God hath not so seuered ciuil causes from Ecclesiasticall, but that one man may be iudge in them both: and if it perteine to the Church to declare what is a lawfull contract, & which be the iust causes of diuorce, by what reason can you proue that the iudiciall determination and definitiue sentence of those matters, doth perteine to the ciuill magistrate only? For is not he most méete to iudge in these causes, which best vnderstandeth them? but both this and that whiche followeth, you speake without reason, and therefore the custome of the Church, and the lawes appoynted for the same, now also receyued and confirmed by the ciuill magistrate, with the consent of the whole Realme, must be of greater force than your single words.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the fourth Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 150. Sect. vlt.
                     Thirdly as they handle matters which do not apperteyne vnto the Ecclesiastical iurisdiction, so those which do apperteyne vnto the Church, they do turne from their lawfull institution, vnto other ends not sufferable, which M. Doctor himselfe doth confesse in excommunicating for money. &c.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        So I do indéede: but it is the fault of the man not of the law.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 151. Sect. 1.
                     Last of all they take vpon them those things, which are neyther lawfull for ciuil nor ecclesiasticall iurisdiction, nor simply for any man to do, of which sort diuerse are reckened vp by the Abmonition and some confessed by M. Doctor. I will not here speake of the vnfitnesse of those whiche are chiefe officers in these courtes, that the most of thē are eyther Papists, or bribers, or drunkerds, (I know what I write) or Epicures and suche as liue of benefices and Prebends, in Englande and in Irelande, doing nothing of those thinges whiche apperteyne vnto them, and of other suche naughty persons, which are not only not meete to be gouernours in the Churche, but which in any reformed Church, shoulde not be so much as of the Church. I speake not of all, I doubt not but there be some do that which they do of conscience, and with minde to help forward the Churche, whiche I trust will (when the Lorde shall giue them more knowledge) keepe themselues in theyr vocations, and being men, for their gifts apt and able eyther to serue the Churche or the common wealth, in some other calling, will rather occupy their gifts there, than where they haue no ground to assure themselues, that they do please God.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        For as much as you referre vs to the Admonition to know what these thinges be that Chancellours. &c. take vpō thē, being lawful neyther for ciuil nor ecclesiasticall iurisdictiō, I will also referre you to my Answer made to that part of the Admonition.
                        Your slaunderous and opprobrious speaches against the men (hauing little to sayA tast of the Repliers diuinitie. against their offices) they must take in good part vntill you come foorth namely to accuse them: but I am sory that they (being as you saye suche persons) shall haue little occasion to be perswaded to amendment of life by you, whome they sée as factious in religion, as they are péeuish in condition: as corrupt with affections, as they be with bribes: as deepe in spite and malice, as they be in drunkennesse: What diuinitie call you this, thus to libell against men in authoritie, whome you dare not accuse to their faces? I defend them not if ther be any such, nay I wish them seuerely punished: but you vtter nothing lesse than the frutes of diuinitie, and I woulde haue you come foorth to accuse them. Touching their benefices and prebendes, they will defend themselues by the examples of your adherentes: whereof some haue shaken off the ministerie, and yet kéepe their Prebends, some misliking the state of this Church, crying out of the Canon lawe, the Court of faculties. &c. take notwithstanding all the benefyte thereby that they can, some of them reteyning two, some 4. &c. and yet do full little duetie, nay rase vp rather than plant.
                        But why do I fall into this vayne, which I mislike in you? I am therevnto forced by your intollerable outrageousnesse, the which howsoeuer I suffer against my selfe, yet may I be bold something to say vnto you, thus swelling and raging agaynste other.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     These Seniors then, bycause their charge was not ouermuch, did execute their office in theyr own persons, without substitutes. Our lord Bishops haue their vnder officers, as Suffraganes, Chauncellours, Archdeacons, Officials, Commissaries, and such like.
                     
                        Ansvver to the Admonition. Pag. 117. Sect. 2. 3. 4.
                        You barely affirme without any proofe, that these Seniors thenOf substitutes or vicares. did execute their offices in their owne persons without substitutes: but your bare word is not of sufficient credite, although I think you will make a greate difference betwixte Seniors and Byshops: for they whome you call Seniors had no authoritie to preach, or to minister the Sacraments as Byshops haue.
                        That Byshops might haue substitutes and had so, it is manifest in the. 13. Canon. Ancyrani Concilij, whiche was about the yeare of our

Lord three hundred and eight, and before Nicene councel, where we reade on this sort: Vicarijs Episcoporum (quos Graeci Chorepiscopos vocant) non licet vel presbyteros
                           Concil. Ancyran. 
                           vel diaconos ordinare, sed nec presbyteris Ciuitatis, sine Episcopi praecepto, amplius aliquid ordinare, nec sine authoritate literarū eius in vnaquaque parochia aliquid agere. It is not lawful for Byshops substitutes, (whom the Greciās do cal fellow Bishops or coadiutors) to order either priests or Deacons, neyther is it lawful to the priests of the citie, without the Byshops authoritie to commaund any thing else, or without the authoritie of his letters to do any thing in any parish.
                        It is manifest hereby that Byshops then had Deputies, whether you will call them Chauncellours, Commissaries &c. the matter is not great. To contend for the name, when the thing is certayne, is a note of a contentious person.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 151. Sect. 1.
                     Now I will take a short suruey of that whiche M. Doctor alleadgeth to proue his offices of M. of faculties, Chauncellours &c. First he saith in the. 117. page out of the Ancyran councell, that there were vicares of Byshops, where although the name be not found of Chancellours. &c. yet there is (saith he) the office. What vicar S. Paules Byshop may haue and in what case, I haue shewed before, where I haue proued the necessary residence of euery Pastor in his flock. But I will note here how M. Doctor doth go about to abuse his Reader in these vicares. And firste where there were three editions, of which one only maketh mention of these vicares, he tooke that and left the other, which is to be obserued, for that this varietie of editions rose of the diuerse vnderstanding of the Greeke word (
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ) which may be taken eyther for him that is byshop for another and in his place, or for him that is Byshop in the countrie, that is in some towne which is no citie, so that Chorepiscopus, was opposed vnto the Byshop which was of some citie. And if it be so taken, then here is no proofe for the vicares of Byshops. But howsoeuer it be, it shall appeare that the names of Chauncellours, and Chorepiscopos do not so muche differ, as the offices and functions of them. For it appeareth in the same councell and Canon,An vntruth, for there is no such thing in that canon nor councell. that they were like the. 70. disciples, that they had also some care to prouide for the poore, and that they were such as did minister the sacraments. And in another councell they haue authoritie giuen them to makeAntioch cap. 10. Subdeacons, exorcists, and readers. I know this was a corruption of the ministerie, but yet all men see, how M. Doctor looketh as it were a farre of vpon things, and therefore taketh a man for a 
                           〈1 line〉
                        olehill, when he would make vs beleeue that these were Chancellours. &c.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        My purpose is to proue that which the Admonition denyeth, that is, that Byshops had their substitutes, call them by what name you will: neyther do I speake eyther of the names, or office of Chauncellours in that place, but I reproue the Authours of the Admonition of ignorance, for saying that Byshops had then no substitutes.
                        You haue shewed nothing hitherto whiche proueth that Byshops may haue no substitutes, but you haue declared rather the contrary, as it is by me in that place noted.
                        
                           How I abuse the reader in these vicares, and what choise I make of these thrée editions,
                                 
                                    〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                  Byshops vicares. let the Authours of the Centuries iudge: who speaking of the same matter Cent.
                            4. cap. 7. write thus: Episcoporum vicarios Canones conciliorum Ancyrani Neocaesariensis & Antiocheni (si quam fidem habent) Chorepiscopos nominant. &c.
                            The canons of the councells of Ancyra, Neocaesarea, and Antioch (if they beare any credite) do callCent. 4. cap. 7. the vicares of Byshops Chorepiscopos, whiche worde also is extant in the. 54. epist. of Basile And Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 14. calleth one Maureandas Chorepiscopum of Bicoris Byshop of the Persians. M Caluine in his Instit. cap.
                            8. Sect. 52. is of the same iudgement. Euery Colledge (saith he) onely for the preseruation of orderCaluine. & concord, was subiect to one Byshop, which did so excel the rest in dignitie, that notwithstanding, he was subiect to the company of brethren. But if the circuite whiche was vnder his Byshopricke was larger, thā that he could sufficiently performe the office of a Byshop in

all places, there were priests appointed in certaine places thorough the countrey which supplyed his roome in smaller matters. These they called Chorepiscopos, bycause through the prouince they represented the Byshops.
                        You may therfore now vnderstand, that I haue not gone about to abuse the Reader by vsing this word Uicares, but rather that your selfe did not, or woulde not vnderstand what was meant by this word Chorepiscopus.
                        
                        You say it appeareth in the same councell and Canon, (meaning the councell of Ancyran and 13. Canon) that they were like the. 70. disciples, that they had also some care to protude for the poore, and that they were such as did minister the sacraments: and yet there is not one word of this in that Canon or in that councell: whereby it appeareth that some man hathe deceiued you with his collections, and that you haue not read the Canon or the councell your selfe. The Canon I haue reported wholly and truly, in my Answere to the Admonition. Let the Reader measure your greate skill and reading, by such grosse errours. Indéede in the councell of Neocaesarea and. 13. Canon: there are the like words to be found.
                        All that which you speake to proue that the office of these Chorepiscopi, doth differ from the office of Chauncellours is néedelesse: (although it is no good reason to says they differ in some points, Ergo, they agrée in no pointes) my purpose only in this place is to proue against the Admonition (as I haue sayde) that byshops had substitutes, whiche being graunted, it will soone fallout that they may as well haue Chauncellours.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     In stead of Chauncellours, Archdeacons, Officials, Commissaries, Proctors, Doctors, summoners, Churchwardens and suche like, you haue to place in euery congregation a lawfull and godly Seigntorie.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 125. Sect. 2.
                        That is, in stead of learned, wise, and discreete men, you must place to gouerne the Church in euery congregation, vnlearned, ignorante, and men most vnapt to gouerne, for such of necessitie you must haue in most congregations.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 151. Sect. 2.
                     In the. 125. page to the Admonition desiring that these may be remoued and the eldership established according to gods order, M. Doctor answereth, that that were to place in stead of wise, and discreete men, vnlearned, ignorant and vnapt to rule. Let M. Doctor take heede, lest in allowing so well of the popish ceremonies, not onely as tollerable, but as fitte, and then acquainting himselfe with the papists manner of speaking, in saying that the people be ignorant and vnlearned, he fall or euer he be aware into some worse thing. Moses in Deuteronomy, and Salomon in hysDeut. 4. Prouerbs, place the principall wisedome in keeping Gods commaundements and in fearing God.Prou. 1. And Dauid sayth, that the secrets and the priute councell of the Lord, is knowen to those whichePsa. 25. feare him, and I haue shewed out of S. Paule, that he giueth to the spirituall man great discretion1. Cor. 2. and iudgement of things. If therefore there be in euery Church whiche feare God and keepe his commaundements, there are both wise and learned and discreete 
                           〈1 line〉
                        en, and therefore not to be spoken of so contemptuously as M. Doctor speaketh. And God be praysed there are numbers in the Church, that are able to be teachers vnto most of the Chauncellours, in any matter perteyning to the Church, and are able to giue a riper iudgement in any ecclesiasticall matter, than the moste part of them can.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Who knoweth not that the people for the most part be ignorant, vnlearned, andThe people for the most part vnap to gouern. vnapt to gouerne? you know what Chrysostome sayth of them 
                              Hom. 2. in Ioh.
                            And yet I do not take from them sufficient knowledge in things perteyning to their saluation, nor that wisedome that Salomon or Dauid speaketh of: nor yet the discretion that S. Paule meaneth. 1. Cor. 2. But is euery man that shall be saued, apt to rule

and gouerne? or doth Christ poure into them such gifts and graces miraculously as he did in the beginning of the Church? commeth learning, wisedome, aptnesse to gouerne, and suche like, by inspiration onely, and not by meanes? I knowe there are many of the people that feare God, and are sober and discréete, the Lorde increase the number of them: but on the other side you must knowe, that some there be (and that not the smallest number) that thinke better of themselues than they deserue: And I suppose that no manne will denie the moste parte to be vnfit for such functions: and that euen of those that are godly, many are farre vnméete toThe absurditie of the Repliers assertiō
                            gouerne. But if your reason be sound, then may the basest and simplest man keeping gods commaundements, and fearing him, be as apt to gouerne, as the wisest man, the most learned, and of best experience in a whole countrie, whiche is to greate an absurditie, and to popular an argument.
                        True it is, that to kéepe gods commaundementes, and to feare him, is requisiteGodlinesse re quired in gouernours, but all that be godly are not meete to gouerne. and necessary in a gouernoure: but yet (as I saye) not all those that feare God and kéepe his commaundements be apt and méete to gouerne. These be the chiefe points of heauenly wisedome, whiche bring saluation, and whiche teache a man to gouerne himselfe in those things that perteyne to eternall life: but there are other things also necessarily required in such as take vpon them the gouernment of others: except you will say with the Anabaptists, 
                              Christianis non est opus magistratu: Christians haue no neede of a magistrate. There may be therefore in euery Church, wise, learned, and discréete men, in matters perteyning to themselues, and to their owne saluation, and yet not méete to gouerne others: there may be also méete men to gouerne others, but yet peraduenture by the more part, (which is commonly euill disposed) put backe from the Seigniorie. In a word, God hath appointed the multitude how godly and learnedAll the Repliers arguments tend to popularitie. soeuer they be, to obey and not to rule, vnlesse indéede you will make the state popular, to the which all your arguments tend.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 151. Sect. vlt.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         besides that the choysest are to be taken to this office, this ought not to be forgotten, that seeing good successe of thinges depende vppon the blessing of God, and that blessing followeth the Church when the Lords order is kept, simple men which carrie no great countinance or shew, wil vndoubtedly do more good vnto the Churche, hauing a lawfull calling, than those of great porte which haue no such calling.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        But how wil you bring it to passe that the choysest may be taken? for if the electiō go by the whole parish (as it must) then is it a thing vnpossible to be brought to passe in many parishes, the most part being euil affected, except you will vse violence, and compulsion, which is against the libertie that you séeke for.
                        The lords order is kept whē due obediēce is giuē to ye ciuil magistrate, & other that beHow ye lords order is kept. placed vnder him, to gouern ye church of God. For of this we haue expresse mētiō to ye R
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 13. 1. Ti. 2. 1. Pet. 2. & it is cōfirmed by ye examples of ye old church vnder Moses,
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              om. 13. Iosua, Dauid, Salomō, Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Iosias, and all other godly kings and
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Tim. 2. Iudges. Likewise ye order of God is kept, whē next to this supreme gouernour vnder1. Pet. 2. God, we reuerēce & obey in ye Ecclesiastical state, such as god hath appointed to take ye chiefe care & gouernmēt of the Church, vnder ye Prince, be they Archbyshops, Byshops or such like. And therof also we haue expresse warrant in the word of God and that such as admitteth no other interpretation: as 1. Tim. 3. Lit. 1. Hebr. 13. but as for1. Tim. 3. your order of Seniors, and kind of gouernment, you haue no suche warrante in theT
                                 〈1 line〉
                              t. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . word of God. And the places that you vse for your purpose be doubtfull, and diuerslyHeb. 13. interpreted by learned men: wherefore not sufficient to ground any certaine doctrine vpon, being of faith and of saluation, as you haue saide before, the kinde of gouernment to be. Wherefore it is you that disturbe and seeke to ouerthrow the order of gouernment appointed by God, and therefore in the end, you must looke to be ouerthrowen your selfe.
                        
                           To your imagination of transforming simple, vnap
                              〈1 line〉
                           , and vnlearned men to an aptnesse and 
                              〈◊〉
                            of gouernment, if your platforme were placed. I will only answere that which Master Bullinger did to a fantasse of the Anabaptists not much vnlike: You imagine and conceyue in your minde those things, which neuer haue beene, nor are extant, and shall neuer hereafter be.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The nintéenth. What should we speake of the Archbishops Court, sith all men know it, and your wisdome cannot but see what it is. As all other Courtes are subiect to this, by the PopesTo proue that the regiment of the Church should be spirituall, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ade, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ph. 1. 23. 1. Thes. 5. 13 1. Tim. 1. 2. Heb. 10. 30 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , yea and by statute of this Realme yet vnxepealed, so is it the filthie quaue
                           〈1 line〉
                        ire, & poysoned plash of all the abhominations that do infect the whole Realme. We speake not of licences graunted out of this Court, to marrie in forbidden tymes, as in Lent, in Aduent, in the gang week, when ban
                           〈1 line〉
                        ers and belles, with the Priest in his surplesse, singing Gospels and making crosses, raungeth about in many places, vpon the ember dayes and to forbidden persons, & in exempt places. We make no mention of licences, to eate white meate, and flesh in Lent, and that with a safe conscience, for rich men that can buy them with mony, nor we say nothing how dearly men pay for them. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        s for dispensations with beneficed voyes, tollerations for non reudents, bulles to haue two benefices, to haue three, to haue more, and as many as they list or can get, these are so common, that all godly and good men are compelled with griefe of heart, to crie out vpon such abhominations. We omit excommunication for money, absolution for the same, and that by absoluing one for another, which how contrarie it is to the Scriptures, the complaints of many learned men by propositions in open scholes proposed, by wrytings in printed bookes set out, and by preaching in open 
                           〈◊〉
                        , haue bene sufficiently witnessed. To conclude, this 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ilthie Court hath full power, togither with the authoritie of this pettie Pope, Metropolitane and primate of all England, to dispence in all causes wherein the Pope was wont to dispence, vnder which are conteyned more cases and causes, than we are able to recken. As for my Lordes grace of Yorke, we deale not with him. We referre him to that learned Epistle which Beza wrote vnto him about these matters.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 228. Sect. 1. 2. & pag. 229.
                        I thinke this Court to be necessarie for the state of this Church and Realme: and if there be abuses in it, either in the law it selfe, or in the persons, I wish it were reformed. But the whole order of the Court is not therefore to be condemned, no more than it is of other Courts, which cannot be missed, and yet haue abuses in them. I confesse my selfe to haue little experience in such matters, and therefore I will speake the lesse thereof.
                        As I do mislike that there should be any time forbidden to marry in (for that can haue no good meaning) or any dispensations for boyes to keepe benefices, or excommunications and absolutions for money, for one man to be absolued for another, and if there be any other such like abuse: so do I vtterly condemne your vnseemely and vnchristian termes, as filthie quauemire, poysoned plash of al abhominatiōs, filthie Court, especially cōsidering wherof they be spoken, to whom, and by whom: they argue a scolding nature, & a stomack boyling with contempt of lawesThe Church 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              aundered by the Admonitors. & superiors. Neither can I suffer you to slaunder not that Court, but this Church, with manifest vntruthes, as you do when you say that banners, belles, and making of crosses, be allowed to be vsed in the gangweeke, and that the Archbishops court hath full power to dispence in all causes, wherin the Pope was wont to dispence: which both be most vntrue. I thinke in dispensations this Court goeth no further, than the lawes of the Realme do permit.
                        Agreeable to this spirit is your cōtemtuous speach, vsed to both the Archbishops, mē to be reuerēced not only in the respect of their yeres and authoritie, but of their singular wisdome, grauitie, learning, and sound religion also. Howbeit you reuerence them, as you do all other

that be in authority, except some, whome you do but seeke to vse, to bring your intentes to passe, I will say no more.
                        I thinke you haue abused maister Beza with your false reportes,Beza and others 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              used by salse information
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . which hath caused him to write otherwise than he woulde do, if he knewe the whole state of the controuersie: So you haue also abused other notable learned men, and caused them to wryte, according to yourfansie, which since that time (beeing truely informed) haue by their letters (which are to be seene) both condemned your cōtentiousnesse, and their owne to much credulitie. But our faith and Church, dependes neither vpon M. Beza, nor any other man, neither do they looke for any such prerogatiue. But still you are without the booke.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 152. Sect. 1.
                     In the. 228. page he thinketh the Archbishops Court necessarie, but bringeth no reason, and further confesseth himselfe ignorant of the estate of it, and therefore I know not from whence that good opinion of his should come, vnlesse it be from thence, that he liketh of al things be they neuer so euill which the Admonition misliketh. The rest which M. Doctor hath of this matter, is nothing else but great and high wordes. And as for the Canon law, it is knowne what a stroke it beareth with vs, and that a few cases excep
                           〈1 line〉
                        ed, it remayneth in his former effect.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue shewed better reasons for it, than you haue done agaynst it as yet. For it
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               made 
                                 〈◊〉
                               
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e ouerthrowne but by very strōg reasons. is a reason for me sufficient, that the Court is established by the authoritie of the Prince, and the whole Realme, and fit it is, that very strong reasons should be vsed, before this reason be reiected. For in matters of gouernment, place must be giuen to the gouernors, law makers, and to the state: except there can be shewed inuincible reasons to the contrarie, whereof you haue not in this place vttered one.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of Deacons and Wydowes. Tract. 19.
            
               Of the office of Deacons.
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 152. Sect. 2.
                     It was before shewed that of the gouernors of the Church, there were some whose charge perteyned vnto the whole Church, of the which we haue spoken: some other whose charges extend but to a part of the Church, that is vnto the poore, and these are the Deacons. And as in the former part I shewed there were two kindes, so in this latter part the same is to be noted, that of those whose charge was ouer the poore, some had charge ouer all the poore of the Church (as those which are called Deacons) some had charge ouer the poore straungers, and those poore which were sicke onely, and those S. Paule calleth in one place Diaconisses and in an other place widowes.16. Rom. For the Deacons did distribute vnto the necessities as wel of the poore strangers, & the sick poore,1. Tim. 5. as vnto the other poore of the Church. And the widowes did imploy their labors to she washing of the feete of ye strangers, & attending vpon the poore which were sick, & had no friends to keepe thē.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There is no great matter in all this, sauing only that I would gladly learne where the office of widowes & Diaconesses is restreyned to poore straungers onely, and such as be sicke: féeing that the other poore, that be neyther straungers nor sicke, may néede their helpe in sundrie things as well as they: and séeing also that neyther in the. 16. to the Rom. nor in the. 1. Tim. 5. (which you quoted in the margent) there is any such restraynt made, or to be gathered, but the contrarie almost in expresse wordes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Touching Deacons though their names be remayning, yet is the office fouly peruerted, and

turned vpside downe, for their dutie in the primitiue Church, was to Rom. 12. 8. gather the almes diligently and to distribute it faythfully: also for the sicke and impotent persons to prouide painfully, hauing euer a diligent care, that the charitie of godly men were not wasted vpon loyterers 2. Thes. 3. 10 and idle vagabonds. Now it is the first step to the ministerie, nay rather a mere order of Priesthoode.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 118. Sect. 2.
                        In the whole. 12. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romaines, there isMore perteyneth to the office of Deacons, than prouision for the poore. not one worde to proue the office of a Deacon to consist in gathering almes, and distributing the same, neyther yet doth he speake there of the office of a Deacon, no more doth he in the thirde Chapter of the seconde Epistle to the Thessalo. Lorde God what meane you thus to play with the Scriptures?
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 152. Sect. 2.
                     First I will speake of the Deacons, and whereas M. Doctor crieth out of daliying with the scriptures for alledging the. 8. verse of the twelfe vnto the Romaines, to proue Deacons, affirming that there is no worde of them? Truly I can find no wordes to set forth this so grosse ignorance. And had it not beene enough, for master Doctor to haue vttered this ignorance, but he must also with an outcrie proclaime it, and as it were spread the banner of it? What doe these wordes note (he that distributeth in simplicitie) but the office of the Deaconship: for in that place S. Paule reekeneth vy all the ordinarie and perpetuall offices of the Church, as the office of the Doctor, of the Pastor, of the Deacon, of the elder, and leaueth not out so much as the widow, which he noteth in these wordes (shewing mercie.) If the Authours of the Admonition do dally with the scriptures in this place, surely Master Caluine, Master Beza, Master Bucer, Peter Martyr. &c. doe dally with them. And shall all these be esteemed to play with the Scriptures. And Master Doctor onely to handle them seriously?
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I thinke rather this clause: he that distributeth, let him do it with simplicitie, isRom. 12. 8. spoken to such as be able to helpe the poore, that they should do it willingly and simplie for Christes sake, not for vaine glorie, or any other like respect. For the whole scope of that Chapter is to moue such as beléeue in Christ to good lyfe, and conuersation, neyther doth the Apostle speake of the Ministers of the Church onely, but of all Christians of what vocation or calling so euer they be. And therefore this sentence being generall and spoken to all of abilitie, it may also include Deacons, but I sée not how it can be particularly restreyned to them. Origen vpon this place saith: TheOrigen. in. 12. Rom. Apostle sayth that he which giueth, and bestoweth any thing vpon the poore, must do it in simplicitie of heart, that is, that he seeme not to benefite the poore, and in heart seeke the prayse of men. VVherefore it is not simplicitie, if one thing seeme to be done outwardly, and in heart another be sought for. Chrysostome likewise expounding these wordesChrysost. in 12. Rom. sayth: It sufficeth not to giue, but it must also be done bountifully. &c. So doth the Gréeke Scholiast, Theodorete, Theophilact, Ambrose, Hierome: all these do vnderstand this place, not of the Deacons, who distribute other mens almes, but of such as giue almes themselues, and relieue the poore with theyr owne substance.
                        
                           Master Bullinger also doth admit, and well allowe this interpretation. Wherfore you sée, that I haue good grounde of my saying, when I sayde that he did not speake there of the office of a Deacon.
                        You say that Paule reckeneth vp here all ordinarie and perpetuall offices of the Churche, but you speake it onely, you proue it not: he speaketh here of prophecying, and you denie the office of a Prophete to be perpetuall. You say he speaketh here of Wydowes, and I denie their office to be perpetuall. Moreouer it is certaine that hee speaketh in this place of gyftes profitable to the Churche, and some of them common, as well to Ciuill as to Ecclesiasticall persons, as all learned Fathers in theyr Commentaryes vppon this place doe confesse, and so doeth Maister Bullinger in lyke manner, and so I thinke muste all other doe that well consyder

the drift of S. Paule in that Chapter, and the profitable lessons, the Apostle th
                              〈1 line〉
                           re giueth to all and euerie sort of men.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 152. Sect. 2.
                     And as Master Doctors ignorance appeareth in this place, so his minde not 
                           〈◊〉
                         of the truth, but seeking to cauill, doth as manifestly shew it selfe. For all men see that the Admonition alledgeth not the place to the Thessalonians to proue the office of Deacons, but to shewe that ydle vagabonds might not haue any of that reliefe, which belongeth vnto those which be poore in deede, which thing appeareth, both by the placing of the quotation ouer agaynst that allegation, and by the letter which directeth therevnto.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Bilike that place was onely quoted for the phrase, else I sée not to what ende i
                              〈1 line〉
                            serueth, except it be to proue the office of a Deacon. For to what purpose should they note it to proue that ydle vagabondes shoulde haue none of that reliefe, séeing that is not denyed nor yet in question.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 152. Sect. 2.
                     And whereas Master Doctor sayth that the office of the Deacons is not onely to prouide for the poore, but also to preach and minister the Sacraments, I haue shewed before that it both not apperteync vnto them, to doe eyther the one or the other. For the proofe whereof, this place of the Romaines, quoted by the Admonition, is verie fitte and most proper. For S. Paule speaketh there agaynst those which not contenting themselues with their owne vocations, did breake into that which apperteyned vnto others, as it the hande shoulde take vpon it the office of the eye, or of some other member of the bodie, and therefore Saint Paule doth (as it were) bounde and poynt the lymittes of euerie office in the Church, and so placeth the Deacons office onely in the prouision for the poore. This one thing I will adde to that matter, that if the Apostles whiche had such excellent and passing gyftes, did finde themselues (preaching of the worde, and attending to prayer) not able to prouide for the poore, but thought it necessarie to discharge themselues of that office, to the ende they might doe the other effectually, and frutefully, he that shall doe both nowe, must eyther do none well and profitably, or else he must haue greater giftes than the Apostles had.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue proued before manifestly that it perteyned to the office of a Deacon toTract. 14. preach, and to minister the Sacrament of Baptisme, and to helpe in other businesse perteyning to the Church: I haue alledged both manifest examples out of the scripture to iustifie the same, and the practise of the primitiue Church togither with the testimonies both of the auncient and late wryters: and vndoubtedly you are dryuen to a great streight when you are inforced to vse this place of the. 12. to the Romaines to proue the contrary, for though it were ment of Deacons, yet doth it not proue in any respect your purpose: neyther can you frame any argument of it to that ende. Neither Steuen nor Philip, when they being Deacons preached, and the one ministred the Sacrament of Baptisme also, did breake into that whiche apperteyned not vnto them, being incident to their office when they be therevnto called.
                        The Apostles were occupied in planting Churches, in going from place to place, to spreade abrode the worde of God, and therefore they coulde not: so conueniently prouide for the posre: but the Deacons hauing no such occasion of traveling and remouing from place to place, might very well both preach the Gospell and prouide for the poore. Neither can I conceiue any reason to the contrarie: for I thinke they spent no greate tyme in turning ouer manie volumes, to prouide for their Sermons, bicause God gaue to them extraordinarie gyftes of knowledge, vtterance, and suche lyke, necessarie for their function. And if you speake of Deacons nowe, I

say vnto you, that vnder a Christian Prince in the tyme of peace, that part of theirSome part of the Deacons office not so needfull in the time of christian magistrats office to prouide for the poore is not necessarie, séeing that by other lawfull and politike meanes, they may much better be prouided for. Wherfore glorie as much as you will in your owne witte and reason, yet in these heauenly & diuine things, your reasons shall proue but vaine and vntowarde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Againe in the olde Church euery Phil. 1. 1. Iohn. 13. 27 Acts. 6. 5. 1. Tim. 3. 8. congregation had their Deacons.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 120.
                        O how aptly you haue alledged the scriptures to proue that euery congregation had their Deacons? In the first to the Philip. these beWhether deacons were in euery congregation. the wordes: Paule and Timotheus, &c. to all the Saincts vvhiche are at Philippi, vvith the Bishops and Deacons. Paule & Timotheus salute the Bishops and Deacons which are at Philippi: Therfore in those dayes euerie congregation had their Deacons: a straunge kinde of reasoning: you might well haue thus concluded, Ergo at Philippi there was Deacons: But surely this argument is to much out ofUnapt arguments. square, there was Deacons at Philippi, therefore euerie congregation had their Deacons.
                        In the. 13. of S. Iohn. verse. 27. these be the wordes. And after the soppe, Sathan entered into him, then sayde Iesus vnto him, that thou doest, do quickly. After Supper Satan entered into Iudas, and Iesus sayde vnto him, that thou doest, do quickly: Therefore euerie Cōgregation had their Deacons. No maruel though your margent be pestred with Scriptures, when you take libertie to make ex quolibet quidlibet. Peraduenture you meane that Iudas was a Deacon (as he was not, but an Apostle) bycause he caryed the bagge, and that some of the Apostles thought, that Christ had bid him giue some what to the poore: belike whosoeuer giueth a pennie to the poore at his masters commaundement, is with you a Deacon.
                        In the sixt of the Actes we learne that there were chosen seuen Deacons, but there is not one worde to proue, that euery congregation had their Deacons.
                        In the thirde of the first to Timothie S. Paule sheweth what qualities and conditions a Deacon ought to haue, but not one worde of Deacons being in euery Congregation. This is great audacitie, thus manifestly to wring the Scriptures, without all colour or shewe of reason.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 152. Sect. vlt.
                     The second point is touching that there were Deacons in euery Church, which is wel proued of the Admonition, both by the place of the Philippians, and of the Acts, for although it be not there sayd, that the deacons were in euery church, yet forsomuch as the same vse of thē was in all Churches whiche was in Ierusalem and at Philippes, and for that the Apostles (as hath beene before touched) labouring after the vniformitte of the Church, ordeyned the same officers in all Churches, the proofe of one is the proofe of all, and the shewing that there were Deacons in one Church, is the shewing in all. The place which they alledge out of the first to Timothe, is of all other most proper
                           〈1 line〉
                         for S. Paule there describing not how the Church of Ephesus, but simplie and generally how the Church must be gouerned, reckeneth there the order of Deacons, whereunto may be added the

continuall practise of the Church long after the Apostles tymes, which appeareth by the often superscriptions and subscriptions in these wordes: the Bishop, Elders, and Deacons, of suche a Church, and vnto the Bishops, Elders, and Deacons of such a Church. And by that it is so oftentymes sayde in the councels where the Churches assembled, that there were so many Bishops, so many Elders, so many deacons.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And I say againe, that they be most vnapt reasons: for the Deacons office was not so troublesome, but that the Deacons of one Citie, might serue all the Churches and congregations belonging vnto the same: neyther haue you read eyther in scripture, or any auncient wryter (except I be greatly deceyued) that Deacons were placed any where, but in Cities: and yet it is not to be thought, but that there were Churches also, in meaner Townes. And surely no man without blushing can defend this argument: there were Deacons at Ierusalem, and at Philippos, Ergo there were in euerie congregation Deacons. It is like vnto this: there be Preachers in Cambridge and London: therefore in euerie parish in England, there be preachers.
                        This is also vntrue, that the Apostles ordeyned the same officers in all Churches. For in chiefe and principall Cities they ordeyned Bishops to guide and gouerns the rest of the ministers, which were in townes belonging to those cities, as it is manifest by the examples of Iames, Timothie, and Titus, but they did not ordeyne any such Bishops in euery congregation: for further proofe of this, I referre the reader to thatTract. 8. which I haue spoken of Archbishops and Bishops.
                        The first to Timothie, the third, is as violently wrested to serue their purpose. For S. Paule doth not speake one worde there of Deacons, being in euery congregation, onely he telleth what maner of man they ought to be. And you are not able to shewe (as I haue sayde) by the practise of the Church, that there were Deacons in euerie congregation. These superscriptions and subscriptions that you talke of, were then vsed, when letters were sent to the Bishoppe, Ministers, and Deacons of chiefe Cities, where all these commonly remayned: and therefore cannot proue that euerie congregation had their Deacons. The Deacons named in Councels were resident in Cities, not in euerie congregation.
                        But among all these slender defenses of yours, you leaue out the. 13. of S. Iohn:The Admonitors left to their own defense. vers. 27. belike the Authors of the Admonition must answere that themselues, as they must do many other places, which you by silence passe ouer vnto them.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Nowe they are tyed to Cathedrall Churches onely, and what do they there? gather the almes and distribute it to the poore? nay, that is the least peece, or rather no part of their function. What then? to sing a Gospell when the Bishop ministreth the Communion. If this be not a peruerting of this office and charge, let euery one iudge.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 121. Sect. 2.
                        I am sure you are not offended that there be Deacons in Cathedrall Churches: for if they ought to be in euery Congregation, they ought to be there also: and yet I knowe no such order nowe in Cathedrall Churches, that they be more bounde to Deacons in the respect of reading the Gospell, than other Churches be: But admitte they were, it is no peruerting of the office of a Deacon, being incident to his office, as well to read the Scriptures in the congregation, andDiuerse state of the church. Some part of the Deacons office not now so necessarie. to exhort, as to giue almes, and distribute to the poore: for the state of the Church is not nowe, as it was in the Apostles time, neither is that part of the office of a Deacon, so necessarie now, as it was then,

being lawes & orders otherwise to prouide for the poore, than there eyther was then, or could haue bene.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. pag. 153. Sect. 1.
                     The thyrd poynte in this Deaconshyp is, whether it be a necessary office in the churche or for a tyme only, which controuersie should not haue bene, if M. Doctors Englyshe tongue had bene agreable with his latine. For in a certayne latine pamphlet of his, wherof I spake before, he maketh the Deaconship a necessary office and such as ought not to be takē out of the church: here he This disco
                              〈1 line〉
                            is in your care, not in 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ong. singeth an other song, there, because he thought the necessitie of the Deacon made for hym, hee woulde needes haue Deacons: here, because it maketh against him, he sayth there is no neede of thē, wherby appeareth howe small cause there is that M. Doctor should vpbrayde the authors of the Admonition with mutabilitie and discorde with them selues. But that this office is durable & perpetual, it may appeare by that which I haue alledged before out of the fixt of Timothie, for the necessitie of Elders, for the argumentes serue to proue the necessitie of those orders which are there set forthe, whereof the Deacon is one.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The onely thing that is spoken in that latin booke, touching the continuance of Deacons in the Churche, is this, that they are not mentioned in the fourth to the Ephesians, and yet they may not be taken out of the Churche. In my Answere to the Admonition, I saye that this parte of the office of a Deacon which consisteth in prouiding for the poore, is not so necessary nowe as it was in the Apostles tyme. My englyshe tongue agreeth very well with my latine tongue, for any signification of dissention that is here vttered. I am fully perswaded that the office of a Deacon is to be reteyned in the churche, for it is a degrée to the ministerie, which consisteth in Preaching, Baptizing, and helping the ministers in other functions of the churche, as I haue shewed. But yet I saye that this parte of the office, whiche consisteth in prouiding for the poore, is not so necessary vnder a Christian prince, when better prouision is made, as it is vnder a Tyrant and in time of persecution. Therfore I sing one and the selfe same song, but you would gladly espye out the contrary if it were possible.
                        To your allegation out of the sixte of Timothie, I haue answered fully: it is but a conceyte of yours whiche your selfe wyll mislike when you be better aduised.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     And yet least the reformers of our tyme should seeme vtterly to take out of Gods church this necessary function, they appoynte some thyng to it concerning the poore, and that is, to searche for the sycke, needy, and impotent people of the paryshe, and to intimate their estates, names, and places where they dwell to the Curate, that by his exhortation they maye be releeued by the Parishe, or other conuenient almes. And this you see is the nyghest parte of his office, and yet you must vnderstande it to be in such places where there is a Curate and Deacon: euery paryshe cannot bee at that coste to haue both, nay, no paryshe so farre as can be gathered, at this present hath.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 122. Sect. 1.
                        And what faulte can you fynde herewith, is not this greatly to be commended? If euery paryshe can not be at the coste to haue bothe Curate and Deacon, why do you require them both in euery parishe? why do you not thinke well of such lawes as appoynte Collectours for the poore, whiche may as well prouide for them and better to, than coulde the Deacon, who must be susteyned hym selfe with that

which the poore should haue.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 153. Sect. 1.
                     And whereas M. Doctor sayth, that euery churche is not able to fynde a Curate (as he termeth hym) and a Deacon, I haue before shewed, intreatyng of the Seniors, that the churches in the Apostles tymes myght best haue sayd this, beyng poore and persecuted, although I see not why the churche may not haue a Deacon or Deacons if mo be needefull, with as small charges as they may haue a collector or collectors.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is the Admonition that sayeth, Euery paryshe cannot be at that caste to haue bothe. Wherevpon I doe but aske this question, why they require them both in euery paryshe, if euerye paryshe cannot bee at the coste to haue them both? Bylike you make small accompte of the Admonition, in that you read it not, or else you haue forgotten that this question is demaunded vpon their confession. But in deede I am of that opinion too, and haue before answered your obiection of the Churches in the Apostles tymes, as for our Collectors, they be suche as put not the Churche to one halfepenye charge, so could not your Deacons do.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     For they Pontifi. tit. The ordring of deacons. may baptise in the presence of a Byshop or priest, or in their absence (if necessitie so requyre) minister the other Sacrament, lykewyse reade the holy Scriptures and homilies in the congregation, instructe the youth in the Catechisme, and also preache, if he be commaunded by the Byshop.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 119. Sect. 2.
                        I knowe not what you meane by your Ponti. tit. in the margent of your booke, but if you meane the booke entituled, the forme and mā
                           ner of making and consecrating Byshops, &c. nowe allowed in this Churche of Englande, then do you vntruely reporte it, for there is no mention of baptising in the presence of a Bishop or Priest, neyther yet of ministring the other Sacramente in their absence if necessitie require: onely the booke sayeth, that a Deacon may baptise or preache, if he be thervnto admitted by the Byshop, and that he may so doe by the worde of God I haue proued before. As for reading the holye Scriptures, and Homelies in the Congregation, also for instructing the youth in the Catechisme, who doubteth but that a Deacon may doe them?
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The Deaconshyp 1. Tim. 3. 8. must not be confounded with the ministerie, nor the Collectours for the poore may not vsurpe the Deacons office: but he that hath an Rom. 12. 7. 1. Cor. 7. 20 office must looke to his office, and euery man must keepe hymselfe within the bondes and limites of his owne vocation.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 126. Sect. 2.
                        Neither doe we confounde them, and yet Paule in the place by you quoted in the margent, speaketh not one worde of confounding,

or not confounding these offices: So the poore be prouided for, it forceth not, whether prouision be made by Deacons or by Collectours: by the one it may be well done, by the other it cannot be done in all places, as the state is nowe. But shew any Scripture to proue that the poore must onely be prouided for by Deacons, else not.
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothing answered to this.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Of the offices of Widowes and their continuance.
               
                  Chap. 2.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 153. Sect. 2.
                     There remayneth to speake of the Widowes, which were godly poore women in the church aboue the age of three score yeares, for the auoyding of all suspition of euill, whiche myght ryse 
                           〈1 line〉
                        y sclaunderous tongues, it they had bene yonger. These as they were nouryshed at the charges of the churche being poore, so did they serue the churche, in attending vpon poore straungers, and the poore whiche were sicke in the churche whereof they were widowes. This will not agree with the doctrine you taught before. Pag. 1. 41. Now although there is not so great vse of these widowes with vs, as there was in those places where the churches were first founded, and in that tyme wherein this order of widowes was instituted, parte of the whiche necessitie grewe both by the multitude of straungers through the persecution, and by the great heare of those easte countryes, wherevpon the washing and supplyng of their feete was required, yet to: so muche as there are poore which are sicke in euery churche, I do not see howe a better and more conuenient order can be deuised, for the attendaunce of them in their syckenesse and other infirmities, than this which sainct Paule apoynteth, that there should be (if there can bee any gotten) godly poore widowes of ye age which S. Paule apointeth which should attend vpon such. For it there be any such poore wydowes of that age destitute of all frendes, it is manifest that she must needes iyue of the charge of the churche, and seing she must needes doe so, it is better she should doe some duty for it vnto the churche agayne, than the churche should be at a newe charge, to fynde others to attende vpon those which are sycke and destitute of kepers, seing that there can be none so fitte for that purpose as those women which saynt Paule doth there describe, so that I conclude, that This condition cānot agree with so precise 
                              〈1 line〉
                            cōmaundement as you haue made it before. (if such may be gotten) we ought also to keepe that order of widowes in the churche styll. I knowe that there be learned men which thinke otherwyse, but I stande vpon the authoritie of Gods worde, and not vpon the opinions of men be they neuer so wel learned, and if the matter also should be tried by the iudgement of men, I am able to shewe the iudgement of as learned as this age hath brought forth, which thinketh that the institution of widowes is perpetuall, and ought to bee where it may be had, and where such widowes are founde. Indeede they are more rare nowe than in the Apostles tymes. For then by reason of the persecution, those whiche had the gifte of continencie, did abstayne from mariage after the death of their husbandes, for that the sole lyfe was an easyer estate and lesse daungerous and chargeable when they were dryuen to flye, than the estate of those which were maryed.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Here you are taken in your owne trappe, and fayne you would wrynge yourThe Replie
                                 〈1 line〉
                               tripped and caught in his owne nette. Pag. 141. selfe out if you could tell which waye: for if all thinges conteyned in S. Paule his first Epistle to Timothie bee perpetuall, and must be kept vnder the great charge that be gaue vnto Timothie in the sixt chapter, as you haue before affirmed, then of necessitie the churche must needes still reteyne wydowes. You knowe not in the worlde howe to auoyde this absurditie, and therefore some tymes you saye, that nowe there is not so great vse of them with vs as there was in those places where the churches were first founded. &c. and by and by you beginne to call that backe and saye, that you do not see howe a better and more conuenient order can be deuised for the attendance of them in their sickenes and other infirmities. &c. and in the ende you conclude that (if such maye be gotten) wee ought also to keepe that order of wydowes in the churche still. Surely if it be an order appointed of God to be perperpetuall, and conteined vnder that denunciation to Timothie in the sixt chapter, these (ifs) and (ands) can take no place, for there are wydowes good store in this realme of Englande, so that, that excuse will not serue. But it is a world to sée, what you dare auouche be it neuer so vntrue, contrary both to the practise of all reformed churches that I can heare of, and iudgementes of all learned men that I haue read of this matter.
                        
                           But if the institution of widowes be so necessay, why should they not be in euerye congregation as wel as Deacons: for the Apostle speaketh as directly of them in his epistle to Timothie, as he doth of Deacons. Againe if this be a sufficient excuse why the church hath no widowes, to say that they cannot be gotten, or there is none meete, why will not the excuse serue the church for lacke of your Seniors also. &c.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Of the Authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate in Ecclesiasticall mattets. Tract. 20.
            
               The. 1. Diuision.
               
                  Admonition.
                  And to these three ioyntly, that is, the Ministers, Seniors, and Deacons, is the whole regiment of the Churche to be committed.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 126. Sect. vlt.
                     This is only by you set downe without proofe, therefore I will heare your reasons before I make you answere. In the meane time I praye you what authoritie in these matters do you giue to the ciuillWhere is the princes autho ritie? magistrate, me thinke I heare you whisper that the Prince hath no authoritie in ecclesiasticall matters: I knowe it is a receiued opinion among some of you, and therein you shake handes also with the Papistes and Anabaptistes.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 153. Lin. vlt. &c.
                  Unto all the rest vntill the ende of the firste parte of the Admonition. I haue answered already, yet there is a poynte or two whiche I must touche, whereof the first is in the. 126. pag. where hee would beare men in hande that the authours of the Admonition & some other of their mynde, would shut out the ciuill magistrate and the prince from all authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matters. Whiche surmise although I see it is not so much, bicause either he knoweth or suspecteth any such thing, as bicause he meaneth hereby to laye a bayte to entrappe withal, thinking that where Note these speaches, he maketh no conscience to giue he careth not what authoritie to princes, wee will be loth to giue more than the worde of God will permit, wherby he hopeth to drawe vs into displeasure with the prince: yet for bicause he shall vnderstande, we nourishe no opinons secretly, which we are ashamed to declare openly, & for that we doubt not of the equitie of the prince in this part, which knoweth that although her authoritie be the greatest in the earth, yet it is not infinite, but is lymited by the worde of God, & of whome we are persuaded, that as her maiestie knoweth, so she will not vnwillingly heare ye truth in this behalfe, these things I say being considered, I answere in the name of the authors of the Admonition and those some other which you speake of, that the prince and ciuill magistrate VVhat
                           
                              
                           
                           reversed ?
                         no more but to see them executed
                           
                              
                           
                           reversed ?
                         how differeth this from Papistrie
                           
                              
                           
                           reversed ?
                        
                      hath to see, that the lawes of God touching his worship, and touching all matters and orders of the church be executed and duly obserued, and to see that euery ecclesiasticall persone do that office whervnto he is appointed, & to punish those which faile in their office accordingly. The prince spoyled of authoritie to make Ecclesiasticall orders. As for ye making of ye orders and ceremonies of the churche, they do (where there is a constituted and ordered churche) perteyne vnto the ministers of ye church, and to the ecclesiasticall gouernours, & that as they medle not with ye making of ciuill lawes, & lawes for the common wealth: so the ciuill magistrate hath not to ordeyne ceremonies perteining to the church: But if those to whome that doth apperteyne make any orders not meete, the magistrate may and ought to hynder them, & driue them to better, for so much as the ciuil magistrate hath this charge to see that nothing be done against ye glorie of God in his dominiō.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     The wordes of the Admonition pag. 126. be these: and fo these three ioyntly, that is, theThe Admoni tors and T. C. ioyne with the Papistes against the Queenes supremacie in matters ecclesiasticall. Ministers, Seniors, and Deacons, is the whole regimēt of the churche to be committed. Wherfore they spoyle the ciuill magistrate of all gouernment in Ecclesiasticall matters: for if the whole gouernmēt of the church is to be cōmitted to Ministers, Seniors, & Deacons, what authoritie remaineth to the ciuil magistrate in the gouernment of it? Agreable to this disobedient spirite & erroneous & Papisticall doctrine, is that in the second Admonitiō Fol. 8. &. 9. where the authors of that booke take from the ciuill magistrate all supremacie in

Ecclesiasticall matters, and by euident circumstances, call his authoritie vsed in those things vsurped. pag. 57. they saye, only meere ciuill lawes are to be made. And here in this place T. C. in expresse wordes taketh from the ciuill magistrate, all authoritie of makyng and appointing
                           
                              〈◊◊◊◊◊〉
                           
                         orders and ceremonies of the church, and giueth the same onely to ministers and eccle
                           〈1 line〉
                        asticall gouerne
                           〈1 line〉
                        rs, he maketh it the princes dutie to see those 
                           〈1 line〉
                        awes executed which these eccle
                           〈1 line〉
                        asticall gouernours shall appoynte and prescribe: and in his Preface he saith that eiuill persones may not handle ecclesiastical matters and Pag. 35. &. 145. ye the ciuil magistrate may not be the head of the church in that common wealth whereof he is the head. Where by (as I suppose he meaneth
                           
                              〈◊◊◊◊◊〉
                           
                         supreame gouernour) and that the churche may bee established without him. Pag. 54. hee denieth that the magistrate ought to prescribe what kynde of apparell ministers should 
                           〈◊〉
                        . In diuers places, he maketh such a distinction betwixt the church of Christ, & a Christian cōmon wealth yt hath a Christiā magistrate, as he would do betwixt the church & a Heathenishe common wealth, yt hath a persecuting and an vnbeleuing magistrate, and separateth the common wealth of Englande, as farre from the churche of Englande as he can do the common wealthe of Turcia, from the churche of Christ in Turcia: all this I haue noted to this ende, that the good subiect and those that be carefull for the preseruation of the state of this Realme, and the lawefull authoritie of hir Maiestie, may the better consider and beware of this doctrine, the whiche vnlesse I proue to be the selfe same with the Papistes in substance, let me susteine that punishement that is due vnto them whome I burden & charge with forgetfulnes of dutie in this poynt.
                     
                        Saunders in that trayterous booke of his, wryteth thus. That hath deceiued many,Saunders & the Rep
                              〈1 line〉
                           er agree. bicause they see kings to be Christians, and to rule ouer Christians, for they knowe not, or at the least they will not knowe, what difference there is, whether thou rule ouer a Christian in that he is a Christian, or in that he is a man. For a king ruleth ouer Christian men, but notSaunders. bicause they bee Christians, but bicause they bee men: and bicause byshoppss be men, in that respect he ruleth also ouer them. &c. And. T. C. in his Reply. pag. 35. writeth on thisPag. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              5. in the miast. manner, saying: That the godlye Magistrate is the head of the common wealth, but not of the churche, meaning that particular churche conteyned in the common wealth whereof he is gouernour: and in the same page he saith: that the Christian Magistrate is but only a member of that particular churche. And pag 145. he sayeth, That the Prynce may well beePag. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . Sed 1. Monarche immediatly betwene God and the common wealth, and not betwene God & the church, in that common wealth or any singular member in the church, and in this place he would haue the ciuill Magistrate no more to intermedle with making Ecclesiasticall lawes and orders, than the ecclesiasticall minister should deale with ciuill: diuers such nippes and pinches he hath at the ciuill Magistrate: speaking no other wyse of hym than of a Turke or a Iewe, and giuing him no more authoritie in the church of Christe and ouer Christians, than if hee were the great Turke, or wicked Nero. But I answere them bothe with the wordes of M. Musculus in his common places Titu. de Magistratu.
                         Let Ethnickes and infidels whiche liue not in the vnitie of truthe, but in the confusion of errour, haue their diuers lawesMusculus. and magistrates, some prophane and some holy, whose whole life is prophane, whose religion is but ecclesiasticall superstition and in the temple only. Christian people are altogether hely, and dedicated to the name of Christe, not in temples only and ecclesiasticall rites, but in their whole life, in euery place at al times, in all things, in al deedes and studies, that according to the admonitiō of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 10. whether he eate or drinke, or whatsoeuer he doth all may be done to the glory of God, and Col. 3. whatsoeuer he doth in woorde or in deede, hee doe it in the name of the Lorde. &c. VVherefore that distinction of Ecclesiasticall & prophane lawes, hath no place in it, bicause there is nothing in it that is prophane, seeing it is a people holy to the Lorde God: and the Magistrate is holy and not prophane, his authoritie is holy, his lawes are holy, his sword is holy, a reuenger of the wicked and vngodly, whereby he serueth the Lorde being the chiefe lawmaker, and iudge: our members are the members of Christ, and our bodies are the bodies of the holy ghost: we are willed to glorifie God not in our spirit onely, but in our bodie also 1. Cor. 6. Therefore this be sarre
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            authoritie Pap
                              〈1 line〉
                           ts giue to the 
                              〈◊〉
                            in ec
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . from the church of Christ, that it should be partly holy, and partly prophane, holy before, and prophane behinde, lyke vnto an Idoll which sheweth beautifull before, and behinde is full of filth, and Spyders webbes.
                     Againe the Papistes giue to the Christian Magistrate in ecclesiasticall matters,

                        Potestatem facti and not iuris, that is, to sée those lawes executed and put in practise, that the Pope and his Clergie shall make, and to bée as it were their executioner, but not to make any lawes or orders in Ecclesiastical matters: for so writeth Saunders in his book before named Fol. 64. Although I doe not denye but that the knowledge of aSaunders. facte that belongeth to the ecclesiasticall lawe, may be committed to kings and Magistrates, and before the ecclesiastical cause be determined, the king may vse his authoritie to this end, that there may be some quiet place prepared, where the bishops shall cōsulte, and that the bishops be called to the same place at a certein day, and that in the meane time while the matter is in determining, cōmon peace may be preserued euen among the priests them selues: to conclude, after the cause be determined and iudged by the priests, the king may punishe him with the sworde (which he carieth not in vaine) or by some other corporall punishmēt which shal refuse to obey the sentence of the priests. Therfore we do not deny but that kings haue something to do, both before, and at, and after the iudgements of the bishops: but in the office of iudging, they haue no more to do, than other priuate persons, for they may well giue councell, and declare what they thinke, but they may not determine or define what Gods lawes or the ecclesiastical lawe doth require. And doth not T. C. in this place affirme thePotestas facti, not iuris, ascribed to the magistrates. same? onely herein he séemeth something to differ, yt if the ecclesiastical gouernours shall make any orders vnmeete, the magistrate may driue them to better. But what if they saye they be méete, & will stand to it, as you do now in this fonde platforme? will they not crye out vpon the magistrate, & saye that he is a persecutour, a mainteiner of an vnlawfull authoritie, & of that which is against the glorie of God, if he withstande thē? as the authours of the seconde Admonition do in playne termes, saying, For though the orders be, and ought to be drawen out of the booke of God, yet it is her Maiestie that by her princely2. Admonit. pag. 60. authoritie should see euery of these thyngs put in practise, and punyshe those that neglect them, making lawes therefore: for the churche may keepe those orders, but neuer in peace, except the comfortable and blessed assistance of the states and gouernours imcke in to see them in their countreis and vsed, for otherwyse the church maye and must keepe Gods orders, but alwaies in troubles and persecution which is like to light vpon vs, except a reformation of religion, or a direct prouiso for vs bee made, for surely only this is God his order, and ought to be vsed in his churche, so that in conscience we are forced to speake for it and to vse it, and in conscience and in reuerence of God we are forced to speake as we do of that reformation, which we nowe vse, not so much for ought else, as to set out the deformities thereof, that we might thinke vpon the amending of them.
                     M. Musculus in the booke and title before recited, setteth out this Popish opiniō touchingMusculus. the authoritie of ye ciuill Magistrate in ecclesiasticall matters briefly, but plainly, in these wordes. Those whome they call Ecclesiasticall persones, and we call them Papistes, will not commit to the magistrate any further authoritie in religion, than to be the keeper and reuenger of it, and of their Ecclesiasticall lawes, that the ecclesiasticall pollicie maye remayne immouable, wherefore they deny him to haue authoritie in that he is a magistrate to make or to publyshe any Ecclesiasticall lawes, bicause suche things perteine to those that do represent the churche, whose decrees and constitutions must bee mainteyned and defended by the authoritie of the magistrate.
                     This I thought good to nete before I come to answering of his argumentes, that al men may vnderstand that I no otherwise charged them in this point, than they haue well deserued, neither haue I as yet detected all that they peruersly thinke, of the authoritie of the ciuill magistrate: one thing I praye you marke, that here is one noteA note of Anabaptisme practised by ye Rep
                              〈1 line〉
                           r. practised that I haue ascribed to the Anabaptistes, in my Pag. 2. sect. 2. Answere to the Admonition, for there I shewe that the Anabaptistes accuse the true ministers of the Gospell, for attributing (as they saye) to much to the ciuill magistrate: The same doth T. C. charge me with in this place. But I will nowe come to his argumentes.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 2. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Page 154, Sect 1.
                  This distinction if M. Doctor knoweth not nor hath not heard of, let him looke in the seconde booke of the Chronicles in the. 19. chap. and in the. 8. and. 11. verses, hee shall see that there were aYou alleage the reasons of the Papilies to the same purpose with them number appointed for the matters of the lord, which were priests & Leuites, and there were other also appointed for the kings affaires, and for matters of the common wealth, amongest which were the Leuites, which being more in number than could be applied to the vse of the churche, were sette ouer ciuill causes, being therfore moste fitte, for that they were best learned in the lawes of God, which were the polylike lawes of that countrey.

There he may learne if it please him, that the making of orders and giuing of iudgementes in ciuill and Ecclesiasticall, in common wealth and churche matters, perteyned vnto diuers persons, whiche distinction the writer to the Hebrewes doth note, when he sayeth, 
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                      that the Priest was ordeyned in thinges perteyning to God.Hebr. 5.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Yes, I bothe knowe this distinction, and haue hearde of it, for I haue redde itThe 
                              〈◊〉
                            vseth the same distinction & reasons with the Papistes. in the bookes of the Papistes as I haue shewed before: I haue hearde also this same place of the. 2. Chro. 19. alleaged to confirme it: For Saunders in his booke before named, dothe vse it to the same ende and purpose that you do: that is, to proue the Ciuill Magistrate to haue no authoritie in making Ecclesiasticall lawes and orders, his woordes be these. Likewyse Iosaphat kinge of Iuda distinguishing bothe theSaunders. li. 2. cap. 1. fol. 57. powers, sayde to the Leuites and Priestes: Amarias the Prieste, and your Bishop shall gouerne in those thinges whiche perteyne to God: But Zabadias &c. beholde something perteyned to the Bishop, other somethinges to the office of a Kinge. The same place also dothe Harding vse, to the selfe same ende agaynst my Lorde of Sarisburie, fol. 118. of the defense of the Apologie of the Churche of Englande, from whome I beléeue you haue borrowed it. Do I not say truely that you iumpe with the Papistes? do you not both conspire agaynst the Ciuill Magistrate? and are you not content to vse theyr very woordes and reasons? greate ado there is agaynst me, bycause I vse a place of Cyprian for the authoritie of an Archbishop ouer his prouince, whiche the Papistes abuse for the authoritie of the Pope ouer all Christendome: and here you vse the reason not onely of Papistes, but of Traytours to the same ende with them: that is, agaynst that lawfull iurisdiction, whiche wée haue giuen to our Prince, and whiche hath hetherto bene maynteyned, bothe by preaching and by burning.
                     But to lette this reste in the consideration of the Reader, I will in feweThe place of the Replier agaynst himselfe. woordes declare that this place maketh flatte agaynst you: for who placed those Leuites and Priestes in Ierusalem for the iudgement and cause of the Lorde? or who prescribed vnto them what they shoulde do? or who gaue to them that authoritie? did not Iehosaphat? the texte is playne. Iehosaphat had chiefe authoritie and gouernment bothe in thinges perteyning to God, and in thinges perteyning to the common wealth, but for better execution of them, the one he did committee to be executed by Amaria the Prieste, the other by Zabadiah a ruler of the house of Iuda: euen as the Quéenes Maiestie beyng supreme gouernour in all causes, bothe Ecclesiasticall and Temporall, committeth the hearing and iudgyng of Ecclesiasticall matters to the Archbyshops and Bishops, and of Temporall matters to the Lorde Chauncellour and other iudges, neyther can you any more conclude that Iehosaphat had no authoritie in Ecclesiasticall causes bycause he made Amarias the Prieste iudge in the same, than you can that he had nothing to do in Temporall affayres, bycause he appoynted also Zabadiah to heare & determine them. For if this reason be good, the Quéene of Englande hath nothing to do with Ecclesiasticall matters, bycause shée hath made the Archbishops and Bishops iudges in them, then is this as good, hir Maiestie hath no authoritie in Ciuill matters, bycause she hath committed the same to the Lorde Chauncellour and other Iudges. Thus you see howe both the Papistes and you are deceyued in one and she selfe same reason.
                     I will but note by the way that the Leuites beyng Ecclesiasticall persons, hadLeuites being Ecclesiasticall persons had to d
                              〈1 line〉
                            in ciuill matters. to do in Ciuill matters, as the woordes of the texte verse. 11. moste manifestly, declare, as for your shifte of the number of them, beyng more than coulde be applyed to the vse of the Churche, it is but your owne, and therefore to simple to answere so playne and direct a place of the Scripture.
                     That in the fifte to the Hebrewes is farre from the purpose, for the Apostle in the same sentence declareth what those things perteyning to God be: Euen to offer bothe giftes and sacrifices for him: I thinke you do not so malitiously reporte of vs

as the Papistes do: that we giue to the Prince power to minisier the Sacramentes, and to preache the woorde: if you do not, this place can by no meanes serue your turne.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 3. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 154. Sect. 2.
                  This might M. Doctor haue learned by that whiche the noble Emperour Constantine attributethEuseb. lib. 2. de vita Const. epi. ad Euseb. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 17 
                           〈1 line〉
                        . tom. con. to the Fathers of the Nicene Councell and to the Ecclesiasticall persons there gathered: whiche he dothe also permitte the Byshops, Elders, and Deacons of Churches to do, A great ouersight. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                      eyther by correcting or adding, or making newe if neede be. And by the continuall practise of the Churche in the tyme of Christian Emperours, whiche alwayes permitted vnto the ministers assembled in councels▪ as well the determination of controuersies whiche rose, as the making or the abolishing of needefull or hurtfull ceremonies, as the ease requyred. Also by the Emperours epistle in the first action of the councell of Constantinople where by the epistle of the Emperour it appeareth, that it was the manner of the Emperours, to confirme the ordināces which were made by the ministers, and to see them kept.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     
                        I learne in Eusebius Lib.
                         1. de vita Constan. that Constantinus is called as it were
                           Euseb. lib. 1. de vita Const. Constantinus his rule in ecclesiasticall matters. a generall Bishop appoynted of God, that he also called Synodes and placed the moderator in them: I learne in that seconde Booke, that he made lawes and constitutions perteyning to holynesse towardes God, and to the appoynting of meete thinges for the Churches of God: that there shoulde be no Images worshipped: none erected and set vp: no enchauntmentes vsed or so thsayinges. And I learne in that same EpistleLib. 2. by you quoted, that Constantinus prescribed to Eusebius what he shoulde do, and whatEpist. ad Eusel. he should will others to do, in buylding and repayring of Church▪s, or enlarging of them: neyther is there mention made of anyother Lawes or constitutions in that Epistle:
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               grosse ouersight of T. C. and surely I beleeue that those woordes whiche Constantinus speaketh to Eusebius of buylding or repayring, or enlarging Churches buylded of stone, you vnderstande of making, restoring or enlarging of Ecclesiasticall orders and Lawes, whiche if you do (as your woordes playnely signifie) then vnderstande you not the place, abuse your Reader, and caste away an argument. For Constantinus woordes to Eusebius be thesc: Howe hitherto by that wicked sentence and tyrannie, persecutingLib. 2. Eus. de vita Con lant. Epist. ad Eus. the Ministers of our Sauiour, the buyldinges of the Churches are decayed, and weakened thorough negligence, or soulde and made vyle, for feare of imminent daunger, I knowe and am fully perswaded: but nowe libertie beyng restored, and that Dragon thorough the prouidence of God, and our ministerie banished from the gouernment of the common wealth, I thinke Gods power is made manifest to all, and that those whiche haue fallen into certayne sinnes, eyther for feare or thorough vnbeleefe, and nowe knowe the trutheEusthius gouernour of me churches than one. will returne agayne to the true and right waye of lyfe: therefore admonishe all Churches whiche thou doest gouerne or any other Churches, vnder the gouernment of other Bishops, Priestes, or Deacons, that they be diligent aboute the buyldyng of theyr Churches, and that they eyther repayre suche as stande still, or enlarge them, or if necessitie requyre, buylde them newe, and thou thy selfe, or other for thee, may requyre of the gouernours and Magistrates in the prouinces those thinges that be necessarie. It is playne that Constantine in these woordes speaketh onely of materiall Churches, and therefore you are greatly deceyued. But if it were as you say, do you not sée howe it maketh agaynstThe place agaynst 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . your selfe? for what dothe more plainely appeare in that you saye, he permitteth this vnto the Bishops &c. than that the authoritie was in him, and they were but his vicegerentes.
                     
                     The continuall practise of Christian Churches (in the tyme of Christian Magistrates)Christian Princes haue exercised su
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                            authoritie in ecclesiastical cases. Sozomenus. lib. 1. cap. 17. before the vsurpation of the Bishop of Rome, hath bene to giue to Christian

Princes supreme authoritie in making Ecclesiasticall orders and lawes, yea and that whiche is more, in deciding of matters of religion, euen in the chiefe and principall poyntes. And that booke and chapter of Sozomene by you quoted declareth the same. For the Bishops that came to the Councell of Nyce, committed the hearing & determining of theyr controuersies to the Emperour, which argueth that it was then, a common and vndoubted opinion receyued among them, that the Emperour had authoritie to iudge in their causes: and although the Emperour of modestie refused so to do, saying, that it was not meete for them, so to vse themselues, that they shoulde be iudged of other, yet I am sure you will not make this a rule to exempt the Cleargie from the iurisdiction of the Ciuill Magistrate, vnlesse you will take holde with the Pope and saie, VVe muste iudge all and be iudged of none▪
                         This modestie in Constantinus (in refusing to heare the matters in controuersis among the Bishops) excepted, there is nothing in that firste booke and, 17▪ chapter of Sozomene, that can by any meanes serue your turne.
                     If you say that he woulde not determine any thing agaynst Arius heresie, butA wise prince will take the aduise of the learned in discussing of weighty matters. committed the same to the Synode and Councell of Nice: I answere, that therein be nothing at all abridged his authoritie.▪ but shewed his wisedome and godly care. For it is the parte of a wise and godly Prince, to haue such weightie matters of doctrine (beyng in controuersie) decreed and determined by suche, as for their authoritie, wisedome and learning, are moste fitte to entreate of suche matters. But alas how doth this argument follow: Constantinus called the Councell of Nice to determine certayne matters of religion in controuersie, therefore he had no authoritie to make Ecclesiasticall orders and lawes?
                     What Councell of Constantinople was that? if you meane the. 5. beyng celebratedIustinian made many Ecclesiasticall lawes. 
                        Anno. 549. in the tyme of Iustinianus: it is a very late testimonie for this cause, the Bishops of Rome: beyng then in great authoritie, and yet manifest it is, that no Emperour made mo Ecclesiasticall lawes, bothe concerning matters of order, and also of doctrine, than did the Emperour Iustinianus, as may be séene in the Code vnder these Titles, De summa trinitate & fide Catholica: De sacrosanctis Ecclesijs: de Episcopis & Clericis: de Haereticis & Manichaeis & Samaritanis: ne sanctum Baptisma iteretur: de statuis & imaginibus, and a number such like.
                     If you meane the sixth Councell of Constantinople, as it lyke you do: then are you without my compasse: for that Councell was Anno. 681. and who will alleageConstantinus▪ rogon▪ gouerned the councell of Constantinople. on. 681. any authoritie of that corrupt tyme for any suche matter in controuersie? and yet it is certayne that Constantinus the Emperoure did gouerne that Councell and that the Bishops on bothe sides did pleade before him at his appoyntment, himselfe sitting as moderator: and this was in a matter of fayth. But be it as you say (though I can finde no suche thing in the firste Action of that Councell) dothe it followe that bycause Emperours cōfirmed ordinaunces that were made in Synodes and Councelles, therefore they haue no authoritie to make Ecclesiasticall lawes? surely I vnderstande not howe you can make any suche conclusion, for (as I sayde before) it is a poynt of greate wisedome and singular care, to prouide that weightie matters in controuersie be determined with great deliberation and aduise of suche as be most skilfull in them. But this can be no argument to proue that Ciuill Magistrates may make no orders in the Churche, or Ecclesiasticall Lawes: for euen those orders and lawes whiche were made in suche Councels, were made by the authoritie of the Emperour, as dothe very well appeare in the same Councels, for when the matters were concluded in the Councell of Chalcedon, the Bishops brust out into these voyces. It is a true and a right iudgement: long lyfe to the Senate: manyConc. Chalced▪ Euagr lib. 2. cap. 4. yeares to the Emperour. Whereby it appeareth that the chiefe authoritie in suche Councels was giuen to the Emperour, and that he was esteemed as the chiefe iudge: which appeareth also at large in the seconde booke of Euagrius.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The. 4. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 154. Sect. 2.
                  The practise of this he mighte haue also moste playnely seene in Ambrose, who woulde by5. Lib. epist. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        2. no meanes suffer that the causes of the Churches should be debated in the Princes consistorie orAnother reason of the Papists agaynst the authoritie of the ciuil magistrate. courte, but would haue them handled in the Churche, by those that had the gouernment of the Churche, and therefore excuseth himselfe to the Emperour Ualentiman for that (beyng conuented to answere of the church matters vnto the ciuill courte) he came not.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     This is an other of M. Hardinges reasons agaynst the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate in Ecclesiasticall matters, and he vsed it against the Apologie, but the answere made to the same in the defense of the Apologie, by that reuerende Father6. Parte. 14. Chap. 5. Diuision. the Bishop of Sarisburie, is learned and true, the summe whereof is this. The Emperour Ualentinian at that tyme when Ambrose wrote this Epistle vnto him, was very yong, he was not yet baptized, he knewe not the principles of ChristesWhy Ambrose refused to come at the Emperours commaundement. Religion, he was an Arian Heretike, he woulde haue thruste out the Christians, and placed Heretikes in their Churches, he thought it was lawfull for him to do what him listed &c. For this cause Ambrose refused him to be his iudge, so that he did not mislike his authoritie in causes Ecclesiasticall, but onely his wilfull ignorance and his tyrannie: for that he knewe his iudgement was corrupted and not indifferent. And if you had marked the beginning of his Epistle, you might haue perceyued that he alleageth for his chiefe defense, and excuse for not appearing, the decrée of Theodosius the Father of Ualentinian, so that in not comming or appearing at the Emperours summon, he did but challenge the priuiledge graunted before of godly Emperours vnto the Cleargie.
                     And it is euident that the learned and auncient Fathers, haue committed theThe auncient Fathers haue committed the deciding of controuersies to Emperours. deciding of matters of controuersie to Emperours, as it appeareth in Athanasius his seconde Apologie, where he committing himselfe and his cause to the Emperour, sayeth thus: VVe require that the Emperours moste godly and most religious Maiestie, may haue the hearyng of the same matter, before whome we may open both our churches right, and also our owne: for we hope that his godlinesse vnderstanding our reasons, willAthanasius Apol. 2. neuer condemne vs.
                     
                     
                        Likewise S. Augustine Contra Epist Parme. Lib.
                         1. speakyng to the Donatistes,August. contra epist. Parmen. lib. 1. sayeth. Is it not lawfull for the Emperour or his deputie to giue sentence in a matter of religion? wherefore then went your Ambassadoures to the Emperour? why made they him iudge of their cause?
                     
                        Sozomene Lib.
                         4. Cap. 16. sayeth that the Emperour commaunded that tenne BishopsSozom. lib. 4. 16. of the East, and ten of the VVeste, chosen by the Councell, shoulde repayre to his courte and open to him the decrees of the Councell, that he might not only consider whether they were agreed according to the Scriptures: but that he might further determine and conclude what were best to be done.
                     Socrates 
                           Lib. 5. Cap. 10. sayeth that Theodosius the Emperour for the appeasingSocrat. lib. 5. cap. 10. of contention cōmaunded an assemblie of Bishops, & best learned to appeare before him, and eche parte to write a confession of their faith and religion: the which being done at a day appointed, they came to the Courte and deliuered vp their writinges to the Emperour, who after earnest praiers made, perusing the writings that were deliuered, rent in pieces the confessions, made by the Arians, and Eunomians, and allowed onely and receyued the confession of the Catholikes.
                     The practise therefore of the authoritie of Princes in Ecclesiasticall matters, euen in determining and iudging controuersies in Religion, you might haue learned by these examples in Ambrose tyme.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The. 5. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 154.. Sect. vlt.
                  And by whome can the matters and orders of the Churche be better ordeyned than by the ministers of the Churche? And if that be a good reason of M. Doctor in the fortie and seuenth Page, that the Bishops ought therefore to ordeyne ministers, bycause they are best able to iudgeAn other argu ment of the Papistes to the same purpose. of the learning and abilitie, of those which are the fittest, it is also as good reason that therefore the ministers and gouernours of the Churche should appoynt and decree of suche ceremonies and orders as perteyne to the churche, for bycause it is to be supposed that they can beste iudge of those matters, bestowing their studies that wayes, and further best vnderstanding the state of the church aboute the which they are wholly occupied.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     This also is a reason of M. Hardinges in the same cause, but it onely preueth that it is moste conuenient and necessarie, that Bishops and ministers of the ChurchThe debating and deciding of matters in religion by bishops, doth not derogate from the princes authoritie. whyle they he learned and godly, may haue the debating and deciding of matters in religion, neyther dothe this derogate any thing from the authoritie of the Prince in the same causes: we sée that matters in lawe are determined by iudges & lawyers: so be other ciuill matters by wise and prudent officers in like manner, and yet is not the authoritie of the Prince thereby abridged: but what if all the ministers of the Churche or moste of them be corrupt and vngodly, as it was in the beginning of the reygnes of Ezechias and Iosias, and as▪ it hath oftentimes bene: must all be committed to them then also?
                     No godly Princes hauing godly Bishops and ministers of the Churche, will alter or chaunge, determine or appoynt any thing in matters of religion, without their aduise and counsayle. But how if there be dissention among them, shall not the Prince determine the controuersies, as Constantinus, Theodosius, and other godly Emperours did? wherefore the méetnesse of the Priests and Bishops doth not take away any authoritie, from godly Princes in matters of the Church.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 6. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 155. Lin. 5.
                  And this is not (M. Doctor It is nothing els, as will appeare. to shake hands with the Papistes. For the Papistes would exempt their Priestes from the subiection and from the punishment of the ciuill magistrate, which we do not. And ye Papists would that whatsoeuer the cleargy doth determine, that that sorthwith shoulde be holden for good, and the Prince shoulde be foorthwith compelled to mayntayne, and set forth that, be it good or euill, without further inquitie: but we saye Why then more than at eiher timess or hawe proue you this▪
                      that if there be no lawfull ministerie to set good orders, as in ruinous decayes and ouerthrowes of religion, that then the Prince ought to do it, and if when there is a lawfull ministerie it shall agree of any vnlawfull or vnmeete order, that the Prince ought to stay that order, and not to suffer it, but to driue them to that whiche is lawfull and meete, and if this be to shake handes with the papistes, then M. Doctor is to blame whiche hath taught vs once or twise before, that the appoynting of ceremonies of the churche, belongeth vnto the churche. And yet I knowe that there is one or two of the later writers that thinke otherwise, but as I take no aduantage of their authoritie which thinke as I do, so I ought not to be preiudiced by those that thinke otherwise. But for so muche as we haue M. Doctor yet of this iudgement that the churche ceremonies shoulde be ordeyned by the church, I will trauayle no further in this matter, considering that the practise of this churche, commonly is to referre these matters vnto the Ecclesiasticall persons onely this is the difference, that where it is done now of one or a fewe, wee desire that it may be done by others also who haue interest in that behalfe.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.The papistes confese that the prince may punish priest, 5, Harding.
                        
                     
                     Yes in good sooth is it: for M. Harding agaynst the Apologie, confesseth that the Ciuill Magistrate may punishe with corporall punishment any estate or degrée of persons, offending eyther agaynst the first or second table. And Saunders sayeth 
                           lib. 2. That Bishops in that they be men, be subiect to ciuill Magistrates: and therefore in thatSaunders li, 2.
                        
poynt the Papistes graunt as much as you.
                     Concerning the determination of matters in religion, I know not wherein you differ from them: for though the Prince mislike your determination, yet can he not him selfe conclude any thing, onely he may compell you to go to it agayne andThe Replier giueth to the Prince no more than potestatem facti.
                         take better holde: but if it shall please you to go forewarde in your determination, or if you cannot agrée among your selues, I see not what authoritie you haue giuen to the Ciuill Magistrate, to determine the matter: but for ought that I can espie, if you and your Seniors be disposed to be peeuishe, eyther muste the Prince haue no Religion, or els that which you shall appoynt vnto him: for potestatem facti, you giue him, that is, you make him your executioner, but potestatem iuris, you do as fully remoue from him, as the papists do: for he hath not (as you say) any authoritie to make orders or lawes in Ecclesiasticall matters.
                     Saunders sayeth, and so say all the Papistes, that he hath 
                           authoritatem promouendi
                           Saunders. 
                           religionem: authoritie to promote religion, but not 
                           constituendi, to appoynte: and therefore vndoubtedly I perceyue not wherein you differ in this Article from the Papistes. In the chiefe poynt I am sure that you agree fully and flatly with them: and vse their argumentes and none other: that is in this, that you take from the eiuill Magistrate omnem potestatem iuris, in matters and causes Ecclesiasticall.
                     And what Scripture haue you to proue that the ciuill Magistrates authoritieThe Replier vttreth strāge doctrine with out proofe: & yet woulde haue all proued by scripture. is not as ample and as large in matters of religion, when there is a lawfull ministerie, as when there is an vnlawfull ministerie? In deede when he hath the one he may the more safely vse their aduise, and followe theyr counsell, which he neyther may nor ought to do when he hath the other, but his authoritie is all one ouer them bothe: and surely I marueyle that you will vtter suche straunge assertions, so peremptorily without any kinde of proofe. For you that woulde haue all thinges proued by the Scriptures, haue not in this wayghtie cause vsed one texte of Scripture, but onely one borrowed of the Papistes, and making directly agaynst you.
                     When I say, that the Churche hath authoritie to appoynt Ceremonies, I speake generally of all states of the Churche, as well vnder persecution as vnder a Christian Magistrate, not secluding, but including, the Christian Magistrate as the chiefe and principall gouernour of the Churche committed to him nexte vnder God: for I do not speake of a Christian Magistrate, as you and the Papistes woulde haue me, to witte, as of Iulius Cesar, Alexander, or Nero: but I speake of him as one appoynted by God to gouerne, not only in the common wealth, but in the Churche also. Yea I will go further with you, I make no difference betwixteNo suche difference betweene a christian common wealth & the Church as is pretended. a Christian common wealth and the Churche of Christe: wonder you as muche at it as you will: I haue shewed my reasons before, and you haue not as yet vsed any to the contrarie, wherefore if you thinke no otherwise of this cause than I haue in these woordes taught you, the ciuill Magistrate shall be much more beholden vnto you, than he is.
                     Certaynely I knowe not of any of the late wryters (one or two excepted) that are of your iudgement in this cause, and were it not that the same is learnedly and fully handled almoste of all the late wryters, and namely of suche as haue in our tongue notably and learnedly defended this truth of the Princes authoritie in Ecclesiasticall matters agaynst the English Louanistes, who haue especially sought to impeach the same, I woulde in more ample manner haue prosecuted this cause. But for as much as their bookes are in euery mans handes, it shall be sufficient to referre the Reader to my Lorde of Sarisburie his defense of the Apologie agaynst Maister Harding, my L. of Winchesters answere to Master Fecknam, & Master Nowels bookes agaynst Dorman, in all which this matter is very learnedly and painefully handled.
                  
               
               
                  Admonition.
                  Is a reformation good for Fraunce? and can it be euill for England? is discipline meete for Scotlande? and is it vnprofitable for this Realme? Surely God hath set these examples before

your eyes, to encourage you to goe forwarde, to a thorow and a speedie reformation. You may not do as heretofore you haue done, patche and peece, nay rather goe backwarde, and neuer labour to Heb. 6. 1. contende to perfection. But altogither remoue whole Antichrist bothe head, body, & braunche, and perfectly plant that puritie of the worde; that simplicitie of the sacraments, and that seueritie of discipl ne which Christ hath commaunded, and commended to his church.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 138. Sect. 1.
                     Hathe there beene no reformation in this Church of Englande sithenceUnthankfulnesse of the Ad monitors. the Queenes Maiesties reygne? What say you to the abolishing of the vsurped power of the Bishop of Rome? what say you to the banishing of the Masse? Nay what say you to the puritie of doctrine in all poynts perteyning to saluation? Is this no reformation with you? O intollerable vnthankfulnesse.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 155. Sect. 1. 2.
                  The other poynt is in the. 138. page, where he most vntruly and standerously chargeth the Authors of the Admonition, and maketh wonderfull outcries, as though they should denie that there had beene any reformation at all sithence the time that the Queenes Maiestie began to reigne, manifestly contrarie not only to their meaning, but also to their very words, which appeareth in that they moue to a through reformation, and to contende, or to labour to perfection, denying onely that the reformation which hath beene made in hir Maiesties dayes, is through and perfect. We confesse willingly, that next vnto the Lorde God, that euery one of vs is moste deepely bounde to hir Maiestie, whome he hath vsed as an excellent instrument to deliuer his churche heere, out of the spirituall Egypt of Poperie, and the common wealth also, and the whole lande out of the slauery and subiection of strangers, whervnto it was so neere. This I saye we willingly confesse before men, and do in our prayers dayly giue most humble thanks to God therfore.
                  And by this humble sute and earnest desire, which we haue for further reformation, we are so farre from vnthankfulnesse vnto hir Maiestie, that wee thereby desire the heape of hir felicitie, and the establishment of hir Royall throne amongst vs, whyche then shall be moste sure and vnremoued, when our Sauiour Christ sytteth wholly and fully, not onely in his chayre to teache, but also in his throne to rule, not alone in the heartes of euery one by his spirite, but also generally and in the visible gouernment of his churche, by those lawes of discipline which he hath prescribed.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     The words of the Admonition, page. 137. be these: Is a reformation good for Fraimce.The Admonitors, and the Replyer mislike our reformation almost wholly. &c. and can it be euill for Englande? is discipline meete for Scotlande. &c. and is it vnprofitable for this Realme? To this I answering say, hathe there beene no reformation in the Church of Englande since the Queenes Maiesties reigne &c. what wonderfull outeryes these be, or howe vntrue slaunders, let the discrete Reader iudge. Doth not he that sayth (is a reformation good for Fraunce, and can it be euill for Englande) insinuate that there is no reformation in Englande? In the same place they say, that hitherto we haue but patched and peeced, my rather gone backwarde. Moreouer to what ende dothe their booke tende, but to the defacing of this reformation? What is it that eyther they or you commende or lyke in this Churche? nay what is it that you mislike not? For, to the sinceritie of doctrine, as it appeareth, you haue little regarde: all things else you vtterly cast downe: neyther the authoritie of the Prince, the ministerie, the gouernment of the Churche, the administration of the Sacraments, the ceremonies, the discipline, the forme or matter of publike prayers, norThe good they acknowledge of the Queene dissembled. almoste any thing else can please you: and howsoeuer nowe in wordes you confesse, that you are most deepely bounde vnto hir Maiestie. &c. yet bothe in tongue and in deede, dyners of you declare, that your meaning is nothing lesse. For why doe you then so vnorderly, so vndoubtedly, so spitefully, publikely and priuately, in worde and in wryting deface hir procéedings, slaunder hir gouernment, depraue the reformation that she hathe made, with sectes and schismes deuide the Realme, set dissention among the people, make the Papists more stubborne, driue those backe that were welnighe persuaded, thrust a misliking of the state into the hearts of many Protestantes, encourage

hir aduersaries, separate hir faythfull subiectes one from another, and greatly disquiet hir selfe? But I will not prosecute this matter: onely I desire of God most hartily, that it would please him to worke that minde and affection in you in deede, that becommeth dutifull subiects, and quiet members of the Churche.
                  
               
               
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 138. Sect. 1.
                  Englande is not bounde to the example eyther of Fraunce orEnglande is not bounde to other Churches for examples. Scotlande: I woulde they bothe were (if it pleased God) touching Religion, in that state and condition that Englande is. I woulde Antichriste were as farre from them remoued. The Lorde make vs thankfull, and continue this reformation we haue, and graunt peace to his Church, and eyther couuert the hearts of those that be enimies vnto it, or remoue them.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 155. Sect. 3. & Pag. 156. Sect. 1.
                  And whereas M. Doctor would bring vs into a foolish paradise of our selues, as thoughe we neede not to learne any thing at the churches of Fraunce and Scotland, he should haue vnderstanded, that as we haue bin vnto them in example, and haue prouoked them to follow vs, so the Lord will haue vs also profite, and be prouoked by their example, and so be mutual helpes one to an other, and stirre vp our selues with the admonition that our sauiour Christe stirred vp his Apostles, that oftentimes those that are first are not forwardest, but are ouerrunne of others that come after. And wheras he would A slanderous and malicious vntruthe. priuily pinche at the reformation there, for so muche as the Lorde hatheMat. 20. humbled the one, and exerciseth the other by ciuill warres and troubles, he should haue in steade of rocking vs a sleape in our securitie, put vs in remembrance of Gods scourges which hang ouer vs, and of Gods great patience that still tarrieth for our repentance, and that if he haue punished that people of his, which haue suffered so muche for the profession of the gospell, and which went with so straight a foote in it, with an vniuersall hazarde of their goods and lyues, that we shall not escape vnlesse we repent speedily of our coldnesse and halting in religion, and vnwillingnesse, I will not say to hazarde to put our lyues in daunger, but not to leese some of our wealth and honour, for the obteyning of a through reformation of the Church, and aduauncement of the glory of the Lorde.
                  Finally, he would rather haue put vs in remembrance of the sermon which our sauiour ChristLuk. 13. maketh, where he sheweth that those cities are not alwayes the greatest sinners, or those whome God is most angry with, which haue the heauiest iudgements executed vpon them, but that therby the Lord calleth vs to repentance, otherwise that we shall likewise perishe. This had beene more fit for our estate to haue beene sayde, than to haue after a sort God roote out of you this malicious spirite, which deliceth in slaunders. insulted vpon the afflicted, and daubed vp our eyes, that we should not see our miserie and our nakednesse.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I haue sayde truely, that we are not bounde to their examples: I doe not denieNo Churche may chalenge to be a patern necessarie to be followed. but that examples may be followed, and one ought to followe an other in that which is good and conuenient. But I haue shewed before, that one Churche is not bound of necessitie in all things to followe an other: onely the Church of Rome is so arrogant and proude as to chalenge that prerogatiue.
                     I haue great cause to expostulate with you, for this your vnchristian, vnbrotherly, and most vniust handling of me. For where, or in what words doe I pinche at their reformation? Wherein doe I vse any insultation vpon the afflicted, and agaynst them? is this to pinche at them, or to insult agaynst them, to wishe that touching religion, they were in that state and condition that Englande is? to wish that vnto them, that they grone for themselues? Surely fleshe and bloud will hardely suffer me to put vp this iniurie: But I am taught patience I thanke God, and the Lorde forgiue you, & roote out that roote of bitternesse that is so déepe in your heart.
                  
               
               
                  Admonition.
                  And heere to ende, we desire al to suppose that we haue not attempted this enterprise for vayne glory, gayne, preferment, or any other worldly respect.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 139. Sect. 1.
                     I would to God you were as free from vayne glory, ambition,

and malice, and other sinister affections, as you would seeme to be: but no indifferent man reading your booke, will so thinke of you, for besides the opprobrious and vnseemely termes you vse towardes your superiours, your Admonition smelleth altogither of popularitie and vayne glory.
                  
               
               
                  Admonition.
                  Neyther yet iudging our selues, so exactly to haue set out the state of the Churche reformed as that nothing more could be added, or a more perfect forme and order drawne, for that were great presumption, to arrogate so muche vnto our selues, seeing that as we are but weake and simple soules, so God hath raysed vp men of profounde iudgement, and notable learning.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 139. Sect 3.
                     And yet in the beginning of your booke, you call it a true platforme of a Churche reformed: and I dare saye you thinke it to be as perfect a forme of a Church, as al the best learned & godlyest men in the worlde could frame: for it is well knowne that men of your disposition, thinke commonly as well of them selues, as they doe ofMen thinke too well of themselues. any man else, and better too. But we graunt vnto you, that you are so farre from setting downe a perfect state of a Churche reformed, that you maye rather be called confounders and deformers, than buylders and reformers.
                  
               
               
                  Admonition.
                  But therby to declare our good wils towards the setting forth of Gods glory, and the building vp of his Church, accounting this as it were but an entrance into further matter, hoping that our God, who hath in vs begon this good worke, will not onely in time hereafter make vs strong, and able to goe forwarde therein: but also moue other vpon whome he hath bestowed greater measure of his giftes and graces, to labour more thorowly and fully in the same.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 140.
                     God graunt that you maye become buylders and not destroyers: I thinke in deede you haue but begonne: I knowe there is otherSuspected opinions behinde. opinions among you, whiche be not yet commonly knowne: and truely I doubt that you will neuer ende: but from tyme to tyme coyne newe deuises to trouble the Church, vntill you haue brought that heuy plague of God vpō vs, which the like kind of mē through their schismes and heresies haue brought vpon all those places almost, where any of the Apostles preached, and where the GospellDomesticall dissention for
                              〈1 line〉
                            runner of destruction▪
                         was first planted: and commonly before ruine and destruction, commeth inwarde discorde and domesticall dissention.
                     The Lorde make vs thankfull for the puritie of his Gospell, that we by his mercy enioy: the Lorde roote out schismes and factions from among vs, and eyther conuerte or confounde the authors of them: The Lorde of his singular goodnesse continue our gracious Queene Elizabeth vnto vs, and giue vs faythfull and obedient hearts to his worde, and to hir Maiestie. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 156. Sect. 1.
                  In all the rest M. Doctor hath nothing but wordes of reproche agaynst the authors of the Admonition, and calling styll, as his maner is, for more punishment for them, which I will not bestowe the answere of.
                  
                     
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     And to this ende haue I héere set my wordes downe, that the Reader may vnderstande what wordes of reproche those be that you charge me with, but seeing it will not please you to bestowe the answere of them, I shall also be content to spare so muche labour.
                  
               
               
                  Admonition.
                  Where as immediately after the last Parliament, holden at Westminster, begon in Anno. 1570. and ended Anno. 1571. the ministers of Gods holy worde and sacraments were called before hir Maiesties highe Commissioners, and enforced to subscribe vnto the Articles, if they would keepe their places and liuings and some for refusing to subscribe, were vnbrotherly and vncharitably entreated, and from their offices and places remoued: May it please therfore this honorable and high Court of Parliament in consideration of the premises, to take a view of suche causes as then dyd withholde, and nowe dothe the foresayde Ministers, from subscribing and consenting vnto those foresayde Articles, by way of purgation to discharge themselues of all disobedience towards the Churche of God, and their Soueraigne, and by way of moste humble entreatie, for the remouing away and vtter abolishing of all suche corruptions and abuses, as withhelde them, through which this long time, brethren haue bin at vnnaturall warre and strife among them selues, to the hinderance of the gospell, to the ioy of the wicked, and to the griefe and dismay of all those that professe Christian religion, and labour to atteyne Christian reformation.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 146. 147. 148.
                     You complayne muche of vnbrotherly and vncharitable entreatingComplaynte of persecution without cause of you, of remouing you from your offices, and places. Surely in this poynt I must compare you to certayne Heretikes that were in Augustines time, who moste bitterly by sundry meanes afflicting and molesting the true ministers of the Churche, yet for all that cried out, that they were extremely dealt with, and cruelly persecuted by them: or else vnto a shrewde and vngratious wyfe, which beating hir husbande, by hir clamorous complaynts, maketh hir neighboursPersecution of the tongue. beleeue that hir husbande beateth hir: or to him that is mentioned in Erasmus collequies, that dyd steale and runne away with the Priestes purse▪ and yet cried alwayes as he ranne, stay the theefe, stay the theefe, and thus crying escaped, and yet he was the theefe him selfe. You are as gentlye entreated as maye be, no kinde of brotherly persuation omitted towards you, most of you as yet keepe your liuings, though some one or two be displaced, you are offered all kinde of friendlynesse, if you could be content to conforme your selues, yea but to be quiet and holde your peace. You on the contrary side moste vnchristianly, and moste vnbrotherly, bothe publikely and priuately rayle on those, that shewe this humanitie towards you, slaunder them by all meanes you can, and moste vntruely reporte of them. seeking by all meanes their discredite. Agayne they as theirDisobediēce. allegiance to the Prince, and duetie to lawes requireth, yea and as some of them by othe are bounde, doe execute that discipline whiche the Prince, the lawe, and theyr othe requireth: you contrarie to all obedience, duetie, and othe, openly violate, and breake those lawes, orders, and statutes, whiche you ought to obey, and to the whicheA token of a good conscience. some of you by othe is bounde. If your doings proceede in deede from a good conscience, then leaue that liuing and place, which byndeth you to those things that be agaynst your conscience, for why shoulde you striue with the disquietnesse, bothe of your selues and

others, to keepe that liuing which by lawe you can not, excepte you offend agaynst your conscience? Or what honestie is there to sweare to statutes and lawes, and when you haue so done, contrary to your othe to breake them, and yet still to remayne vnder them, and enioy that place which requireth obedience, and subiection to them? For my parte I thinke it muche better, by remouing you from your lyuings to offende you, than by suffering you to enioy them, to offende the Prince, the lawe, conscience, and God. And before God I speake it, if I were persuaded as you seeme to be, I woulde rather quietly forsake all the liuings I haue, than be an occasion of strife, and contention in the Church, and a cause of stumbling to the weake, and reioycing to the wicked. I knowe God woulde prouide for me, if I did it, bona conscientia: yea surely I woulde rather dye, than be an author of schismes, a disturber of the common peace, and quietnesse of the Church and state. There is no reformed Churche that I can heareEuery church hath a determinate order of ceremonies tell of, but it hath a certayne prescript and determinate order, aswel touching ceremonies, and discipline, as doctrine, to the whiche all those are constrayned to giue their consent, that will liue vnder the protection of it: and why then maye not this Churche of Englande haue so in like maner? Is it meete that euery man should haue his owne phansie, or liue as him liste? Truely I knowe not wherevnto these your dooings can tende, but eyther to Anabaptisme, or to meere confusion. But nowe to the reasons that moue you, not to subscribe to those Articles ministred vnto you, by hir Maiesties highe Commissioners.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 156. Sect. 2.
                  
                     Sed etiam quodam in loco facetus esse voluisti. Deus bone, quam te illud non decet. Heere M.Pleasant diuinitie. Doctor was disposed to make him selfe, and his Reader merie, but it is with the bagpipe or countrey mirth, not with the harpe or lute, which the learned were wont to handle. For he hath packed by togither the olde tale of the curst wyfe, and of the thiefe that tooke away the Priests purse, very familiar and homely geare: It might peraduenture make M. Doctor hoppe about the house, but the learned and the wyse, can not daunce by this instrument.
                  It pleaseth M. Doctor to compare those which be put out of their liuings without iust cause, to heretikes. curst wyues, and to theeues, but all men do vnderstande how rightly. What his troubles be within, and in his conscience, the Lorde God and he knoweth best, but as for the outwarde persecution which he suffreth, it is not suche as he neede thus to stoupe and to grone, and to blowe vnderneath it, as though he had some great burthen vpon his shoulders. And if he cōplayne of the persecution of the tongue, to let passe his immoderate heate of speeche, whych he vseth with those that he hathe to doe withall, the tongue whiche is more intemperate than his is in all his booke, shall hardely be founde.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     And I thanke God, I can be mery with the bagpype, I am neyther ashamed of the Instrument, nor of the countrey. But what diuinitie call you this? alacke poore spite at the bagpipe. Surely you doe me a pleasure when you tell me of it. You haue omitted nothing that by any meanes might serue you for a iest. O great grauitie. &c. But let vs leaue puerilia, pueris.
                     
                     I knowe none of you put from your liuings, without moste iuste cause: if there be any iniuried that wayes (God be thanked) they maye finde iustice. My quietnesse within my conscience (I moste humbly thanke my God therefore) dothe mitigate the

heate of the slaunderous generation, and maketh me more willing to deale agaynst that secte, that can not be maynteyned without suche kinde of vncharitable, and slaunderous dealing. I remember what Cyprian sayth to Cornelius Epist. lib. 1. EcclesiasticallCyprian. discipline is not therefore to be lefte of, nor the seueritie that becommeth a Priest to be slackned, bicause we are reuiled and euill spoken of. &c. And agayne: The opprobrious speeches of the wicked ought not to moue vs so, that we decline from the righte way, and the sure rule, seeing that the Apostle instructeth vs, saying: If I ▪shoulde please men, I were not the seruant of Christ. If the heate of my tongue be immoderate, what shall be sayde of yours? But this kinde of dealing is nothing méete for vs. Wherefore if you continue in this vayne, you shall haue the best game for me.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 156. Sect. 2.
                  And althoughe it be vnreasonable inoughe, that he shoulde not giue men leaue to complayne of their troubles, when he glorieth in troubling them, yet that of all is most vntollerable, that besides the iniurie which he dothe them, he is angry that they wyll not lay handes of them selues by casting themselues out of their liuings, or euer they be cast out by him. Tully maketh mention of one C. Fimbria, whiche when he had caused Q. Sceuola a singular man to be wounded, and sawe that he dyed not of it, conuented him before the Iudges, and beeing asked what he had to accuse him of, answered, for that he dyd not suffer the whole weapon wherewith he was striken, to enter into hys body: euen so M. Doctor contenteth not him selfe only to doe iniuries vnto men, but accuseth them also, that they will not doe it vnto them selues, or that they would not willingly suffer his weapons enter so farre, as he would haue them.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I trust there is not one that can iustly saye, I haue without great cause molested him: if there be any suche, or whome I haue by any meanes iniuried, I refuse not to answere, and to satisfie him: yea it is my desire that it maye come to the triall, so shall many slaunderous spéeches, togither with the authors of them be founde as they are.
                     
                        C. Fimbria was a very proude, sedicious Romane, and one that disquieted theC. Fimbria. Q. Sceuola. state of the common wealth, and greatly enuied his superiours. Q. Sceuola was a wyse and a prudent Senatour, one that liued in authoritie, and obserued lawes him selfe, and caused the same to be obserued by other. Sceuola surely you can not be, for you are neyther of that credite, for wisdome, nor of that authoritie in the cōmon wealth, nor so diligent an obseruer of good orders and lawes: your conditions come nearer to Fimbria, I will not conclude, you shall doe it your selfe.
                     If I haue done you any iniurie, prosecute it to the vttermoste, and spare not, I neuer entreated you to holde your peace. The greatest iniurie that I acknowledge my selfe guiltie of, is vnto the Colledge, that I so long suffered you contrarie to your expresse othe, to vsurpe a place therein, to the great hinderaunce and disquieting thereof.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 156. Sect. 2.
                  What conscience is there that bindeth a man to depart from his liuing, in that place where he liketh not of all the orders which are there vsed? Is it not inough to abstayne from them, if there be any euill in them, or to declare the vnlawfulnesse of thē, if his calling do suffer him, when as the reformation is not in his power? And if eyther of this absteyning, or declaration of thys vnlawfulnesse of them, troubles be moued, there is no more cause why they should giue place, than the other which like of those disorders, yea there is lesse cause, for that they are not the causes of trouble but the other, and for that by their departure out of their places, roome is made for those which will lyke of those disorders, whiche the other misliked, whiche is to the hurte of that companie, or congregation in suche places.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     If he be sworne to kéepe those orders kéeping his liuing: if as honest men as he is will lyke of them: If his equals, or rather betters, might supply his place: I thinke he ought rather to satisfie his othe, or to refuse his liuing, if he wyll auoyde periurie:

yea though there were no such méete persons to succéede him. But if the case be this, that a man shall directly sweare, eyther to doe such a thing by such a tyme, or to leaue his place, if by that time he neyther do the thing by othe required, nor leaue his place, but still vsurpe the same, at the least the space of fiue yeres: I thinke he ought to be displaced for periurie: whiche is a greater matter than eyther cappe or surplesse. I doe but nowe put a case, that men may vnderstande euery man that is displaced, not to be displaced without great and vrgent occasion. I woulde not enter into thys vayne, if I were not vrged. Therefore to answere in one worde for all, I haue put no man out of his liuing, but there is greater cause why he should be ashamed to cō
                        playne of iniurie, than I, to doe according to my othe and duetie.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 156. tovvards the ende.
                  And as for M. Doctors easinesse to depart from his liuing, rather than he woulde cause any trouble, he giueth men great cause to doubt of, whiche hauing diuers great liuings, and amongest them a benefice, is very loth to goe from troubling of others, to doe his duetie at any of them. It is true that the Church of England may haue an order, whervnto it may iustly require the subscription of the ministers in Englande. And so is it likewyse vntrue, that we desire that euery one shoulde haue his owne fansie, and lyue as him listeth, for we also desire an vniforme order, but suche, and in suche sorte, as we haue before declared. As for the olde accusation of Anabaptisme and confusion, it is answered before, therfore according to my promise, I will leaue your words, and if you haue any matter, I will speake to that.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     This was obiected and answered before: God knoweth my heart, and I am ready to giue myne accompte when I am therevnto by order called: orders you wyll admitte, but suche as pleaseth you, that is, you will be in order, if you maye doe what you liste.
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶Of subscribing to the Communion Booke. Tract. 21.
            
               Certayne generall faults, wherewith the booke is charged by the Admonitors.
               
                  Chap. 1. the first Diuision.
                  
                     The first article.
                     Fyrst that the booke commonly called the booke of common prayers for the Churche of Englande,Of subscribing to the communion booke. authorised by Parliament, and all and euery contents therein, be suche as are not repugnant to the worde of God.
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Albeit, right Honorable and dearely beloued, we haue at all times borne with that whiche we could not amende in this booke, and haue vsed the same in our ministerie, so farre foorth as we might, reuerencing those times, and those persons, in whiche and by whome it was first authorised, beeing studious of peace, and of the buylding vp of Christes church, yet nowe beeing compelled by subscription to allowe the same, and to confesse it not to be against the worde, of God in any poynt, but tollerable: we must needes say as followeth, that this booke is an vnperfect booke, culled and picked out of the Popishe dunghill the Masse booke, full of all abhominations, for some, and many of the contents therein, be suche as are agaynst the worde of God, as by his grace shall be proued vnto you. And by the waye we can not but muche maruell at the crafcie wilinesse of those men, whose parts it had beene first to haue proued eache and euery content therein, to be agreable to the worde of God, seeing that they forcemen by subscription to consent vnto it, or else sende them packing from their callings.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 149. Sect. 1.
                        And what reason can you giue why you should not aswell all owe
                              Scilicet, the Communion booke. of it by subscription, as you say, that you haue hitherto done by vsing of it in your ministerie? Will you speake one thing, and doe an other? Will you not subscribe to that, whiche you publikely vse, and giue your consent vnto?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 157. Sect. 1.
                     The Admonition hath no such thing, as M. Doctor chargeth the authors therof with, that they dyd euer allow of the booke of seruice. It sayth, they bare with it, and vsed it so farre, as they might, and therfore nowe when it came to the approuing of it by subscription, they refused, and there is no man which can not vnderstande, that it is one thing to beate with a thing, and an other to approue it, and therfore to beare, and to vse it so farre as might be, may well agree with their refusall of subscription, so that M. Doctors note is not worth the noting. The Apostles did beare with the infirmitie of the Iewes addicted to the obseruation of the ceremoniall lawe, yet they neuer allowed that infirmitie, and they were so farre from approuing it by subscribing, that they wrote agaynst it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        They say they haue not only borne with it, but vsed it also in their ministerie. &c. & he that vseth a thing doth as much allowe of it by vsing, as he could doe by subscribing. But I will not contende with you about a matter of so small weight: for neyther is their learning, discretion, or iudgement suche, that the booke is better or worse for their allowing or disallowing of it. They shew their natures bent to contention, and vnreuerent estimation of the scriptures by abusing of them, and that is all that can be gathered out of their booke.
                        The Apostles refused not to subscribe vnto such things as they permitted vnto the Iewes for a time, neyther did they beare with any thing, for their infirmitie, agaynst the which they wrote. If they haue done any such thing, note the place.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 149. Sect. 1.
                     
                        If those persons by whome this booke was first authorised, were studious of peace, and of buylding vp of Christes Church, as you say they were, then you that seeke to deface it, are disturbers of peace, and destroyers of the Churche of Christ. They were singular learned men, zelous in Gods religion, blamelesse in life, and Martyrs at their end, for eyther al, or the most part of them haue sealed this booke with their bloud. But by theA note by the waye. way this is to be noted, that you confesse your selues to haue allowed that (by vsing of it) which you say is agaynst the worde of God.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 157. Sect. 1.
                     Those sayth M. Doctor which authorised this booke, were studious of peace, and of buylding of Christes Church, therfore they that speake agaynst it (which he calleth defacing) are disturbers of the peace, and destroyers of the Church. So I will reason. Vnequal com parisons For in these poyntes they were not buylders vp of Christes church. Gedeon was studious of peace, and of building of the Church, therefore they whyche spake agaynst the Ephod whyche he made were disturbers of the peace, and destroyers of the church. We speake agaynst Images in churches and consubstantiation in the sacraments, & such lyke, which Luther beeing studious of peace, and of the building of the church did holde, and yet we are not therfore disturbers of peace, or destroyers of the church. Although they were excellent personages, yet their knowledge was in part, and although they brought many things to our light, yet they beeing sent out in ye morning, or euer the sunne of the Gospell was risen so hygh, might ouersee many things, which those that are not so sharpe of sight as they were, may see, for bicause that which they want in the sharpnesse of sight, they haue by the benefite and clearnesse of the sunne, and of the light. They sealed not the booke of seruice with their bloud (as M. Doctor sayth) for some that suffered for the truth, declared openly their misliking of certayne things in it, and as for the other they could neuer dye for that booke, more than for the Lyturgie vsed in the French church, or at Geneua. For they receyued not the sentence of condemnation, bicause they approued that booke, but bicause they improued the articles drawne out of the Masse booke. And if they had dyed for that booke (as in deede they dyed for the booke of God) yet the authoritie of their martyrdome coulde not take away from vs this libertie that we haue to enquire of the cause of their death. Iustine and Cyprian were godly Martyrs, and yet a man may not say, that they sealed their errours whiche they wrote wyth their bloud, or wyth this glory of their martyrdome, preiudice those which speake or write agaynst their errours, for this is to oppose the bloud of men, to the bloud of the sonne of God.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be the words of the Admonition: they saye that the Authors of that booke were studious of peace, and of the building vp of Christes Churche. and therefore vpon their owne words and confession, I grounde mine argument. This peace that they were studious of, and sought to maynteyne by collecting and authorising this booke, was a godly peace, sought to be maynteyned by godly meanes: and therefore suche as shall deface that godly meanes, wherby they procured peace, can not de iudged otherwyse, than disturbers of the same peace.
                        Gedeon by making the Ephod did not séeke peace, but rather glory, for he erectedGedeons Ephod. it to be a monument of his victorie: Gedeon erected the Ephod for an other ende and purpose than God did appoynt it: the Ephod that Gedeon made, was the cause of idolatrie. Likewise Images are expresly forbidden in the word of God, & there is a direct cōmaundement agaynst them: so is consubstātiation also. But the booke of common prayer is framed according to the scriptures, appoynted to the true worshipping of God, most repugnant to all Idolatrie, & Idolatrous worshipping: and therfore these similitudes & exāples that you vse be nothing like: it is neither like to Gedeons Ephod▪ nor maynteineth Luthers Images: or consubstantiation, but ouerthroweth them all.
                        Their knowledge was in parte, in that sense that the Apostle speaketh. 
                              Ex parte
                              The prayse of the makers of the booke. 
                              enim cognoscimus, & ex parte prophetamus: VVe knowe in part, and we prophecie in part. &c. But if they be compared vnto men, I thinke for learning, zeale, godlynesse & sounde1. Cor. 1
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . iudgemēt, most of thē haue not bin ouermatched, by any that hath folowed. And surely their learning & iudgement was singular. But no maruell it is, though you make so small account of me poore wretch, when you so basely speake of them. Undoubtedly in cōparison of your selues, I thinke you contēne all learned men both liuing & dead.
                        They may well be sayde to haue sealed this booke wyth their bloud,How they sea led the booke with their bloud. bicause they were martyred for that religion that is conteyned in this booke, and according to the which this booke was framed: and if they were condemned, for improuing the articles drawne out of the Masse booke▪ (as you say) why maye it not be likewise affirmed, that they receyued the sentence of condemnation, for approuing the Articles conteyned in the Communion booke: I know the booke they dyed for, was the booke of God, yet did not the aduersarie pretende that, but the articles drawne out of this, and suche like bookes, grounded vpon the worde and booke of God.
                        Name one of them, who at the time of his death, or in ye time of his imprisonmēt, declared openly his misliking of certayne things in this booke. I can shew you the contrarie: That notable vessell of God, for learning, zeale, and vertue, inferiour to none of ourM. Ridleys testimonie of the booke of cōmon prayer age, Master Ridley Bishop of London, in his (last farewell) as it is called, looking dayly and hourely when he should go to the stake, giueth this testimonie of this same booke of common prayers, the whiche the Churche of Englande nowe vseth, and you so contemptuously reiect. This Churche (sayth he) of Englande had of late, of theM. Foxe. infinite goodnesse, and abundant grace of almightie God, great substance, great riches of heauenly treasure, plentie of Gods true and sincere worde, the true and vvholsome administration of Christes holy sacraments, the whole profession of Christes religion, truely and playnely set foorth in baptisme, the playne declaration and vnderstanding of the same taught in the holy▪ Catechisme, to haue bin learned of all true Christians. This Church had also a true and sincere forme and maner of the Lords supper, wherin according to Iesus Christes ordināce & holy institution, Christes cōmaundements were executed and done. For vpon the bread and wine set vpon the Lords table, thāks were giuen, the commemoration of the Lords death was had, the bread in the remembrance of Christes body torne vpon the crosse, was broken: and the cuppe in remembrance of Christes bloud was distributed, and both communicated vnto all that were present, and woulde receyue them, and also they were exhorted of the minister so to do.
                        
                        
                           All was done openly in the vulgare tongue, so that euery thing mighte be bothe easily heard, and playnely vnderstoode of all the people, to Gods high glory, and the edification of
                           
                           the whole Church. This Church had of late the whole diuine seruice, all common and publike prayers ordeyned to be sayde and heard in the common congregarion, not onely formed and fashioned to the true vayne of the holy Scripture, but also set foorth according to the commaundement of the Lorde, and S. Paules doctrine, for the peoples edification in their vulgar tongue.
                        
                        But I knowe his testimonie shall weigh with you, as all other mens doe, howbeit I trust it will pearce the hearts of the godly. Neyther is this to oppose the bloud of men, to the bloud of the sonne of God, when the martyrdome of men is brought into beare witnesse vnto the truthe of God.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 149. Sect. vlt. &. 150. Sect. 1. 2.
                     The vnperfectnesse of this booke, and such things in the fame as be culled and picked out of that popishe dunghill, the Masse booke, with the contents therein that be agaynst the worde of God, shall appeare I am sure in your seuerall reasons, for it is not sufficient for you, barely to saye so, without witte, learning, or reason.
                     This you know right wel, that in so saying you make the PapistsAduantage gi uen to the papistes by the Admonitours leape for ioye, bicause they haue gotten suche companions to assaulte this booke, whylest they rest them, & lye as it were in sleepe. O that the wyse men of this realme (suche I meane as be in authoritie) see not this Popishe practise, and seeke not with more earnestnesse to preuent it. Will ye suffer the Papists to gather strength, and to multiplie, by tollerating such Libellers, vnder the pretēce of reformatiō, to discredite so muche as lyeth in them, yea to ouerthrow the whole state, and substance of religion in this Churche? Bee not secure, but watche, and remember the beginning and encrease of the Anabaptistes of late in Germanie, whiche I haue described in my Preface to this booke.
                     You saye, that you can not but much maruell at the craftie wilynesse of those men, whose partes it had beene first to haue proued eache and euery content therin to be agreable to Gods word. &c. Nay surely, but it were your parts rather to proueThe apponēt must proue, by rules of Logike. that there is something therein contrarie or not agreable to Gods worde. For such as be learned, and knowe the manner of reasoning say, that the Opponent must proue or improue, and not the answerer. They stande to the defense and mayntenance of the booke: you seeke to ouerthrowe it: it is your partes therfore to iustifie your assertions, by reasons and arguments.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 157. Sect. 1.
                     For the Papistes triumphe I haue answered before, and I will not striue about the Goates 
                           〈◊〉
                        , who is the apponent, and who the respondent in this difference.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Thus you passe all this ouer in silence, for I doe not remember where you haue answered one worde to it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They should first proue by the worde of God, that a reading seruice going before and with the administration of the sacraments, is according to the worde of God, that wafer cakes for theyr bread when they minister it. surplesse and cope to doe it in, churching of women comming in vayles abuong the Psalme to hir. I haue lifted vp mine eyes vnto the hilles. &c. and suche otherPsal. 120. foolishe things, are agreable to the written worde of the almightie.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 151. Sect. 2. &. 152. Sect, 1.
                        I doe not well vnderstande your meaning: would you haue vs to proue, that to reade prayers before, and with the administration ofThe order of prayers in the Communion booke agreable to ye scripture. the sacraments, is according to the worde of God? In deede in the booke of seruice there is first appoynted to be read some one or two profitable sentences, mouing eyther to prayer, or to repentance, after followeth a generall confession, then the Lords prayer, and certayne Psalmes, nexte certayne chapters out of the olde and newe Testamente. &c. laste of all, the administration of the sacramente. If you aske me of the sentences: they be scripture. If of the Lordes prayer Psalmes, and chapters: they be scripture also. If of the sacrament of the Supper: it is according to scripture, Matth. 26. Marke. 14. Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11. If of the other prayers annexed: they be lykewise according to the scripture, for they be made to God in Christes name, for suche thinges as we neede, or as we desire, according to that saying of Christ: 
                              Quicquid petieritis &c. VVhatsoeuer you aske my father in my name. &c. And agayne: 
                              Petite & dabitur vobis: Aske, and it shall be giuen vnto you. Mat. 7. & Iacob. 1. If any of you lacke wisdome, let him aske it. &c. And. 1. Timoth. 2. with other infinite places besides.
                        If you would haue vs to proue that to reade prayers or scriptureOnly Zuinfildians misliked reading of scriptures. in the Church is according to the word of God (which you seeme to denie) then we say vnto you▪ that if there were any pietie in you, any religion, any learning, you would make no such vayne and godlesse doubts. was there euer any from the beginning of the world to this day (the Zuinfildians onely excepted) that misliked reading of prayers and scriptures in the Church, but you?
                        
                           Of wafer cakes, ministring in surplesse, or cope, & churching of women, I haue spokenPag. 154. Sect. 3. before: wafer cakes be bread: surplesse & cope, by those that haue authoritie in the church, are thought to perteyne to comelynesse and decencie. Churching of women is to giue thāks for their deliuerāce. Bread to be vsed in the Cōmunion, comelynesse and decencie, giuing of thanks for deliuerance out of peril & daunger, be agreable to Gods word: therfore al these things be agreable to gods word. The forme of bread, whether it ought to be cake bread, or loafe bread: euery particularDetermination of the Churche in things indifferent. thing that perteyneth to decencie or comelynesse, at what time, in what place, with what words we ought to giue thanks, is not particularly written in scripture, no more than it is, that you were baptized. And therfore (as I haue proued before) in such cases the Church hath to determine and appoynt an order.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Admonition.
                     But their craft is playne: wherin they deceyue them selues, standing so much vpon this word repugnant, as though nothing were repugnant or agaynst the worde of God, but that whiche is expressely forbidden by playne commaundement, they know well inough, and would confesse, if eyther they were not blinded, or else their hearts hardned, that in the circumstances, eache content,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            iudgement. wherwith we iustly finde fault, and they too contentiously for the loue of their liuings maynteyne, smelling of their olde Popish priesthoode, is agaynst the worde of God.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 156. &. 157. Sect. 1.
                        If they were disposed to be craftie, I thinke they might soone deceyue you, for any great circumspection or discretion that appeareth to be in you, by this booke. You finde great fault, that we stande so muche vpō this word repugnant, as though nothing were repugnant or agaynst the word of God, but that which is expressely forbidden by playne cōmaundement, and herein (you saye) we deceyue our selues. But you do not tell vs howe we are deceyued, neither do you let vs vnderstande, what you thinke this worde (repugnant) doth signifie. This is but slender dealing, to finde a fault, and not to correct it: you should yet haue tolde vs your opiniō of the signification of this worde, seeing so great a matter doth depende vpon it. True it is, that this worde (repugnant) or (agaynst the worde of God) is toThe worde (repugnant) expounded. be contrarie to that which in the worde is comaunded or forbidden, not onely in manifest words, but also in sense and vnderstanding: except you vnderstande this worde (repugnant) on this sorte, you wyll bring in many poynts of daungerous doctrine: for we reade in the Acts. 2. &. 4. that the Apostles had all things common, and yet Christians haue not al things common. Those that were then conuerted to the Gospell, solde all they had, and layde it at the Apostles feete. Act 4. Now it is farre otherwise. Then Christ ministred his supper at night, after supper, we in the morning before dinner: he in a priuate house, we in the publike Churche: he to men onely, we to women also, with a great many of such apparant contrarieties, which be none in deede, bicause they be not agaynst any thing cōmaunded or forbidden to be done, or not to be done, eyther in expresse words, or in true sense. And therfore you are greatly deceyued, when you think that we are persuaded, that those things which you find fault with, be agaynst the worde of God.
                        As for this your saying (If eyther they were not blinded, or else their harts hardened) I pray God it be not most aptly spoken of your selues, but I will not take vpon me to iudge those secrets, that be onely knowne to God and your selues.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     By the worde of God it is an office of preaching, they make it an office of reading. Christe sayde Mat. 26. 19 Mar. 16. 15 go preache.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 158. Sect. vlt.
                        You say, by the worde of God the ministerie is an office of preaching, and we make it an office of reading. To proue it to be an office of preaching you note in your margent, Matth. 26. But I thinke your meaning is the. 28. and Mark 16. where Christ sayth to his Disciples: Go therfore and teach all nations. &c. What if a man should say vnto you, that this commission was giuen onely to the Apostles? for he sayth: Go into the

whole worlde, where as you teach now, that no man may come into the ministerie, except he first haue a stocke, & then must he keepe him with his flocke, and go no further. If this doctrine be true, then can not this place serue your turne: for as the office of Apostle is ceased by your doctrine, so is this commission also, except you will haue the one part to stande, that is, Goe and preach, and this to be abrogated, 
                              In vniuersum mundum, into the vvhole vvorlde.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     You haue not any where answered directly to any of this, and to the most of it, and diuers other things included betwixt the. 151. Page and the. 171. You haue not answered one woorde: which the Reader by conference may vnderstand: and I for breuities sake haue omitted to set downe.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Of reading of Homilies and the Apocrypha in the Churche.
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The second reason. In this booke also it is appoynted that after the Creede if there be no sermon, an homily must follow eyther already set out, or hereafter to be set out. This is scarce playne dealyng, that they would haue vs to consent vnto that which we neuer saw, and whiche is to be set out hereafter, we hauing had such cause already to distrust them by that whiche is already set out, beyng corrupt and straunge to maynteyne an vnlearned and reading ministerie. And sith it is playne that mens workes ought to be kepte in, and nothing else but the voyce of God and holy Scriptures, in whiche onely are conteyned 2. Ti. 3. 6. 17. all fulnesse and sufficiencie to decide controuersies,2. Pet. 1. 20 Rom. 1. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 18 &c. must sound in his church, for the very name Apocrypha testifieth, that they ought rather to be kept close, than to be vttered.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 171. Sect. 1. 2.
                        
                           Your second reason in fewe wordes is this: In the booke of commonHomilies. prayer it is appointed that after the Creede, if there be no sermon, an Homilie must follow, eyther already set out, or hereafter to be set out, but you knowe not what will hereafter be set out, therefore you will not subscribe.
                        
                        You haue no cause to suspect any thing touching religion set out by publike authoritie (for so is the booke) or hereafter to be set out by common authoritie. Hitherto you are not able to conuince any Homilie set out by common authoritie, of any errour, and therfore you ought notOur homilies cannot be accused of any errour. to be suspicious of any that is to come. If any Homilie shall hereafter be set out, wherein you mislike any thing, you neede not to reade it, the booke doth not appoynt you this or that Homily to reade, but some one which you like best. But what neede you to be scrupulous in this matter? if you be disposed to preache, then neede you reade no Homilie at all, therefore this is no reason.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 157. Sect. 2.
                     I answere that although it be meete, that as we hope that the Homilies which are made already be godly, so those that shall be made hereafter, shalbe likewise: yet considering the mutabilitie of men, and that of tentimes to the worse, it is not meere. nay, it is merely vnlawfull, to subscribe to a blancke, seyng that we cannot witnesse or allow of those thinges which we haue not seene nor hearde.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you be disposed to quarrell, it is an easie matter to picke out occasions, but your suspicion is without cause, and I thinke a modest protestation in that poynt would not be refused.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 171. Sect. 3. 4.
                     This assertion (that in the holy Scriptures is conteyned all fulnesse to decide controuersies) if you meane controuersies in matters of fayth, and in matters touching saluation, is very true, but you haue vsed litle discretion in quoting some places to proue the same.
                     I finde no faulte with you for cyting the sixte verse of the. 2. Tim. 3. for the. 16. verse, that is but a small ouersight, and it may be in the Printer: but howe do you conclude this assertion of the wordes of Peter. 2. Epist. cap. 1. verse. 20. which be these, so that ye firste knovv that no prophecie of the Scripture is of any priuate motion: for this place only proueth that the Scriptures be not of men, but of the holy ghost: it speaketh nothing of the sufficiencie of the Scripture.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothing answered.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 172. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
                     That place also. 1. Cor. 1. is not fitly applied to this purpose: there is Scripture sufficient directly to proue the sufficiencie of scripture, so that you should not haue needed to giue the aduersarie occasion to carpe at the vnaptnesse of these places for that purpose.
                     Homilies conteyning doctrine agreable to the Scriptures, be of the same nature that sermons be: Wherefore if it be not lawfull in the Churche to reade Homilies, neyther is it lawfull to preach Sermons: The reason is all one, neither is there any difference, but that Homelies be read in the booke, Sermons sayde without the booke.
                     Homilies are pithie, learned, and sounde: sermons oftentimes beSome Homilies better than some sermons. wordes without matter, vnlearned, erroneous.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 157. Sect. vlt.
                     The place vnto the Corinthes, is the same vnto the Romaines, and M. Doctor approuing one hath no cause to finde faulte with the other. For the hemilies, first of all I haue shewed how absurde a saying, and how vnlike a diuine it is, to matche reading of homilies with preaching of sermons. For if the reading of the holy Scriptures is nothing so fruitefull as the preaching of them, muche lesse is the reading of homilies to be for their fruite matched with preaching of sermons.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Neither of both the places doth proue directly that, for the which the Authors of the Admonition do vse them: and there be other places more manifest which they haue omitted.
                        
                           I haue answered in that place to all your Replie concerning this point: I do not match reading of Homilies with Sermons simply, or with all sermons, but withReading of Scriptures a meanes to iudge of sermons. some: and to some sermons I do preferre the Reading of Homilies for the causes conteyned in mine Answere to the Admonition. Both the reading and the preaching of the Scriptures is necessarie, and the one in diuerse respectes as necessarie, and in some respectes more necessarie than the other. For the Scripture is the rule to discerne and iudge sermons and preachers by: Christe willeth to take heede of falseMath. 7. Prophetes. Math. 7. Which can not be done without the diligent reading of the Scriptures: those of Thessalonica are to be commended, for trying by the Scriptures theAct. 17. doctrine preached vnto them: Act. 17. S. Iohn willeth that the spirites be tried, whetherIohn. epist. 4. Cal. 1. they be of God or no, which must be by the Scriptures. S. Paule Gal. 1. willeth them to holde him accursed that shall preach any other Gospell vnto them, whiche they can not do without that knowledge, whiche God doth giue vnto them by reading of the Scriptures. Infinite places there be, that tendeth to this ende, but I haue spoken of this matter before. This is my opinion that both reading and preaching be most necessarie: but in some respectes the one to be preferred before the other.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 157. Sect. vlt.
                     There remayneth that I shew briefly, that neyther the Homilies nor the Apocrypha, are at all to be redde in the Churche. Wherein first it is good to consider the order which the Lorde kept with his people in tymes past, when he commaunded that no vessell, nor no instrument, either besome, or flesh hooke, or panne, &c. should come into the temple▪ but those onely which were sanctified and set aparte for that vse. And in Leuiticus, he will haue no other trumpets blowne to call theNumb. 10. people togither, but those onely which were set aparte for that purpose. What should the meaning of this lawe be? The matter of other common vessels and trumpets, was the same oftentimes which theirs was, the same forme also, and the other beesomes and hookes and trumpets hable to serne for the vses ofsweeping and sounding. &c. as well as those of the temple, and as those whiche were set aparte, wherfore mought not these then as well be vsed in the temple as others? Forsoth, bicause the Lord would by these rudimēts & pedagogie teach, that he would haue nothing brought into the church, but that which he had appoynted, no, not although they seemed in the iudgement of men, as good as those things which God himselfe had placed there. Which thing is much more to be obserued in this matter, seing that the Homelies redde, be they neuer so learned and pithie, neyther the Apocrypha, are to be cōpared either in goodnesse within thēselues, eyther in fruite, or in effect towards the hearer, with the authenticall scriptures of God. Now if a man will say that the Homilies do explane, and lay open the scriptures, I answere, that the worde of God also is playne and19. Psal. easie to be vnderstanded, and such as giueth vnderstanding to Idiotes and to the simple. And if1. Prou. there be hardnesse in them, yet the promise of the assistance of Gods spirite, that God hath giuen to the reading of the Scriptures in the church, which he hath not giuen to homilies▪ or to the Apocrypha, will be able to weygh with the harduesse, and to ouer come it, so that there shall easily appeare greater profite to come vnto the church by reading of the scriptures▪ than by reading of homilies.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        All this of the vestels of the temple, the instruments, beesoms, flesh hookes, trumpets, &c. is superstuous, and proueth nothing, except it can be shewed that the Lorde hath commaunded only the Canonicall scriptures to be redde in the Church and nothing els: or that the Lord hath as particularly expressed all thinges to be vsed in the Churche vnder the Gospell, as he did in the temple vnder the lawe, the contrarie whereof I haue proued Tract. 2. and the kinde of reasoning that you vse in this and other placesTract. 2. Cap. 6. Diu. 1. &. 2. vpon similitudes is not of sufficient force to proue any thing, onely it carrieth away the ignorant people. In the rest of this portion you argue against your selfe: for you proue the excellentie, and the worthinesse of the Scriptures, and the great cōmoditie that cōmeth by reading of them, which I haue laboured against the authours of the Admonition to verifie. But what can you therevpon cōclude agaynst Homilies, that may not be in like manner against Sermons, or other interpretation of the Scriptures? and rather against the one, (that is sermons) than against the other. For as I sayd before, I make this onely difference betwixt Homilies & Sermons, that the one is pronounced within the booke, the other not so. If you obiect & say that the Preacher

is directed by the spirite of God, I will answere that the writers of Homilies, be so likewise. And what can you alleage in this poynt for the one, that I can not alleage for the other? The promise of the assistance of Gods spirite, is as well giuen to him that writeth Homilies, & to those that heare them, as it is to such as studie for their sermons, & such as heare them. To the Scriptures I giue the chiefe preheminence, but yet both Sermons, and all other kindes of teaching, publishing the doctrine conteyned in the Scriptures, haue their singular commodities, and necessarie vses in the Churche of God.
                        But either I vnderstande you amisse, or else do you not well agrée with yourT. C. semeth to be contrary to himselfe. self: for let the Reader consider the great commoditie, that you truly giue to the reading of the Scripture in this place, with that abasing of the same, that in the defense of the authors of the Admonitiō you vse Pag. 173. which I will also note when I comePag. 173. Sect. vlt. to that place.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 158. Sect. 1.
                     Besides this the pollicie of the church of God in tymes past is to be followed herein, that for the expounding of darker places, places of more easinesse ought to be ioyned togither, as in the persecution of Antiochus, where they coulde not haue the commoditie of preaching, the Iewes did appoynt at their meeting alwayes a peece of the lawe to be redde, and with all a peece of the Prophets which expounded that peece of the lawe, rather than to bryng in interpretations of men to be redde. And bycause I am entred into that matter, here commeth to be considered, the practise also of the church, both before our sauiour Christes comming, and after, that when the churches met togither, there is nothing mentioned but the reading of the Scriptures, for so is the Liturgie described in the Actes. And it is not to be thought, but that they had those which made expositions13. Act. of the law & the Prophets. And besides that they had Onkelos the Calday paraprast, both Galatyne,15. Act. and Rabbi Moses (surnamed Maynion) write, that Ionathan an other of the Calday paraphrasts florished in our sauiour Christes time, whose writings & paraphrases vpon the scriptures, are esteemed cōparable in that kinde of paraphrasticall writing, with any which hath laboured that wayes, & if any mens writings were to be redde in the churche, those paraphrases which in explaning the scripture, go least from it, and which kept not only the numbre of sentences, but almost the very number of wordes, were of all most fit to be redde in the churche, seyng therefore (I say) the church of God then absteyned from such interpretations in the churche, and contented it selfe with the scriptures, it can not be but a most daungerous attempt, to bring any thing into the churche to be redde, besides the worde of God. This practise Vntruth as will appeare. continued still in the Churches of God after the Apostles times, as may appeare by the second Apologie of Iustine Martyr, whiche sheweth that their manner was to read in the church the monuments of the Prophets, and of the Apostles, and if they had redde any thing els, it is to be supposed that he would haue set it downe, considering that his purpose there, is to shewe the whole order whiche was vsed in their churches then. The same may appeare in the first homilie of Origen vpon Exodus, and vpon the Iudges.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely in all this there is nothing spokē against reading of Homilies, that maySermons are of the same nature with Homilies. not in like manner be alleaged against preaching of sermons, & other godly exercises of interpreting the scriptures: for if Homilies interpreting the scriptures according to the true meaning, & sense of them, be the interpretations of men, and therefore not to be redde in the Church, whose interpretations shall we call Sermons, and other readinges? The one as well as the other is vttered by men, & by men in that order framed. But I thinke that no right and true interpretation of the Scripture is to beThe true interpretation of the scripture is not to be accounted as of man. compted mans, though it be written, redde, or preached by man, for the spirite of God is the Author of it, & man is but the instrument. The rest of your proofes taken frō the vse of the Church (as you say) be all ab authoritate negatiuè: and most of them ab authoritate hominum: whiche kinde of argument your self haue before vtterly condēned. I haue oftentimes could you that an argument, à non facto, ad non ius (& it is M. Zuinglius and other mens iudgement, as well as mine) is good neyther in diuine, nor yet in humane thinges.
                        So far as I can learne Ionathan the Calday Paraphrast, florished not in ChristesIonathan the Cald
                                 〈1 line〉
                              y paraphrast before christes time. time, (as you say) but. 42. yeares before Christ was borne, and I thinke there is none of these Paraphrastes so faithfull, in interpreting, but that they misse in some places: & you can not but acknowledge, that one good Sermon or Homilie of some

learned mans, well & plainely redde to the people, may edifie them more, than the reading of these Paraphrastes. And yet I suppose you knowe, that the Iewes haue those Paraphrastes, as yet redde in their Churches: wherefore hitherto if you haue spoken any thing it is against your selfe.
                        
                           But you say, that this practise continued still in the Churches of god, &c. and you proue it by Iustine Martyr, bycause he mentioneth nothing read in the churche, but Monuments of the Prophetes, and Ipostles. Concerning your proofe, I haue declared already of what force it is, being drawne ab authoritate humana negatiuè. Now that this practise continued not still in the Church, you shall easily perceyue if you peruse that which Eusebius writethThe epistle of Ciement reade in the churche. out of an Epistle of Dionysius Corinthius to Soter Byshop of Rome, where he writeth after this sorte. And in this epistle there is mention of an Epistle of Clemēt written to the Corinthians, declaring that (according to the olde custome) it was read in the
                              Euseb. lib. 4▪ 
                              Cap. 2
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Church. For thus he sayth: we haue this day celebrated the holy day of the Lorde, wherein we read your Epistle, whiche we will alwayes read for admonition sake, in like sorte asDionysius liued about the yeare. 147. the former epistle written to vs from Clement. The Authors of the Centuries writing of this Dionysius, thinke it not vnlike that his Epistles were also read in the Churche, bicause Eusebius calleth them Catholicas,
                            Catholike. Their woordes be these: Non videtur prae
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ereundum, quòd Eusebius basce epistolas Catholicas vocet: fortè quia in Ecc
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 esijs
                           
                           Cent. 2. cap. 10. 
                           piorum solitae sunt legi, sicut Clementis. This thing woulde not be omitted, that Eusebius calleth these epistles Catholike: peraduenture, bicause they were wonte to be read in the Churches of the faythfull, as the Epistle of Clement was. And this may testifie of the practise of the Churche in Iustinus Martyrs time better than your negatiueConcil. vas. La. 4. argument. And of the practise since, the. 4. Can. Concil. Vasens. will giue sufficient testimonie, where it is decreed, that if the ministers be let by infirmitie or sickenesse, the HomiliesHomilies of fathers read in the church. of the fathers should be read of the Deacons.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 172. Sect. 3.
                     
                        But of readyng Homilyes in the Churche I haue some thingBucers opinion of ho
                                 〈1 line〉
                               lies in the churche. spoken before, nowe it shall be sufficient onely to set downe Master Bucers iudgement of this matter in his notes vpon the Communion booke, whiche is this. It is better that vvhere there lackes to expounde the Scriptures vnto the people, there shoulde be Godly and learned Homilyes redde vnto them, rather than they shoulde haue no exhortation at all in the administration of the Supper. And a litle after: There be too fevve Homilies, and to fevve poyntes of Religion taught in them: vvhen therefore the Lorde shall blesse this kingdome, vvith some excellent Preachers, lette them be commaunded to make mo Homilyes of the principall poynts of Religion, vvhich may be redde to the people, by those Pastors, that can not make better themselues.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 158. Tovvardes the ende.
                     And as for Master Bucers authoritie, I haue shewed before how it ought to be weyghed, and here also it is suspitious, for that it is sayde that his aduise was, that when the Lord should blesse the realme with mo learned preachers, that then order should be taken to make more homilies, which should be redde in ye church vnto the people. As if M. Bucer did not know. that there were then learned preachers enough in the realme, which were able to make Homilies so many as the volume of thē might easily haue exceeded the volume of the Bible, if the multitude of Homilies, would haue done so much good. And if the authoritie of Master Bucer beare so great a swaye with Master Doctor, that vpon his credite onely, without eyther Scripture or reason,

or examples of the Churches primitiue, or those which are nowe, he dare thrust into the churche Homilies, then the authorities of the most auncient and best councels ought to haue bene considered, which haue giuen charge, that nothing should be redde in the church, but onely the Canonicall Scriptures.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        They are M. Bucers woordes in déede, neyther is there any cause why you should suspect them so to be. And it is not his iudgemēt only, but other learned mensRidleys iudgement of homilies in the churche. also: and namely that famous man D. Ridlies, Bishop of London in the treatise before rehearsed. Wherein thus he speaketh of the Churche of Englande, that was in King Edwards time. It had also holy and wholesome Homilies in commendation of theM. Foxe. to. 2. Pag. 1940. principall vertues, which are commended in Scripture, and likewise other Homilies agaynst the most pernicious and capitall vices, that vseth (alas) to reygne in this Church of England. And truly these authorities if I had no other reason, preuaile more with me than all that you, or any of your parte had sayd, or is able to say to the contrarie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 159. Lin. 4.
                     For it was decreed in the councell of Laodicea, that nothing should be redde in the churche, but the Canonicall bookes, of the olde and newe Testament, and reckeneth vp what they be. Afterwarde59. Can. conc. Laodi. rom. 1. concil. as corruptions grewe in the church▪ it was permitted that homilies might be redde by the Deacon, when the minister was sicke, and could not preach, and it was also in an other Councell of Carthage permitted, that the martyres lyues might be redde in the church, but besides the euill successe that those decrecs had (vnder preteuce whereof the Popish Legende, and GregoriesConcil. vasense. 1. to. 4. tom. cō
                           cil. 6. c concil. Colon. parte. 2. homilies, &c. creptin) that vse and custome was controlled by other councels, as may appeare by the councell of Colen, albeit otherwise Popishe. And truly if there were nothing else but this consideration, that the bringyng in of the readyng of Martyres liues into the churche, and of the homilies of auncient wryters, hath not onely by this meanes iustled with the Bible, but also thrust it cleane out of the church, or into a corner where it was not redde nor seene, it ought to teache all men to beware of placing any wryting or worke of men in the church of God, be they neuer so well learned, as long as the world should endure.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is certayne that the decrée of the Councel of Laodicea, can no more condemne the reading of Homilies in the Churche, than it may the readyng of Prayers or Cathechismes, or any other interpretation of the Scriptures. The meaning of theNothing ought to be read in the church vnder the name of Scriptures, but the canonicall. Councell is onely, that nothing be redde in the Churche as Scripture, or vnder the name of Scripture, but that which is Canonicall. And that doth euidently appeare in the. 47. Canon of the third Councell of Carthage, which doth explane this Canon. The woordes be these: 
                              Item placuit vt praeter Scripturas Canonicas, nihil in Ecclesia legatur sub nomine diuinarum scripturarum. It is thought good that nothing be redde in the Church, vnder the name of the scriptures of God, but the Canonicall Scriptures. It doth not therforeCon. Carth. 3. can. 47. inhibite interpretations of the scripture and godly exhortations grounded vpon the same to be redde. Concilium vasense (as it is before declared) appointeth HomiliesHomilies appoynted to be redde. to be redde, when there is no Sermon, by reason of some infirmitie or sickenesse in the minister, which is a godly and profitable decrée, neyther could it be the cause of any corruption.
                        I do not defend the reading of any thing in the Churche which is not groundedNothing ought to be redde not grounded of the scriptures vpon the worde of God, therefore the decrée of the Councell of Carthage, or any such like doth nothing touch the cause that I defende: and yet I know not in what sort or out of what storie these liues of Martyres were redde. I like very well of the decrée of the councell of Colen, for it inhibiteth the reading in the Churche of fabulous, and barbarous stories of the liues of Sainctes, whereby it is like that the booke called Legenda aurea is mente. But what is this against godly Homilies, that conteyne the true interpretation of the scriptures, godly exhortation to good life, & sound proofes of true doctrine, which is as far frō iustling the bible out of the church, or into corners, as is preaching. And I muse that you can alleage this for a cause, seing you thinke so slenderly of the reading of the Scriptures, and will haue ye same giue place to your sermons.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 159. Sect. 1.
                     And if any man You haue obiected that which you cannot answere. obiect, that by this meanes also is shut out of the church the forme of ordinarie Prayers to be sayde: I saye the case is nothing lyke, for when wee pray, wee can not vse the wordes of the Scripture, as they orderly lie in the text. But for so much as the church prayeth for dyuers things necessarie for it, the which are not conteined in one or two places of the scripture, and that also there are some things which we haue need of, wherof there is no expresse prayer in the scripture, it is needfull that there be a forme of prayer drawne forthe out of the Scripture, which the church may vse when it meeteth, as the occasion of the tyme doth require, which necessitie can not be by no meanes alleaged in the reading of Homelies or Apocrypha. Whervpon appeareth, that it is not so wel ordeyned in the church of Englande, where both Homilies and Apocrypha are read, especially when as diuers chapters of the books called Apocrypha are lifted vp so high, that they are sometyme appoynted for extraordinarie lessons vpon feastes dayes, wherein the greatest assemblies be made, and some of the chapters of the canonicall Scripture, (as certain chapters of the Apocalyps) quite lefte out, and not redde at all.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You haue made an obiection which you can not answere, and against the which all these reasons that you haue before vsed do as much preuayle, as they doe against reading of Homilies: and whatsoeuer you can say for the one, may likewise be said for the other. For when we interprete the Scriptures, when we teache, or exhorte, we can not vse onely the wordes of the scripture, as they lye orderly in the texte, but wee muste amplifye them, displace them, applie them to the matter we speake of, entermingling them with our owne wordes and phrases. For except you will graunt this to be lawfull, as wel in exhorting and teaching, as in publike preaching, you must (as I sayd before) as well condemne Sermons, as Homilies.
                        The Apocrypha that we reade in the Church, haue bene so vsed of long tyme, asApocrypha redde in timèpaste in the churche. it may appeare in that third councel of Carthage, and 47. Canon, where they be reckened among the Canonicall bookes of the Scripture. They maye as well be read in the Church, as counted portions of the olde and new Testament: and forasmuch as there is nothing in them contrarie to the rest of the Scripture. I sée no inconuenience, but much commoditie that may come by the reading of them.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶Of the name (Priest) giuen to the ministers of the gospell.
               
                  Chap. 3. The fyrst Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     We speake not of the name of Prieste, wherwith he defaceth the minister of Christe, (bicause the Priest that translated it, would perhaps fame haue the minister of Christe to be ioyned wyth him) seyng the office of priesthood is ended Christ being the last Priest that euer was. To cai vs therfore Priests as touching our office, is eyther to call backe againe the olde priesthoode of the law, which is to denie Christ to be comen, or else to keepe a memorie of the popishe priesthode of abhomination stil amongst vs. As for the fyrst, it is by Heb. 5. 1. 6. Heb. 9. 11. Chryst abolished, and for the seconde it is of Antichrist, and therfore we haue nothing to do with it. Suche oughte to haue Eze. 44. 10 Ierem. 23. Heb. 5. 4. no place in our Church, neither are they ministers of Christ, sente to preach his Gospell, but Priests of the Pope to sacrifice for the quick and the dead, that is, to treade vnder their feet the bloud of Christ. Suche ought not to haue place amongst vs, as the scriptures manifestly teache. Besydes that we neuer reade in ye new Testament, that this word Priest, as touching office, is vsed in y• good parte.
                     
                        Answere to the Admonition. Pag. 183. Sect. 2.
                        The name of Priest neede not to be so odious vnto you, as youThe name of priste. would seeme to make it. I suppose it cōmeth of this worde Presbyter, not of Sacerdos, and then the matter is not great.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 159. Sect. 2.
                     Althoughe it will bee harde for you to proue, that this woorde (Prieste) commeth of the Greeke woorde (
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ) yet that is not the matter, but the case standeth in thys, that for so muche as the common and vsuall speach of England is, to note by the word (Priest) not a minister of the Gospell, but a sacrificer, whiche the minister of the Gospell is not, therefore,

we ought not to call the ministers of the Gospell (priestes) and that this is the english speach, it appereth by all ye english translations, which translate always (
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ) which were sacrificers (priestes) and do not of the other side (for any that euer I read,) translate 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         a priest. Seing therfore a priest with vs, & in our tong, doth signifie both by ye Papists iudgemēt in respect of their abhommable Masse, and also by the iudgement of the protestant in respecte of the beastes whyche were offered in the law, a sacrificing office, which the minister of the gospell neyther doth, nor can execute, it is manyfest, that it can not be without great offence so vsed.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I am not greatly delightedwith the name, nor so desyrous to maynteyne it, but yet a truth is to be defended: I reade in the olde fathers, that these two names Sacerdos and presbyter be confounded. I see also that the learned, and the best of oure English writers, such I meane as write in these oure dayes, translate this worde presbyter, so: and the verie worde it selfe, as it is vsed in our english tongue, soundeth the worde presbyter. As heretofore vse hath made it to be taken for a sacrificer, so wil vse nowe alter that signification, and make it to be taken for a minister of the Gospell. But it is méere vanitie to contende for the name, when wée agrée of the thing: the name may be vsed and not vsed without any great offence.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Answere to the Admonition. Pag. 183. Sect. 3. & Pag. 184. Sect. 1. 2.
                     The priest or priestes that translated this booke, be not so skornfully to be taunted: I thinke some of them haue ended their lyues in the fyre, and all of them singular both in life, religion, & learning: speake not so contemptuously of so worthy men: vtter not your hautie stomacks with so spitefull words towards your superiours & betters, least you proue your selues to be in the number of those, of whom S. Paul speaketh. 2. Tim. 3. vers. 2. 3. 4. 5. and Iudas in his epistle vers. 8. It is true that the priesthod of the old law is abolished but the place of scripture noted in your margent proueth it not. For Hebrues. 5. Paule doth shew why the high priest was ordeyned, and what were his offices: but he speaketh nothing of the abolishing of the priesthood. I muse what you mean thus vnnecessarily to paint your margent, and that with so little iudgement, and lesse discretion. The. 9. to the Hebrues is something to the purpose, but needlesse.
                     Touching Popish priestes (as you call them) whether they ought to haue anye place in oure churche, or no, I haue spoken before, where I haue also aunswered youre marginall notes concerning that matter.
                     You far ouershot your self in myne opinion, when you set it down, that you neuer read in the newe testament thys worde priest, touching office to bee vsed in good parte. What saye you to the fourth to the Hebrues? verse. 14. Seeing then that vve haue a greate highe Priest, vvhyche is entred into heauen Iesus Chryst. &c. And verse. 6. For vvee haue not a highe Priest vvhyche can not be touched vvith the feelyng of our infirmities, but. &c. And chapter. 5. verse. 6. Thou arte a Prieste for euer, &c. And Apocalyps. 5. 1. Pet. 2▪
                         But what shoulde I trouble you with a tedious

the whole newe Testament, where this worde Priest, is taken in euill parte touching office. Truly you are farre deceyued, or else myPriest conce
                              〈1 line〉
                            ning office, neuer in euil part. vnderstanding fayleth me. I condemne that office, and institution of sacrificing for the quick and the dead with you, and I knowe it is condemned in the Scriptures manifestly, and namely in the. 9. and. 10. to the Hebrues.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothyng answered.
                  
               
            
            
               Matters concerning the solemnization of Mariage.
               
                  Chap. 4. The first Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The ninth. As for matrimonie yt also hath corruptions too many, it was wont to be counted a sacrament, and therfore they vse yet a sacramentall signe, to whiche they attribute the vertue of wedlock. I meane the wedding ring, which they fowlly abuse and dalli
                           〈1 line〉
                         withal, in takyng it vp & laying it down: In putting it on▪ they abuse the name of the Trinitie, they make ye newe maried man according to the Popish forme, to make an idoll of his wyfe, saying, with this ryng I theeAbuses accidentall. wed, with my bodie I thee worship. &c. And bicause in poperie no holie action, may be done without a Masse, they enioyn the maried persons to receiue the communion, (as they do their Bishops and priests when they ar made.) &c. Other pettie things out of the booke we speak not of, as that women, contrarie 1. Cor. II. 5 to the rule of the Apostle, come, & are suffered to come bareheaded with bagpipes and fidlers before them, to disturbe the congregation, and that they must come in at the great dore of the churche, else all is marred.
                     
                        Answere to the Admonition Pag. 194. Saect. 1.The ring in matrimonie.
                        
                        
                           The fyrst thing you mislyke in matrimonie is the ryng, whiche you call a sacramentall signe, and vntruely saye, that we attribute the vertue of wedlocke thervnto: I knowe it is not materiall whether the ring be vsed or no, for it is not of the substance of matrimonie: neither yet a sacramentall signe, no more than sitting at Communion is, but only a Ceremonie of the which M. Bucer (writing his iudgemēt vpon the firstBucers opinion of 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  ring in mariage. cōmunion booke set out in the tyme of king Edwarde) sayth on this sort: Subijcitur alius ritus, vt ānulum. &c.
                            There is an other rite and ceremonie vsed that the bridegrome should lay vpon the book the ring or any other signe or token of wedlock, be it gold or siluer, which he wil giue to his wife, & from thēce the minister takīg it, doth deliuer it to the bridegrom, & he deliuereth the same to the bride with a prescript forme of words cōteined in the booke: this ceremonie is verie profitable, if the people be made to vnderstand what is therby signified: as that the ring & other things first layd vpon the book▪ & afterwarde by the minister, giuen to the bridegrome to be deliuered to the bride, do signifie that we ought to offer al that we haue to god before we vseThe fourth fynger. them, & to acknowledge that we do receiue them at his hād to be vsed to his glorie. The putting of the ring vpon the fourth finger of the womās left hād, to the which as it is sayd, there cōmeth a sinew of string from the heart, doth signifie that the heart of the wife oughte to be vnited to hir husbande, & the roundnesse of the ring doth signifie, that the wife ought to be ioyned to hir husbande with a perpetuall bande of loue, as the ring it selfe is vvithoute ende. Hitherto M. Bucer.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 159. Sect. vlt.
                     If it be M. Bucers iudgement which is alledged here for the ring, I see that somtimes Homer slepeth. For first of al I haue shewed that it is not lawfull to institute new signes & sacraments, & then it is daungerous to do it, especially in this which confirmeth the false and popish opinion of a sacramente, as is alleaged by the Admonition. And thirdly to make such fond allegories of the laying downe of the money, of the roundnesse of the ring, and of the mysterie of the fourth finger, is let me speake it with his good leaue) verie ridiculous and farre vnlike himselfe. And fourthly, that he

I doe not speake of the inconuenience that men are constrayn
                           〈1 line〉
                        d with charges to bring theyr children oftentymes halfe a score myles for that (whiche if it were needefull) myght be as well done at home in their owne parishes. The thirde is for that in the allegation of the seconde cause of the v
                           〈1 line〉
                        yng of the confirmation, the booke 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ayeth, that by the 
                           〈◊〉
                         of handes, and Prayer, the chyldren maye receyue strengthe and 
                           〈◊〉
                         agaynste all temp
                           〈1 line〉
                        ations, where 
                           〈◊〉
                         there is no promise that by the laying on of handes vpon chyldren, any such gyft that be giuen, & it maynteinethLom. lib. 4 diuis. 7. the popish distinction, that the spirit of God is giue at baptisme vnto ye remission of sinnes, & in confirmation vnto strength, the whyche verye worde (strength) the booke alleageth, and all this M. Doctor con
                           〈1 line〉
                        uteth, by calling of the authors of the Admonition pceuishe and arrogant.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If that be a sufficient reason to abolishe it, bycause it hath
                              〈1 line〉
                            bene horribly abused, then what shall you reteyne eyther in the churche, or in the common lyfe of man. ButTract. 7. ca. 5. t
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . diuiss. &c. I haue before in talking of apparell declared the vanitie of this reason, and yet the confirmation that is nowe vsed was neuer abused by the Papistes, for they had it not, neyther any similitude of it, but onely the name whiche can not contaminate the thyng.
                        
                           It commes not from the Popes decretall Epistles, except you will say, that these Epistles were connted authenticall befor Ieromes tyme: for he maketh mention of this confirmation, and alloweth of it, in his booke aduersus Luciferianos.
                            I denye notIerom. aduers. Luciferian
                                 〈1 line〉
                              s. (sayeth he) this to be the custome of the churches, that the Bishop at the in
                              〈1 line〉
                           ocation of the holye spirite, goe to laye his hande vpon those whyche haue bene baptised as farre off in lesser cities, by priestes and deacons.
                        M. Bucer likewise writing vpon the fourth to the Ephesians testifieth, yt this confirmationBucer. is ver
                              〈1 line〉
                           e auncient in the Churche, & well lyketh & alloweth ye same. Wherfore except you will giue too muche authoritie to the Popes decretall Epistles, you can not say, that the confirming of children after baptisme, had the originall in them.
                        The first steppe of poperie in thys Confirmation, (as you say) is laying on of handes. &c. and yet you sée by the testimonie of Ierome and Bucer, that laying on of handes hath long before Ieromes tyme bene vsed in confirming of children. Neyther can you say, that it confirmeth the opinion of it, that it is a sacrament, more than imposition of handes doth confirme the opinion of ordeyning ministers that it is also a Sacramente: for I thinke that you will not denie but that imposition of handes may be vsed in ordeyning of ministers.
                        You saye, it is an vntruthe, that the confirmyng of chyldren by the imposition of handes came from the Apostles: but you only saye it, you proue it not. Shew the first institution of it since the Apostles, & then you say something, else the words of the booke will beare with them better credite, than yours can do.
                        
                           To your second point, the authors before named, doe sufficiently answere in the places that I haue before named. The words of Ierome be t
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ese. If you demaund inHiero aduers. Lucifer. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              om. 2 this place, wherfore he that is baptised in the Church doth not receiue the holy Ghost but by the imposition of the hands of the Byshop: seing we all affirme that the holy Ghost is giuen in true baptisme. Learne this obseruation to come from this authoritie, that after the ascention of our Lord, the holy Ghost came downe vpon the Apostles. And in many places we find the same thing to be done, rather for the honour of priesthoode than necessitie of the law For if the holy Ghost shoulde come only at the prayer of the Byshop, those were to be lamented, which in prison, or in castels, or in farre places being baptised by priestes and Deacons die before the Byshop can visite them. The words of M. Bucer be these. TheBucer. in. 4. Ephes. signe of imposition of hands, Byshops only did giue, and that not without reason: for whether the couenant of the Lord is to be confirmed to those that are baptised, or whether they are to be reconciled that haue greeuously offended, or whether the ministers of the Church are to be ordeyned: all these ministeries do best become those to whome the chief care of the Church is committed.
                        Your obiection of mens charges in bringing their children to be confirmed, is childish.
                        
                           It cannot be denied but that by harty and earnest prayers God doth worke these eff
                              〈1 line〉
                           cts in thos
                              〈1 line〉
                            children that be his: and hereof imposition of handes is a signe. The ground of this is that promise wherevpon all our prayers do depend, that is, that we shall obteine whatsoeuer we aske the father in Christes name: neyther can you more iustly cauill in this respect, at the imposition of handes at the confirmation of children, than you can do at the same in the ordeining of ministers.
                        The Authours of the Admonition séeme to allow of confirmation, but not as it is now vsed, for the which, bycause they shew no reason, it is a confutation most méete for them, to say that they be both arrogant and péeuish.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Burialls and matters therevnto apperteyning.
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 160. Sect. vlt.
                     Least M. Doctor (as his common fashion is when the corruption of any thing is spoken against)Of Buriall
                              〈1 line〉
                           . say, that we condemne buriall, I would haue him vnderstand that we hold that the body must be honestly and comely buried, and that it is meete that for that cause some reasonable number of those which be the friends and neighbours about should accompany the corps to the place of buriall: we hold it also lawfull to lament the dead, and if the dignitie of the person so require, we thinke it not vnlawfull to vse some way about the buriall whereby that may appeare, but yet so that there be a measure kept both in the weeping, & in the charges, considering that where as immoderate eyther weeping or pompe was neuer, no not in the time of the law allowed, now in the time of the gospell, all that is not lawfull, whiche was permitted in the time of the law. For vnto the people of God vnder the law, weeping was by so much more, permitted vnto them, than vnto vs, by how muche they had not so cleare a reuelation and playne sight of the resurrection as we haue, whiche was the cause also why it was lawful for them to vse more cost in the embaulming of the dead, therby to nourish and to help their hope touching the resurrection, whereof we haue a greater pledge by the resurrection of our sauioure Christ than they had.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Al this is néedelesse: but that you are disposed to stretch out your volume.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The eleuenth. They appoint a prescrip kind of serui
                           〈1 line〉
                        e to bury the dead: and that whiche is the duty of euery christian, they tie alo
                           〈1 line〉
                        e to the mini
                           〈1 line〉
                        ter, whereby 
                           〈1 line〉
                        rayer for the dead is maintayned, and partly gathered out of some of the prayers, where they pray that we with this our brother, and all other departed in the true faythe of thy holy name, may haue our perfect consummation and blisse, both in body and soule. We say nothing of the threefould peale, bycause that it is rather licensed by iniunction, than commaunded in the booke, nor of their straunge mourning, by changing their garments, which if it be not hypocraticall, yet it is superstitious and heatcrush, bycause it is vsed only of custome: nor of buriall Sermons, whiche are put in pl
                           〈1 line〉
                        ce of 
                           〈1 line〉
                        rentalls whereout spring many abuses, and therefore in the best reformed Churches are remoued. As for the superstitions vsed both in countrey and citie, for the place of buriall, which way they must lie, how they mu
                           〈1 line〉
                        t be fecched to Church the Minister meeting them at Church st
                           〈1 line〉
                        le with surplesse, with a company of greedy Clearks, that a Crosse white or blacke must be set vpon the dead corps, that breade must be giuen to the poore, and offrings in buriall time vsed, and cakes sent abroade to friends, bycause these are rather vsed of custome and superstition than by the authoritie of the booke. Small commaundement will serue for the accomplishing of such things. But greate charge will hardly bring the least good thing to passe, and therefore all is let alone, and the people as blind and as ignorant, as euer they were. God be mercifull vnto vs.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 198. Sect. 1.
                        It is true that we haue a prescript kind of seruice to bury the dead, and that we appointe that office to the minister, and what haue you in the whole scripture, against this? or whoeuer hath found fault with either of these two things (I meane prescript seruice to bury the dead, and the minister to execute that office) but you alone? or when was it euer heretofore reproued by any, but euen by yourselues now of late?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 161. Lin. 5.
                     Nowe for the things which the Admoni
                           〈1 line〉
                        ion fyndeth fault with, and thereof 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ingeth reason, M. Doc
                           〈1 line〉
                        er of his bare creditē, without any reason or sc
                           〈1 line〉
                        ipture, or 
                           〈◊〉
                         thing else, 
                           〈◊〉
                         them vnto 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and sayth they be good. And this you shall marke to be M. Doctors simple shift through out his 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ooke, that when he hath no coloure of scripture, nor of reason, no name nor title of Doctor, then r
                           〈1 line〉
                         make 
                           〈◊〉
                         some thing▪ he v
                           〈1 line〉
                        rieth his affirmation by all the figures he c
                           〈1 line〉
                        n, as in saying 
                           〈◊〉
                         that it is so and then in 
                           〈◊〉
                         whether it be not so, and after in asking whether there 
                           〈◊〉
                         any 
                           〈◊〉
                         man will thi
                           〈1 line〉
                        ke 
                           〈1 line〉
                        hat it is not so, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        s if he woulde make vs beleeue, that he setteth vs diuers 
                           〈◊〉
                         of mea
                           〈1 line〉
                        es, bycause he bringeth the same in diuers dishes. For besides these reasons, he hathe no reason, either to pro
                           〈1 line〉
                        e that it is meete to haue prescript forme of seruice for the dead, or that the 
                           〈◊〉
                         should be drawen to this charge. Surely if the order be so good and conuenien
                           〈1 line〉
                        , it hathe met with a very barren 
                           〈1 line〉
                        trone, whiche can saye nothing for it. And although there be enough sayd by the Admonition, yet bycause this bold and hardy 
                           〈1 line〉
                        peach is 
                           〈1 line〉
                        nough to leade the simpler a
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        y, and to make them thinke that M. Doctor hath a good cause, therefore I will also say so
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        thing of these rites of bur
                           〈1 line〉
                        all.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What one reason is there vsed in the Admonition? what one word of scripture? what authoriti
                              〈1 line〉
                            of writer? to improue a prescripte kinde of seruice to bury the dead, and the minister to execute that office. If there be any rehearse it: if there be none why do you kéepe your old cu
                              〈1 line〉
                           ome of speaking vntruly? for as much therefore as they only sayThe dead b
                                 〈1 line〉
                               r
                                 〈1 line〉
                              d by the minister and with pra
                                 〈1 line〉
                              er in the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Church. it withoute proofe, withoute reason, without gr
                              〈1 line〉
                           unde, the thing being knowen so be good and godly, and pra
                              〈1 line〉
                           tised in the primitiue Church (for we reade in Tertullian, that the dead were wont to be buried by the ministers, and with prayer) and furthermore séeing it is established, and allowed by the Church, what shoulde I laboure by reason or authoritie to confirme that, whiche, cannot by any reason or authoritie be ouerthrowen.Tertul. de Anima. Wheresore I will only answer such bare assertions, as M. Zuinglius answeredAn order receyued in the Church needeth no proof, vntill by reason it be ouerthrowen. Zuinglius ad▪ Balt
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 a. resp.
                            (vpon the like occasiō) one Balthasar an Anabaptist. VVhilest you require scripture and reason, you obtrude vnto other that whiche you oughte to performe your selues, for you denie that this ought to be so, shew therefore some expresse testimonie out of the scripture, to confirme your opinion. To this effect spea
                              〈1 line〉
                           eth Zuinglius to Balthasar, who (without reason or scripture, alleadged to the contrary) required of Zuinglius the proofe of those thinges whiche without controle
                              〈1 line〉
                           ent of any (but Heretikes) had continued in the Churche of long time, and then also allowed in the time of the Gospell: Euen so the receiued order established by this Church, carieth with it authoritie and credite sufficient, and néedeth not to be further by reason confirmed, except it be first by reason ouerthrowen, which bycause it is not per
                              〈1 line〉
                           ourmed by the Admonition, my affirmation is sufficient reason, against their deniall.
                        If this be M. Doctors simple shift throughout his booke, I trust M. Doctor that would
                                 〈1 line〉
                               haue bin, hath not omitted to note it, where he may finde it, seing his eye sight is so sharpe, that he can imagine himselfe to espie it, where no man else can find it. But let words go.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition Pag. 198. Sect. 2.
                     You say that thereby prayer for the dead is mainteyned, as may partly be gathered out of some of the prayers, where we pray that we with this our brother, and other departed in the true faith of thy holy name▪ &c. You know full well what out doctrinePrayer for the dead not, mainteyned. is concerning prayer for the dead, and you ought not thus boldly to vtter a manifest vntruth, for in so doing you do but be wray your sinister affection How proue you that a prescripte forme of seruice for burying the dead, and the minister only to bury them, doth mainteine prayer for the dead▪ when you haue shewed your reason, you shall hea
                           〈1 line〉
                        e my answer.
                     
                        In saying that these words gathered out of some of the prayers,Pag. 199. 
                              〈◊〉
                            1. 2. 3. 
                        that we with this our brother. &c. import prayer for the dead, you do but quarrell:E
                              〈1 line〉
                           position of a prayer at Buriall. when we say that we with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob may reygne in thy kingdome, do we pray for Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, or 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ather wish ourselues to be where they are?
                     In the like manner when we say, that we with this our brother, and all other departed in the true faith of thy holy name, may haue our perfect consummation, & blisse both in body and soule, we pray not for our brother, and other that be departed in the true faith, but we pray for ourselues, that we may haue our perfect consummation and blisse, as we are sure those shall haue which die in the true fayth.
                     Now weigh this reason, there is a prescript forme of burying the dead, and it is madea portion of the ministers office, ther
                           〈1 line〉
                        fore you will not subscribe to the communion booke.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 161. Sect. 1.
                     And first o
                           〈1 line〉
                         all as this almost is a generall fault in them all, that they mainteine in the myndes of the ignorant the opinion of praying for the dead: so is this also another generall faulte, that these ceremonies are taken vp without any example eyther of the churches vnder the law, or of the purest churches vnder the Gospell, that is of the churches in the Apostles tymes. For when the Scripture describeth the ceremonies or rites of buriall amongst the people of God so diligently, that it maketh mention of the smallest things, there is no doubt but the holy Ghost doth thereby shew vs a patterne, wherevnto we should also frame our burialls. And therefore for so muche as neyther the Church vnder the law nor vnder the Gospell, when it was in the greatest puritie, did euer vse any prescript forme of seruice in the buriall of their dead, it could not be but daungerous, to take vp any such custome, and in the time of the law it was not only not vsed, but vtterly for for bidden:Leuit. 21. for when the law did forbid that the priest should not be at the buriall, whiche ought to saye or conceiue the prayers there, it is cleare that the Iewes might n
                           〈1 line〉
                        t haue any suche prescripte forme, and yet they had most neede of it, for the causes of obscure knowledge, and weaker fayth before alleadged. Agayne by this meanes a new charge is layd vpon the minister, and a taking him away from his necessary duties of feeding & gouerning the flocke, which being so greate as a maruellous dilig
                           〈1 line〉
                        nce will scarsely ouercome, ought not to be made greater by this, being a thing so vnnecessary. The Admonition dothe not say that the prayers whiche are sayd are for the dead, but that they mainteyne an opinion of prayer for the dead in the heartes of the simple, and that they declare mamanifestly enough, when they say that it may be partly gathered. &c.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Your first reason to proue that there ought to be no prescripte forme of seruice to bury theThe prescript forme of seruice mainteyneth not pr
                                 〈1 line〉
                              yer for the dea
                                 〈1 line〉
                               but 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            dead, and that the minister ought n
                              〈1 line〉
                           t to execute that office, is this: It mainteyneth in the mindes of the ignorant, an opinion of praying for the dead, therefore there ought to be no prescripte forme of seruice to bury the dead, neyther must the minister execute that office. Undoubtedly this is a very ignorant argument, if a man denie your antecedent, howe will you proue it? do you thinke the people (whome you do so greatly in other places extoll) to be so rude, that they vnderstand not the English tongue? Are they not able to discerne what it is to pray for the dead? Surely I do not thinke any to be so simple, that hearing the manner and forme of burying our dead, can or will imagine that we pray for the dead. And I verily beléeue that the ignorantest person in a whole countrey, will deride the babishnesse of the argument. The prescripte forme that is now vsed and the minister pronouncing the same, wi
                              〈1 line〉
                            
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ather perswade them to the contrary, for where as in times past, the minister vsed to say masse and dirige for the soules of the dead, and sundry times moue standers by to pray for the dead, at the time of buriall: now doth he reade most wholesome scriptures, declaring the myserie of the life of man, the shortnesse of his dayes, the happinesse of those that dye in the Lorde, and the certeintie of the resurrection. And who can hereof gather any prayer for the dead?
                        
                           Your second reason is this, these ceremonies (that is a prescript forme of burying the dead. &c) are taken vp without any example eyther of the Churches vnder the law, or of the churches in the Apostles time. &c. therefore there may be no prescripte forme of seruice for burying the dead, and the minister may not make it a péece of his office to bury them. I denie this argument: for it is negatiue from authoritie, bycause you haue neyther warrant to say that there was no such order in the Apostles time, neither if you had any such warrant, doth it follow that it may not be so in our time, séeing that in ceremonies and diuers other orders and externall thinges, we are not bounde to the forme and manner of the Apostolicall Church. And yet if I should say that in the Apostles time, the minister vsed to bury the dead, and ground my reason vpō the place of S. Augustine before alleadged, quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia. &c. I know not what you would be able by any reason to say to the contrary.
                        Another argument you conclude thus: It was forbidden in the lawe that the prieste should be at the buriall of the dead, therefore the Iewes had no suche prescript forme. BeThe replyer had rather conforme him selfe to the Iewes than 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              o this church it so: but will you driue vs to conforme our selues to the Iewes ceremonies? do you thinke that touching the dead, or being at burialls will now make the minister vncleane? I vnderstand not to what end you should alleadge any such proofes, vnlesse you would haue vs to retourne againe to Iudaisme. This kind of reasoning from the ceremoniall law is not only of no force, but also very dangerous, as though Christians were bound to behaue themselues according to that law. Surely it should séeme that you could rather consent to the bringing in of Iudaisme, than to the Christian orders now appointed in the Church. There might be and so there was a prescripte forme of burying the dead among the Iewes, although the Priest was absent: therfore, if this kinde of reasoning from the examples of the Iewes were of any force, yet cannot this your argument proue that there ought to be no prescripte forme to bury the dead.
                        In the fourth place you reason thus: A new charge may not belayd vpon the minister, norThe duetie of ministers not hindred by burying the dead. he maye not be taken from his necessary duties of feeding and gouerning his flocke. &c. but by burying the dead, a new charge is layd vpon him, and he is taken from his necessary duties. &c. therefore the minister may not bury the dead. Your Minor is false, for it is no new charge, laide vpon him: is it not his duty to reade the scriptures, to gyue thanks, to pray and to exhort in the publike congregation? doth he not féede, when he so doth? nay when is there a more apt time of féeding? will you giue him time to bePa. 49. Se. vlt absent from his flocke vpon his owne businesse, as before you haue done, and shal he haue no time to bury their dead? Surely I cannot conceiue how this function of burying the dead, should one iote hinder the minister f
                              〈1 line〉
                           ō any one part of his dutie. And I thinke these reasons of yours too weake to allure any man into your opinion, or to plucke downe any thing that is already builded. If you séeke for alteration, you must vse pro
                              〈1 line〉
                           ound and inuincible proofes, for no wise man will be moued to a change, without vrgent and especiall cause. I passe ouer this and such like matters the more lightly, bycause I take the lightnesse of your arguments to be such, as of themselues they be a sufficient discredite to your cause, and adde (with such a
                              〈1 line〉
                            be learned, and not led by affection) a greater strength and confirmation both to the doctrine, and also to the gouernment of this Church of England.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition. Page. 199. Sect. 4.
                     
                        The threefolde peale, mourning apparell, buriall sermons, the place of buriall, which way they must lye, how they must be fetched to the Church, a crosse white or blacke set vpon the dead corps, bread giuen to the poore, offerings in buriall time vsed, cakes sent abroade to friends, you confesse not to be conteined within the booke, and so you ease me of some laboure. But yet of mourning apparell, and auriallOf mourning 
                              〈1 line〉
                           pparell. sermons, giue me leaue to speake a little. It is no good reason to say,

that bycause mourning apparell is only vsed of custome, therefore it is superstitious and heathenishe: many thinges be vsed of custome wh
                           〈1 line〉
                        ch be neyther superstitious nor heathenish, as to receiue the communion before dinner, to celebrate the Lords day on the Sunday, not on the Saterday, to preach in pulpits, and such like. MourningMourning apparell auncient. apparell is of greate antiquitie (as you knowe) and I thinke it is no matter of religion, but of ciuilitie and order. If any man put religion in it, then no doubt it is superstitious.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 161. Sect. 2.
                     For the mourning apparell, the Admonition Vntruth, 
                              〈◊〉
                            their word
                              〈1 line〉
                            be playne. sayth not simply it is euill, bycause it is done of custome, but proueth that it is hypocriticall oftentimes, for that it proceedeth not from any sadnesse of mind, whiche it dothe pretende, but worne only of 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ustome there being vnder a mourning gowne, oftentimes a merry hart. And considering that where there is sorrow indeede for the dead, there it is very hard for a man to keepe a measure, that he do not lament too much: we ought not to vse these meanes whereby we might be further prouoked to sorrow, and so go a great way beyond the measure, which the Apostle appointeth in mourning, no more than it was well done of the Iewes in the Gospell to prouoke weeping and sorrow for their dead, by some dolefull noyse, or1. Thes. 4. Math. 9. Iohn. 11. sound of instrument, or then it was lawfull for Mary Lazarus sister, to go to hir brothers graue, thereby to set the pri
                           〈1 line〉
                        t of hir sorrow deeper in hir mind. Seing therefore if there be no sorrow it is hypocriticall to pretend it, and i
                           〈1 line〉
                         there be▪ it is very dangerous to prouoke it, or to carry the notes of remembrance of it, it appeareth that this vse of mourning apparell were much better layd away than kept. And here M. Doctor th
                           〈1 line〉
                        eapes alittle kindnesse of the authours of the Admonition, andCyp. 4. sermone de mortalitate Augus. li. 2. de consolat. mortuorum saith that they know it is very anncient, whome before he denyeth to haue any knowledge of antiquitie. Indeede it is very auncient, but M. Doctor is afrayd to shew the a
                           〈1 line〉
                        ciencie of it, for Cyprian, and Augustine, inueigh vnhemently against it, condemning it as vnlawfull and vndecent.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The words of the Admonitiō be these. Nor of their strange mourning by changing their garments (which if it be not hypocriticall) yet is it superstitious and heathenish, bycause it is vsed only of custome. Let the Reader now iudge, whether the Admonition dothe conclude this apparell to be heathenish and superstitious, only bycause it is vsed of custome or no. Truly in my simple iudgement their words be playner, than that they can be excused.
                        Your reason of Hypocrisie is no more sufficient, to condemne mourning apparell, than it is to condemne any other ciuill and decent o
                              〈1 line〉
                           der. By the like reason I might improue your wearing of a turky gowne and a hat, bycause that kind of apparel being a token of such persons, as mislike the gowne and the square cap, and pretende precisenesse aboue the rest, is notwithstanding commonly worne of such as in other places than in London, both weare and like the other, and be precise neither in lyfe nor doctrine. And what is it that I 
                              〈1 line〉
                           annot disproue, if this be a sufficient argument to say some mē do abuse it, or some men do hypocritically vse it, Ergo it is not to be vsed.
                        Your other reason, that it prouoketh more seruice for the dead than is conuenient, if it were true that it so did (as you are not able to proue that it is) yet muste it receiue the same answer, with the former argumente, being of the same nature: vnlesse you will say, that we must not come néere vnto our 
                              〈1 line〉
                           riendes graue, or place where he is buried, we must not weare any of his apparell, come in or neare the place where he dyed, beholde any thing that may put vs in mynde of hym, with an infinite suche like thinges, bycause all these moue affections in a kynde harte, and prouoke it to wéeping. But i
                              〈1 line〉
                            is the affection of the mynde that is to be moderated and brideled, and not the lawfull vse of decent and ciuill orders to be condemnad▪ For if we

admit such causes and excuses, I sée not how any orders, eyther ecclesiasticall or cy
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ill, especially in indifferent things, can be mainteined. If any man weare such apparellThere is both a lawfull and an vnl
                                 〈1 line〉
                              w full vse of mour
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ing apparell. of purpose to prouoke sorrow, he is not to be excused: if for order and ciuilitie, he is to be commended. And surely I sée not why the wearing of mourning apparell should not be profitable to put a man in minde of his owne mortalitie, seeing it carieth a remembrance of death with it, and I thinke it rather woorketh this effecte in the wearer, than the other that you speake of.
                        The antiquitie of this apparell appeareth in this, that (by your owne confession) it was in Cyprians time, as it appeareth in that 4. ser. demortalitate,
                            where he dothe not so much speake against the mourning apparell, as he dothe againste mourning immoderatly: and surely if the thing had bin so greatly to be misliked, it shoulde not still haue had continuance in the Church as it had, for Augustine likewise speaketh of it serm. 2. de consolat. mort. to the same effect that Cyprian doth. But there is no suche immoderate mourning for the dead in these dayes, the contrary rather appeareth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 200. Sect. 1. 2.
                     But wherein haue funerall sermons offended you? or with whatFunerall sermons. face of brasse dare you liken them to trentalls? what similitude is there betwixt a godly sermon and the wicked Masse? In what oneSermons most nece
                              〈1 line〉
                           sary at 
                              〈◊〉
                           . poynt are they like? or how dare you condemne such sermons, being then most necessary and most profitable? what? is there a more fitte time to entreate of the mortalitie of man, and shortnesse of his days, of the vanitie of this worlde, of the vncertaintie of 
                           〈1 line〉
                        iches, of the resurrection, of the iudgemente to come, of eternall life, and of euerlasting deathe, and of infinite other most necessary poyntes, than that wherin we haue a present example before our eyes? when is ther a more meete time to beate downe trentalls, sacrificing for the dead, prayers for the dead, Purga
                           〈1 line〉
                        orie, and suche like, than that wherein they were accustomed to be most vsed? Su
                           〈1 line〉
                        ely there is as much differenceSermons wickedly compared to trentalls. betwixt our funerall sermons, and the papisticall masses and trentalls, as there is betwixt cold and hote, blacke and white, light and darknesse, truth, and lies, Heauen and Hell. But belike there is some other priuate cause, that maketh you to reiecte funerall sermons.
                     You saye that in the best refourmed churches they are remoued: IFunerall sermons allowed of M. Caluine. thinke you saye not truly (and I am sure that M. Caluine dothe very well like and allow of them, as appeareth in the forme of common prayers vsed of the English Church in Geneua, & by him allowed.) But if it be so, I tell you plainly, for my parte I like not that reformation, excepte there be weightier reasons than eyther you vse, or I can perceiue. I am sure that in auncient churches of long time they haue bin vsed, and the same you may see in the moste aunciente and best learned fathers.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 162. Sect. 1.
                     Now touching the funerall sermons, M. Doctor taketh on, and triumpheth maruellously, as though he had already gotten ye victory, but he that girdeth his harnesse, should not boast as he that putteth it of. Ther is more matter, than peraduenture M. Doctor is aware of, and that which is set downe he answereth not, as that it nourisheth an opinion that ye dead are the better for it, which doth appeare in that ther are none more desirous of funeral sermōs than ye Papists, which although they cannot abide the doctrine whiche is preached, yet they will haue suche sermons, and those which will very seldome, or not at all, be at other sermons, will not commonly misse one of these.

Furthermore for so much as the minister is driuē oftentimes by this meanes to preach vpō a suddeyne, the worde of God thereby is negligently handled, especially of those whose giftes are not so gre
                           〈1 line〉
                        t, as that they can prouide in so sma
                           〈1 line〉
                        l time, and by this negligent handling of the worde of God, it is brought into contempte.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely M. Doctor may well triumphe, that so good a cause hath no stronger aduersaries.Funerall sermons nourish not an opinion that the dead are the better for them. Your argumentes are too too slender, and in déede very friuolous: The first is this, that they nourishe an opinion that the dead are better for them, of the which argumente, bicause you are ashamed your selfe, you father it vpon the Admonition, wherin there is not one worde spoken of any such reason. But why doth a funerall sermon nourish that opiniō? forsooth, bicause the Papistes be most desirous of them. First, it is very strange to say that sermons nourishe an opinion yt the dead are the better for them, when it is well knowen that both he that preacheth, thinketh otherwise, & the ende of preaching is to roote out of mens heartes such persuasions, which kinde of sermōs be most mete at that time to be vsed, when such especial occasiōs be offered. Secōdly, it is as strange to thinke that Papistes should for any such cause desire them, who are persuaded the doctrine that is taught to be flat heresie, and the preacher to be none of the church: and surely it is a strange fansie that can imagine a Papiste to thinke that sermon to helpe the dead, which condemneth prayer for the dead, Purgatorie, Masses, Diriges, Merites, and such like Popish trashe, wherein the Papistes place all their hope of helpe for the dead. Wherfore if Papistes be so desirous of these sermons (which I can not beleue) and in many of them it is indéede vntrue, it is rather to auoyde the suspition of Papistrie, than to procure any helpe to the dead.
                        The seconde argument you will haue this, The minister is driuen by this meanes toT. C. forgetteth him selfe. preache of a suddeyne, and thereby the worde of God is negligently handled. &c. and is this so good a reason? Do you remember what you answered before, for the defense of preaching twyse in a daye? you sayde it was a very simple Sermon that had not some goodnessePage. 123. Sect. 1. and edyfying, and very slender meate, whiche is not better beyng gyuen euerye daye, than the best and deyntyest meate once onelye in a month. &c. And howe can hée bée taken so vnprouided, that is able to preach so often? or why should the woorde of God be more negligently handled by a minister preaching a funerall sermon vpon suddeyne warning, than by the same minister preaching two sermons euery daye? your memory waxeth feble towardes the ende of your booke, else would you not haue so reasoned against your selfe. But why may not he that preacheth a funerall sermon haue sufficient warning? or if he haue not, why may he not refuse to preache it? There is no order or lawe that doth of necessitie binde him vnto it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 162. Sect. 2.
                     Moreouer, considering that these funerall sermons are at the request of ryche men, and those which are in authoritie, and are very seldome at the buriall of the poore, there is brought into the church (contrary to the worde of God) an acceptation of persones, which ought not to bee. For although the minister may giue to one more honour than to an other, according as the calling or degree requireth, yet in his ministerie, and that which perteyueth vnto his office, he ought to shew him selfe indifferent, and therefore preache as well at the death of the poore, as of the ryche, and bicause he cannot well do both, it is moste conuenient to leaue both.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is your thirde reason, but it toucheth only the persone, and not the cause, for it reproueth the minister for not preaching as well at the buriall of the poore as of the ryche: which if it be a faulte it is the fault of the man, not of the thing: and therfore

                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
no good reason to condemne funerall sermons. But you saye, he can not do both, and therfore it is moste conuenient that he leaue both: shall he at no tyme do good, bicause he can not do it at all tymes? bicause he is not able to preache euery daye, shall he not therefore preache once in the wéeke? or if he be not able to preache once in the wéeke, shall hée not therefore (being able) preache once in a fortnight? what kinde of reasoning call you this? And yet if your reason for preaching twyse a day before mentioned, be good and allowable, I knowe not why ye minister may not be able to preach at the burial, as well of the poore as of the ryche, and yet there may be sometymes more occasion, to preache at the buriall of the ryche, than at the buriall of the poore: neither is this that acceptatiō of persons, which is in scripture prohibited: for there be degrées of persons and seuerall dignities. Howbeit, funeral sermons be rather in the respect of the liuing than of the dead.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 162. Sect. 2.
                     If so be that M. Doctor will saye, that it is good that notable and famous men, should haue their commendation, to the ende that both the goodnes of God towardes them, might be the better knowen, and others the sooner drawen to followe their example, I graunt it is so, and the scripture doth both approue it, and sheweth what meane is best to do that by. For so we reade that Ieremy2. Chro. 35. 2. sam. 1. and. 3. the Prophete commēded that godly and zealous Prince Iosias in writing verses of his death. He could haue as easely preached, but this he thought the best waye. So did also Dauid wryte verses at the death of Saule, and Ionathan, and Abner, in which he commendeth their giftes and graces which the Lord had bestowed vpon them. There were in deede of auncient tyme funerall orations, as appeareth in Gregorie Nazianzene, but they sauoured of the manner of Athens, where he was brought by: where also this custome of funerall orations was vsed, as may be seene in the seconde booke of Thucidides story by an oration of Pericles. And although this custome was not in Nazianzens time so corrupte as afterwardes: yet the departing from the examples of the purer churches, gaue occasion of further corruption which ensued. And to say the truthe, it was better vsed amongst the Athenians, than amongst the Christians. For there it was merely ciuill, and the oration at the death of some notable personage, made not by a minister, but by an orator appointed therfore: which I thinke may well be done.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Ieremie lamented Iosias death, and writte verses vpon it, Dauid also writte verses at the death of Saule, there were funerall orations in Nazianzens time, and it is lawefull to haue orations at the death of noble personages. &c. therefore there may be no funerall sermons: this argument hath neither necessary nor probable conclusion, for they may both bée vsed, and be so commonly at the buriall of notable personages. M. Foxe reporting the vse of theThe order of the Primitiue churche in funerals. Primitiue churche in this matter, sayth thus. In funeralles priestes then flocked not together, selling Trentalles, and Diriges, for sweping of purgatorie, but onely a funerall concion was vsed, with Psalmes of praises and songs of their worthy deedes: and alleluia soundingM. Foxe par. 1 Pag. 146. on highe, which did shake the golden seelings of the temple, as witnesseth Nazianzene, Ambrose, and Ierome. &c.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 162. Sect. 2.
                     And if M. Doctor will saye that there might be sermons although they be not mentioned neither in the olde Testament nor in the newe, I haue answered before, that seeing the holy Ghost doth describe so diligently the least circumstances of buriall, he would not haue omitted that being the greatest. And let it be obserued, that this deuise of mans brayne, bringeth foorth the same fruite that other do, that is, dryueth quite awaye a necessary dutie of the minister, which is to comforte with the worde of God, the parties which be greeued at the death of their friendes, that considering the sore is particular, he applye vnto it a particular playster, which is very seldome or neuer doone, and yet a necessary dutie, as of a good Christian, so especially of the minister, whiche can best doe it, and to whome it moste apperteyneth.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        No, I saye not only that, which you do not sufficiently improue, but this also, that if there were none such then, yet may there be nowe, being a matter perteyning to edifying, and to the preaching of the Gospell of Christe. And you can no more proue by this argument, that there ought to be no funerall sermons, than you can proue that there ought to be no women at the receiuing of the communion, or no baptisme mininistred in churches, with diuers such like things, wherof there is no expresse mention that they were in the Apostles time.
                        An other of your weighty argumēts is this. The minister ought to cōfort with the woorde of God, the parties that be greeued at ye death of their friendes, therefore he may not preache a funerall sermon. I must stil deny your argument, being to too simple. For may he not do both if nede require? may he not before his sermon, in his sermon, & after his sermonFunerall sermons serue to comfor
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e those that are greeued. comforte the parties greeued? That is one good vse of funerall sermōs, especially when ther are a number so gréeued, whom he can not so well particularly cōforte, bicause of the number, as he may ioyntly, in a godlye & fruitfull sermon: and I haue not heard or red, but that God worketh as effectually in the heartes of the hearers, by publike sermons, as he doth by priuate exhortations, & that euen in matters of saluation, & therfore much more in matters of lesser importance. But as I saide before, this preaching at the buriall, doth nothing hinder this priuate exhortation, if he be so disposed: and therfore of all other your argumentes, this is one of the worste.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 162. Sect. 2.
                     And where as M. Doctor asketh, when there is a better time to speake of death and of mortalitie, than at 
                           〈1 line〉
                        urial, surely if it had bene so sit, the Prophets and Apostles would neuer haue lost that oportunitie, or let passe that occasion of aduauncing and making effectuall their preaching. What if it be answered It were very 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ondly answere▪
                         that for as much as our life, is a continuall meditation of death, it is not sal
                           〈1 line〉
                        e to vse this custome, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        or that it tieth our cogitation to so shorte a tyme, as the tune of buriall is, whiche ought to be extended to the whole course of our life. But I answere that it may be well done without any such funerall sermons, when the minister taketh occasion of the death of any which is lately departed, to speake of the vanitie of the life of man.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Prophets and Apostles did not preache at burials, therefore it is not a moste conuenient time to speake of death and of mortalitie. The antecedent is doubtful, and not proued, and though it were true, the argument followeth not, for it is your vsuall kinde of reasoning negatiuely of authoritie. But why haue you not made here any mention of the other thinges conteined in my Answere to the Admonition, whiche bée necessary pointes to be entreated of, and most fit for that tune: as purgatory, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           rentals. &c?
                        Againe you reason thus: our life is a continuall meditation of death, and by funerall sermonsAn absurd argum
                                 〈1 line〉
                              t against funerall sermons. it is tied vnto a short tyme as the tune of buriall is, therefore funerall sermons be not lawefull: the putting of vs in minde of our mortalitie by funerall sermens, is no hindraunce to our continuall meditation of it, but an helpe rather and a meanes to stirre it vp & to reuiue it. We ought at all times to meditate of the death of Christ, but must we therfore refuse at some times to receiue the sacrament of the supper, whereby we are put in minde therof? or doth the receiuing of this sacrament once in a monthe, restraine our meditation of Christs death to that time only? doth a sermon preached of the death of Christ, at some times appointed, binde our cogitation to that time onlye? surely then are we very vnprofitable hearers. Wherfore although our life be a con
                              〈1 line〉
                           inuall meditation of death, yet can it not be but most profitable for vs, to be put in mynde therof at some one time, more than at other some tyme, & especially at that time when we sée with our eyes that which we heare with our eares. And what can this reason more preuayle against sermons at burials, than it may doe against sermons at the administration of the Sacramentes, or any other appointed or sette tyme?

The like or the same kynde of argument you vsed before against the feast of Easter,
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 120. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              2 and other such like dayes, where I haue in like manner answered the same. I thinke verily that by this time you are ashamed of it.
                        At the length you saye that it may be well done, without any suche funerall sermons, &c. and therefore there may be no funerall sermons. And I saye it may as well and better be done in and by funerall sermons, and therefore funerall sermons may be, &c.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 162. tovvards the ende.
                     Whether M. Doctor liketh the reformation or no; so it is in the church where M. Calu
                           〈1 line〉
                        ne w
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        astor, and ha
                           〈1 line〉
                         be
                           〈1 line〉
                        e for these many yeares. And although the Englyshe churche in Geneua had that in the booke of common prayer, yet (as I haue heard of those which were there present) it was no
                           〈1 line〉
                         so vsed. And if it had bene, yet thereby it is not proued that M. Caluine allowed of it. For with things wherein there was no great and manifest disorder, M. Caluine did beare that whiche hee liked 
                           〈1 line〉
                        t of. And there being no Papistes in all the citie, and all beyng well instructed, there was no such
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        unger in a funerall sermon there, as is here amongst vs, where there be many Papistes and mo ignorant. I w
                           〈1 line〉
                        ll saye nothing of the great abuse of those whiche hauing otherwyse to lyue on of the churche, take nobles for euery such sermon, and sometyme a mournyng gowne, which causeth th
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         to open their mouthes wyde, and to say that the marchandise of sermons is much beare
                           〈1 line〉
                         than of the 
                           〈◊〉
                        , for that they might haue for a groa
                           〈1 line〉
                        e or sixe pence, and the sermon they can not haue vnder a rou
                           〈1 line〉
                        der summe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue tolde you before howe much M. Cal
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ine him selfe misliketh this ambitiousTract. 9. cap. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                               Diui. 13. morositie, which woulde driue all churches to the example of one. It firste brought Rome to that extreame pryde & arrogācie, wherewith it is now so greatly puffed vp.
                        I must beleue that booke that is printed published and vncontrolled, before I beleue your vncertaine reportes, although in such matters I do not depende vpon the churche of Geneua, whiche will not I am sure condemne our vse in these sermons, though it vse them not it selfe.
                        I heare as yet no probable reason why funeral sermons should not be where ther
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           Funer
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ll sermons do most good where there are most Papists. are Papistes, and suche as be ignorante. I am fully perswaded that they be in those places moste necessary, where there are moste Papistes, bicause they minister especiall occasion to confute these errors, wherein the Papistes be moste blynded, & from the which they are with most difficultie drawen. But we must permit vnto you your paradoxes, and your fansies, else all is marred.
                        You saye you wyll not speake of the abuse of those that take nobles for such Sermons, hauing otherwyse to lyue, neyther will I defende them if they either exacte it, or require it, or take it with offence. Yet if it be giuen vnto them by the wyll of the dead, or for the bet
                              〈1 line〉
                           er solemnizing of the burials of suche as be noble or worshipfull, I sée no cause why it should be vnlaweful for them, to take that which by such meanes is giuen vnto them: otherwyse I thinke it not méete for preachers to make a common or vsuall gayne of it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 163. Lin. 5.
                     That must be remembred (which I had almoste forgotten) howe vntruely and slaundero
                           〈1 line〉
                        slye M. doctor sayth that ye authors of the Admonitiō do compare the sermon with a trentall or a masse. For when I saye in steade of the masse we haue the holy Communion: do Yea su
                              〈1 line〉
                           ely if you 
                              〈1 line〉
                           peake to disc
                              〈1 line〉
                           edite it. I compare or liken the communion to ye m
                           〈1 line〉
                        sse? and yet this is M. doctors charitable collectiō, which gathereth things which no man letteth 
                           〈1 line〉
                        all.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If with that mynde and sense you saye, the holy Communion is in steade of the Masse,

that they saye, buriall Sermons are put in the place of trentals, you saye wickedly and vngodly: for they speake it in the euill parte, to the deprauing of those sermons: therfore I slaunder them not, but they slaunderously speake of the preaching of ye word of God. And for my vpright dealing with them in this poynt, I refuse not the iudgement, of any man that hath iudgement.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag 201. Sect. 1.
                     Touching the place of buriall, I muse what you meane to mislikeThe place of Buriall. of it, seeing there hath always bene an appointed place for the same, euen from Abraham to this daye.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page 163. Lin. 10.
                     Touching the place of buriall, I haue spoken before. And although it be not to be misliked, that there should be a common place to bury in yet the places which M. doctor poynteth vs vnto, proue the cleane contrary. For by the story o
                           〈1 line〉
                         Abrahams place of buriall, it appeareth that ye manner was that euery one was buried in his owne seuerall grounde, as may appeare also by that, that the Euā
                        gelisteMath. 27. sai
                           〈1 line〉
                        h, that there was a fielde bought to bury the straungers in, which had no place of their owne, which was also vsed sometimes in the churches vnder the Gospell, as appeareth by the story of Theodoret, which I haue before recited, and in the latter ende of a funerall oration, whiche Gregorie Naz
                           〈1 line〉
                        anzene made of the death of his brother Cesarius. And so by this reason M. Doctor would haue euery one buried in his owne possession.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        There haue bene placēs alwayes appointed to bury the dead in, dedicated to that vse onely, and therefore there may be so nowe, neither haue you one word in any approued wryter to the contrary. The conuenience of the place, & the pointing of it out, is in the power of those that haue authoritie, and be gouernours of the cōmon wealth and churche, and with that place that by them is thought moste conuenient we ought to be contented. Neither do I heare any reason to proue that there ought to be any alteration of the places already appointed.
                        Whatsoeuer you haue spoken to the contrary in the other place, I haue thereTract. 5. cap. 2 Diuis. 7. answered.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Other particular matters for the which they refuse to subscribe to the booke.
               
                  Chap. 7. The. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ift. As for the halfe Communi
                           〈1 line〉
                        n, which is yet appointed like to the commemorationHalfe comm
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           nion. of the Masse, we saye little of it, sauing that wee may note howe neare the translatour bounde hym selfe to the massebooke, that woulde not omitte it.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 183 Sect. 1.
                        I knowe not what you meane by the halfe communion, I finde no such worde in the Communion booke: If you meane the communion in one kinde, you speake vntruely and slaunderously of the booke, and of this whole church: if you meane the scriptures and prayers appointed to be read when there is no Communion, then do you vniustly liken them to the commemoration of the Masse, being most fruitful scriptures, and godly prayers.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Admonition.
                     The eight. The publike baptisme, that also is full of childysh and superstitious toyes. First in their prayer they saye, that God by the baptisme of his sonne Iesus Christ, did sanctifie the floud Iordane, and all other waters, to the mysticall washing awaye of sinne, attributing that to the signe which is (1. Iohn. 1. 7. Acts. 20. 28 Rom. 3. 24.) proper to the worke of God in the bloud of Christe, as though vertue were in water to washe awaye synnes.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 189. Sect. 6. 7. 8.
                        
                           By the first you saye, that wee attribute to the signe that whiche is proper to the worke of God in the bloud of Christe, as though vertue were in water to washe awaye synne.
                        You knowe very well that we teache farre otherwyse, and that it is a certayne and true doctrine of all suche as professe the Gospell, that the outward signes of the Sacrament, doe not conteine in themOutward sacramentes do not giue grace grace, neither yet that the grace of God is of necessitie tied vnto them, but onely that they be seales of Gods promyses, notes of Christianitie, testimonies and effectuall signes of the grace of God, and of our redemption in Christe Iesus, by the whiche the spirite of God dothe inuisiblye worke in vs, not onely the increase of faythe, but confirmation also.
                        You vnderstande likewyse, that this difference there is betwixt these externall elementes, being selected to be sacramentall signes,Sacramental signes. (that is, betwixt water in baptisme, & common water: bread & wine in the Eucharist, & vsual bread & wine) that these now be sacraments sanctified to an other vse, to a spiritual vse, to the norishing of fayth, and feeding of the soule, to be instruments of the holy Ghost, by the which as by instruments we be fed to eternal life. Furthermore, you can not be ignorāt, that whosoeuer cōtemneth these external signes, and refuseth them, can not be a member of Christe, neither yet saued.
                        Last of all you haue learned, that there is suche a similitude betwixtPag. 190. Sect. 1. 2. the signes, and the thing signified, that they are not onely in Scripture vsually called by the names of those things where of they be Sacramentes (as bread the body of Christe, and water regeneration) but also that the contumelie or contempte done to the one, doth redounde to the other, that is, the contempte of the signes, is the contempt of the things signified, and therefore S. Paule saith. 1. Cor. 11. He that eateth and drinketh vnvvorthily, eateth and drinketh his ovvne damnation, Non dijudicans corpus domini.
                            And Christ, Iohn. 3. Excepte a man be borne of vvater and the spirite, hee can not enter into the kingdome of heauen.
                        
                        These things being cōsidered, it is no superstitious toy, but a godly and true saying, that Christe hathe sanctified all waters (vsed in Baptysyng) to the mysticall washyng awaye of synne: not ascrybing, or attributyng washyng awaye of synne to the externall elemente, anye otherwyse, than instrumentallye, or in anye other respecte than for the similitude that Sacramentes haue with the thynges whereof they bee Sacramentes: for wee knowe that wycked men maye receyue these externall signes, and yet remaine the members of Sathan.

It is certainly true, that the mysticall washing away of sinne is proper to the worke God in the bloud of Christ, and for that purpose you might haue alledged much more playner and directer places of Scripture, than moste of these whiche you haue noted in your margent: but I thinke your meaning is not therefore to condemne the outwarde signes and Sacraments, as the heretikes called Messalians, did.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     They pray that all men may be saued.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 202. Sect. 3.
                        
                           You say we pray that all men may be saued, we do so indeede, and what canPrayer that all men may be saued 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  good. you alledge why we should not so do? S. Paule. 1. Tim. 2. sayth, I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giuing of thankes be made for all men. &c. And adding the reason he sayth, For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Sauiour, vvho vvill that all men shall be saued, and come vnto the knovvledge of the truth. The Apostle doth here will vs in plaine words to pray for all men, euen that they may be saued, for there vnto tende the wordes following.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     To this is nothing answered.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The thirtéenth. In all their order of Seruice (1. Co. 14. 16) there is no edification according to the rule of the Apostle, but confusion. They tosse the Psalmes in most places like tennese balles, the people some standing, some walking, some talking, some reading, some praying by themselues, attend not to the Minister. He againe posteth it ouer as fast as he can gallop: for eyther he hath two places to serue, or else there are some Games of Sodome. games to be played in the after noone, as lying for the whetstone, heathnish dauncing for the ring, a Beare or a Bull to be bayted or else Iacke an apes to ride on horsebacke, or an Enterlude to be played, and if no place else can bee gotten, it must be done in the Church. &c. Now the people sit, now they stande vp: when the olde Testament is read, or the lessons, they make no reuerence, but when the Gospell commeth, then they Standing at the Gospell came from Anastatius the Pope in An. 404. all stande vp. For why, they thinke that to be of greatest authoritie, and are ignorant that the Scriptures came from one spirite. When Iesus is named, then off goeth the cap, and downe goeth the knees, with suche a scraping on the grounde, that they cannot heare a good while after, so that the worde is hindered, but when any other names of God are mētioned, they make no curtesie at all, as though the names of God were not equall, or as though all reuerence ought to be giuen to the sillables. We speake not of ringing, when Mattens is done, and Accidentall abuses. other abuses incident: bicause we shall be answered, that by the booke they are not mainteyned, onely we desire to haue a booke to reforme it.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 204. Sect. 1. &. 205. Sect. 1. 2.
                        This is a slaunderous vntruth. And the. 1. Cor. 14. abused toA slaunder of the Communion booke. confirme it. Whatsoeuer S. Paule requireth in that place, is vsed in that booke of Seruice: for first the whole Seruice is in a tongue knowne (as S. Paule there requyreth) that the people may vnderstand & say Amen. Then are the Scriptures read▪ the Sacraments ministered according to Christes owne institution, those that bee Godly disposed persons know what a manifest vntruth this is that you here vtter.
                        
                           But mad men, women and children, must haue their wordes. &c.
                        If by tossing of Psalmes, you meane the singing of them, alternatìm, then do you disallow that which is both commendable, and of great antiquitie, as it appeareth in an Epistle that Basilius Magnus, did wryte to the Ministers in Neocaesaria, where he sheweth the selfe same order of singing Psalmes to be then vsed in the Church, that we vse at this day.
                        If by tossing of Psalmes like tennise balles, you meane the ouer hastie reading or singing of them, it is indeede to be misliked: but it is no part of the booke, and therefore no cause why you shoulde absteyne from subscribing to it.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C Pag. 163. Sect. 1.
                     To passe by the prophane prouerbe here vsed, which matcheth mad men, and women, and childr
                           〈1 line〉
                         togither▪ most vnseemely for a D. of diuinit
                           〈1 line〉
                        , especially handling diuine matters: for the singing of Psalmes by course, and side after side, although it be very auncient, yet it is not commendable, and so much the more to be suspected, for that the diuell hath gone about, to get it so great authoritie, partly by deriuing it from Ignatius tyme, and partly in making the worlde beleeue, that this
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           ocrat. 6▪ 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 8. cap. Platin. cap. Damas. Theod. 2. lib. 24. cap. came from heauen, and that the Angels were heard to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ng after this sort, which as it is a mere fable, so is it confuted by Hystoriographers, whereof some ascribe the beginning of this to Damasus, some other vnto Flauianus, and Dioo
                           〈1 line〉
                        rus. From whence soeuer it came, it cannot be good,This is slat con
                              〈1 line〉
                           r. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ie to that you affirme. pag. 109. Sect. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . considering that when it is graunted that all the people may prayse God (as it is in singing of Psalmes) there this ought not to be restrayned vnto a fewe, and where it is lawfull both with heart and 
                           〈◊〉
                         to sing the whole Psalme, there i
                           〈1 line〉
                        is not inecte that they should sing but the one half with their heart and voyce, and the other with their heart onely. For where they may both with heart and voyce sing, there the heart is not enough. Therefore besides that incommoditie whiche cōmeth this way, in that being tossed after this sort, mē cannot vnderstand what is song, these other two incōuemences come of this forme of singing. & therfore is banished in all reformed churches.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To the slaunderous vntruth of the Admonition, or to my answere there vnto, you say nothing, but passe it ouer.
                        S. Paule vsed a prophane prouerbe in very serious and diuine matters, when he sayde: Cretenses semper mendaces. &c. ad. Ti. 1. and therefore it well beséemeth a Doctor ofTit. 1. 
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           itie, aptly and fitly applying it. But why doe you not find fault with the Authors of the Admonition who vse a more prophane prouerbe, (that is, tossing of tennise balles) in as serious a matter?
                        You confesse that singing of Psalmes by course, and side after side is verie 
                              〈1 line〉
                           uncient, and therfore I shal not néede to labour in prouing that: the diuersitie of opinions touching the originall of it, cannot preiudice the thing: and yet if Ignatius were the Author of it, as Socrates lib. 6. cap. 8.
                            sayth, it is not the lesse to be estéemed, but I will examine yourSocr. li. 6. cap. 8 reasons. When it is graunted (you say) that all the people may praise God, it ought not to be restrayned to a fewe: this is soone answered, for all the people may sing if they can and wil: and those that sing not in voyce may sing in heart, for the Psalmes are soong in a tong that is knowne: and some there be that can neither read nor sing, such of necessitie must hearken to those that sing, and ioyne with them in heart. You adde, that where they may sing the whole Psalme both with voyce and heart, it is not meete they should sing with heart onely, for where they may both with heart and voyce sing, there the heart is not enoughe. Where learne you this in scripture? will you set downe generall and absolute rules, and not tell vs vpon what authoritie they be grounded? This is tootoo Popelike, whose wordes will stande for reason, whom none must aske why doth he so, or sayth so. The prayer of the heart alone when a man may also pray with voyce, is of greatPrayer by heart onely, effectuall. force, and very effectuall, as the example of Anna in the first of Samuell doth declare. I grai
                              〈1 line〉
                           t that in the publike cōgregation God is to be called vpon both in heart & voice, but yet if a man at some times either bicause of the order appointed by the Church, or vpon some other occasion do holde his peace, and desire that in heart onely, which other sing▪ or pray in voyce, no doubt he prayeth effectually. Saint Paule. 1. Cor. 14. speaking of praying and thankesgiuing in the publike Congregation sayeth: Else1. Cor. 14. when thou blessest with the spirite, howe shall hee that occupieth the rowme of the vnlearned

say Amen at thy giuing of thankes, seing he knoweth not what thou sayest? Of the which wordes it may euidently be gathered, that one sayd the prayers, and the rest of the people ioyned with him in heart, and therefore sayde Amen, when he had ended his prayers. And so doth M. Caluin interpret this place. You see then how farre your rule is wide from the rule of S. Paule. For euen in the publike congregation, he alloweth one to pray in heart & voyce, and all the rest to pray in heart only. Wherfore, where they may both with heart & voyce sing, there to sing with the heart is inough. But Lorde how you forget your selfe: before you founde fault with the booke b
                              〈1 line〉
                           se
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            the people repeated their prayers after the minister, and that bicause the Minister is the onely mouth of the people to the Lorde. &c. nowe (as though you were not the same m
                              〈1 line〉
                            but played some other part) you finde fault with the order of Seruice bicause they 
                              〈1 line〉
                            not their owne mouthes to the Lord: then to pray with heart was sufficient: now it is not enough: whence this cōtrarietie should spring I cannot imagin, except I should ascribe it to a frowarde and preposterous desire that you haue to deface this Church:
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            but bicause I haue touched this more largely in the proper place, I will content my selfe with the onely noting of it in this place.
                        If you will say it was then the maner of the Church, that one should pronounce the prayers, the rest harkening vnto him, and therefore could not without the breaking of order speake: the same I say vnto you: that this hath beene of long tyme the generall order of the Church to s
                              〈1 line〉
                           g bysides, and therefore may not without disorder be broken, so long as the Church doth thinke it conuenient to be kept, as a lawfull and conuenient order.
                        The Psalmes béeing song, may as well be vnderstanded as being sayde, and better too. If it be otherwise, the fault is not in singing, but in the maner of s
                              〈1 line〉
                           ging, which is the fault of the persons, not of the thing. And therefore that is but a verie weake reason, and it is à non causa.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 205. Sect. 3. 4.
                     
                        VValking, talking, reading, priuate praying of the people in tyme of common prayers, seruing of two cures, games played in the after noone on the Sabboth day, as lying for the whetstone, &c. be faults worthie of punishment, where they be vsed, but they are not within the contents of the booke, and they are here recyted out of place, and to no purpose.
                     This is verie malicious and vndiscret dealing, to burthen the commonUndiscrete dealing with the 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ke o
                              〈1 line〉
                            comon prayer. order with such faultes, which by the malice of men are growne in vse, and are of all good men misliked. So you might haue burthened Saint Paule, and other Preachers, with the faults of the Churches of Corinth, and Galatians, & the residue of the Apostles, with the superstitions of the Iewes conuerted in the primitiue Church, and all good rulers with such faults as corruption of tyme breedeth.
                     
                        Standing or sitting at this time or that tyme is indifferent, and therefore may both be well vsed, and abused also.
                     
                        Kneeling at the name of Iesus is of the like nature, ringing when Mattens isKneeling at the name of Iesus. done, (as you terme it) curious singing, Organs. &c. All these be without the booke, and therefore without discretion alledged as a reason why you will not subscribe to the booke.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 163. past the midst.
                     Unto two verie good reasons which the Admonition vseth, to shew the inconuenience of making curte
                           〈1 line〉
                        e, and standing at the name of Iesus, and at the Gospell rather than at other names of

God, and the rest of the Scripture, whereof the one is, that it is agaynst decencie and good order. which is broken by scraping of the feete, and the other that it may breed a da
                           〈1 line〉
                        gerous opinion of the inequalitie either of the sonne of God, with the other persons, or of the Gospels with other Scriptures. M. Doctor sayth that it is an indifferent thing, and neyther taketh away their reasons, nor setteth downe any of his owne: this is a slender defense. And it is no malicious dealing to note those faults which are so generall and so open, and yet notwithstanding vncorrected or vnreformed by those, by whome M. Doctor woulde make vs beleeue that the Church is best gouerned. But I pray you tell me, why do you condemne the seruing of two cures, that allow the hauing of two benefices? If it be no fault to haue two benefices, howe is it one, to haue two cures? For the Curate is better able to read his seruice in two places, than the Pastor to discharge his office in two Churches.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The first reason of hindring the worde by the noyse made with scraping the sée
                              〈1 line〉
                            vpon the ground, as it is vsed by them in derision, so is it of it selfe ridiculeus, and not worthie to be answered: besides it is vntrue, for it hindereth no more the worde béeing read, than hawking and spitting bindereth the same being preached. But Lorde how sparing are you of time, that will not spare so much as may serue a man to bow his knée in. Well it is but a pretence, to helpe out with a merie argument: for I dare say neyther they nor you are so vndiscrete, as to vse it in good sadnesse.
                        Their second reason hash some more grauitie in it, though not much more weight, and your addition, that it may breede a daungerous opinion of the inequalitie eyther of the Sanne of God with the other persons, or of the Gospell with other Scriptures, is but supposed, and a man may suppose the Moone to be made of gréene chéese. That gesture at the name of Iesus hath hitherto continued in the Church many hundred yeares, and yet neuer any was heard tell of, that fell into eyther of these opinions by the meanes thereof.
                        One reason that moued Christians in the beginning the rather to bow at theWhy Christians bowed at the name of Iesus. name of Iesus, than at any other name of God, was bicause this name was most hated and most contemned of the wicked Iewes, and other persecutors of such as professed the name of Iesus: for the other names of God they had in reuerence, but this they could not abide: wherefore the Christians to signifie their fayth in Iesus, and theyr obedience vnto him, and to confute by open gesture the wicked opinion of the Iewes and other infidels, vsed to doe bodily reuerence, at all tymes when they heard the name of Iesus, but especially when the Gospell was read, which conteyned that glad tydings of saluation which is procured vnto man by Christ Iesus, wherevpon also he is called Iesus, that is, a Sauior. Neyther can it be agaynst christianitie to shewe bodily reuerence, when he is named by whom not onely all the spirituall enimies of mankinde are subdued, but also the faythfull be made partakers of the kingdome of heauen. Wherefore as I binde no man of necessitie to this reuerence at the name of Iesus, so do I not iudge any man that (hauing knowledge) vseth the same: for I will not holster and defende superstitious ignorance.
                        It must néedes be malicious dealing, to charge the common order and booke of publike prayer, with particular faults of priuate men and places. If you knowe where these abuses be, and will complaine of them either to the Archbishop or Bishop, I dare say they will reforme them.
                        There is better reason why one Pastor may haue two benefices, than one Curate serue in two cures, for ministring of the Sacraments and reading publike prayers dayly, doth require more bodily attendance than the preaching of the worde. A man may better in one day preach at two Churches, than he can at them both minister the Sacraments, and celebrate publike prayers. That Pastor that hath two benefices, and two good Curates at them both, may with much more facilitie do his dutie, both towardes his Churches particularly, and the whole Church generally.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of Cathedrall Churches. &c. Tract. 22.
            
               
                  Admonition.
                  As for Organs and curi
                        〈1 line〉
                     ns singing, though they be proper to popish dennes, I meane to

Cathedrall Churches, yet some others also must haue them. The Queenes Chappell, and these Churches must be paterns and presidents to the people of all superstitions.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 206. Sect. 1.
                     Here it pleaseth you to call Cathedrall Churches, Popish dennes, As hap is your wordes are no slaunder. But this bragge I will make of Cathedrall Churches, and such as be nowe in them, I will offer vnto you a dozen Cathedrall Churches in England (which I my selfe do know) the worst whereof in learning, shall encounter with al Papistes, Puritanes, Anabaptists, and what other sectes soeuer in Englande, for the defense of religion now professed, eyther by worde or wryting. Without arrogancie be it spoken, I thinke there was neuer time wherein these Churches were better furnished with wise, learned and godly men, than they be at this day. I speake not this boastingly, but to Gods glorie, the honour of the Prince, the comfort of the godly, and the shame of slaunderous Papistes, and disdainfull Schismatikes.
                     Your slaunderous speech of the Queenes Maiesties Chappell, which you also say to be a patterne and president to the people of all superstitions, is rather seuerely to be punished, than with words to be confuted.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Page. 163. tovvardes the ende. & Pag 164. Sect. 1.
                  As for the speach of the cathedrall Churches, either it is nothing or else it is false. For if he say that there is eyther in all those cathedrall Churches one, or in euerie of those 12. churches one, which is able to confute Papists. &c. What great thing sayth he, which sayth no more of all these Churches, than is to be founde in one poore house of the vniuersitie, whose rentes are scarce 300. pounde by yeare? Yea what hath he sayde of them which was not to be founde in them euen in Queene Maries tyme, when there was yet some one almost in euery Church, which for feare dissembling, was able notwithstanding to confute the Papists, Anabaptists, Puritanes. And if he meane that in those twelue houses, the worst of the Prebendaries are able to defende the truth agaynst all Papists, &c. all men do knowe the vntruth of it, so that although this sentence be very doubtfully put forth, yet howe so euer it be taken, it is as M. Doctor hath rightly termed it, a meere bragge. And yet I doubt not, and a
                        〈1 line〉
                      well assured, that there be diuerse godly learned men which haue liuings in those places, but for all that they ceasse not therefore to be dennes of loyterers and idle persons, whilst there are nourished there some which serue for no profitable vse in the Church, theyr offices being such as bring no commoditie, but rather hurt, of which number certame are which the Admonition speaketh of in the. 224. page: some other which hauing charges in other places, vnder the colour of their Prebendes there, absent themselues from them: and that which they spoyle and rauen in other places, there they spend and make good cheere with, and therfore not without good cause called dennes. Finally there being nothing there, which might not be much better applyed, and to the greater commoditie of the Church, whilst they might be turned into Colledges, where yong men might be brought vp in good learning, and made fit for the serutce of the Church and common wealth, the vniuersities being not able to receyue that number of schollers, wherwith there neede may be supplyed.
                  And where M. D. sayth, that that which is spoken of the Queenes maiesties chappell, is worthie rather to be punished, than confuted, if so be that these be abuses, the example of them in hir matesties chappell, cannot be but most daungerous, which with all humble submission and reuerence, I beseech hir Maiestie duly to consider.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     My speach is verie plaine and without all ambiguitie, I say there is a dozen Cathedrall Churches in England, the worst of the which Churches in learning shal incounter with all papists. &c. My meaning can not be so darke as you would séeme to make it: but bicause your vnderstanding is so dull, when any thing is spoken to the commendation of any other than of your selfe, I will more plainly declare my meaning: whiche is this, that there is not one of these dozen Churches, but hathe a sufficiente number of learned menne, to perfourme what so euer I haue promysed, howe so euer boastinglye,

which I acknowledge to be my infirmitie, but yet there vnto constreyned by the arrogancie of such, qui cupiunt soli videri aliquid esse. Your opprobrious speaches spoken of those Churches, as mere slaunders, and procéeding from a minde ouercome with enuie, and contempt of other, I passe ouer, affirming still the same that is conteyned in mine Answere to the Admonition, the which you may wel snap and bite at in words, but in déede you shall neuer be able to steyne those places: and whatsoeuer you pretende to the vniuersities, yet your good will is as much towardes the one as it is towardes the other, they both depending vpon one thréede.
                     But if there be abuses in hir Maiesties Chappell (as you suppose) why haue you not sought the reformation thereof orderly? Why haue you sought it tumultuously? why haue you libelled agaynst it? why haue you sought it with spitefull wordes, with disquieting the Church, without all dutie and order?
                  
               
            
            
               The. 2. Diuision.
               
                  Admonition.
                  The seuentéenth. We should be to long to tell your honours of Cathedrall Churches, the dennes aforesayde of all loytering lubbers, where maister Deane▪ maistr Uicedeane, maister Canons, or maister Prebendaries the greater, maister pecie Canons, or Canons the lesser, maister Chauncelor of the Church, master Treasurer, or otherwise called Iudas the purse bearer, the chief Chauncer, Singing men speciall fauourers of religion, squeaking Queristers, Organ players, Gospellers, Pistellers▪ Pentioners, Readers, Uergers. &c. liue in great idlenesse, and haue theyr abyding. If you woulde knowe whence all these came, we can easily answere you, that they came from the Pope, as out of the Troian horses bellie, to the destruction of Gods kingdome. The Church of God neuer knew them, neither doth any reformed Church in the world know them.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 224. Sect. vlt. &. pag. 225. Sect. 1.
                     Here you speake both without the booke of common prayer and Scriptures also, for neyther are Cathedrall Churches conteyned in that booke, neither haue you any Scripture to proue that which you so impudently affirme.
                     God be thanked it is well knowne to those that be not with malice blinded, that Cathedrall Churches be furnished with godly, zealousLearned men in cathedrall Churches. and learned men. And that they be the chiefe and principall ornaments of this Realme, and next to the Uniuersities, chiefest mainteyners of godlynesse, religion and learning: there be some desire the spoyle of them, whose instruments you be: But I hope both theyr mouthes and yours also shall be first stopped with earth. Maister Deane, maister Uicedeane, maister Canons, &c. as much as they loyter, may thinke themselues fit to be compared with such as you are, in any respectes.
                  
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 164. Sect. 2.
                  And as for the reasons which M. Doctor bringeth to establish them, in the. 225. page as that they are necessarie (which he doth barely say) and that S. Augustine alloweth of a Deane, and that the Authours of the Admonition are instruments of those which desire the spoyle of them, and that a man may as well speake agaynst Uniuersities and Colleges, as ag
                        〈1 line〉
                     ynst them, I haue answered before, sauing that it is to be feared, that Colleges in Uniuersities (if M. Doctor may worke that which he goeth about) will shortly be in little better case, than those cathedrall Churches, which not only by his owne example, but with might & maine, and all indeuour possible, goeth about to fill and fraught with non residencies, and such as haue charges of Churches in other places, What will this slaundrous tongue spare
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                      which do no good in the vniuersitie, and partly are such as can do none, onely are pernicious examples of riotous feasting, and making great cheere with the prayes and spoyles whiche they bring out of the countrey, to the great hurt of the vniuersitie presently, and vtter ruine of it hereafter, vnlesse speedie remedie be therefore prouided.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     If I may work that which (you say I go about, I trust it shall be nothing that derogateth

either frō the glory of God, the honor of the Prince, the peace of the church, the cōmendation of the vniuersitie, or the encrease of godlinesse, & learning. I thank god I neither haue gone about any thing, nor intende to do, whereof I am either ashamedThe 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            the 
                              〈◊〉
                            hotte and 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           ter 
                              〈◊〉
                           . or afrayde to make mine accompt. But who séeth not your greefe? In déede I may not suffer those with whom I haue to do, to disquiet ye Uniuersitie or Colledge with false doctrine and schismaticall opinions: I may not suffer them openly to breake & contemne those lawes & statutes which they are sworne to obserue, and I to execute: I may not suffer any man against the expresse woordes of his othe, against all honestie and conscience to liue vnder me, least I be partaker of his periurie: these be the things that I haue done, and these be the thinges that I intende to do: whereby as hitherto I haue kepte the place where I am, in some quiet and good order, so do I trust to continue it, both to the glorie of God, the honour of the Prince, the great encrease of learning, the edifying of Christes Churche, and the commendation both of the Colledge and the whole Uniuersitie.
                     And howsoeuer you haue by woorde and writing sought to deface both me andThe colledge deliuered from the slanderous Replie. the Colledge: yea the whole vniuersitie for my sake (cōtrary to the expresse woordes of your othe, as I sayde in the beginning) yet are you in act and déede confuted, though I should not speake one woorde: for contrary to your expectatiō and practise of your instruments, and earnest desire of al that be factious, the Colledge was neuer in better quietnesse, neuer replenished with more towarde scholers, neuer fuller of students of all degrées (I speake it to Gods glory & to deliuer it frō your slaunders) than it is at this presente. A great occasion of all these blissinges of God (as instruments and meanes) is the grauitie, the honestie, the wisedome, the learning, the discrete gouernment of those, whom you call non residentes: whom not I but the noble founders statutes, ratified by the Quéenes Maiesties authoritie, and allowed of by the wysest of the realme, for moste iuste consideration, euen for the better gouernment of the Colledge, beyng otherwise full of youth, haue licensed (beyng in the number of the twelue preachers chosen according to statute) to continue in theyr felowships with one liuing besides, to a certayne valewe. If there were the like prouision in other places, and the same furnished with such kinde of men, the state of diuers Colledges in Cambridge, would not be so tumultuous, as it is.
                     Touching the parties themselues, agaynst whom you so bitterly whette yourThe fello
                              〈1 line〉
                            defended agaynst the poysoned tongue. tongue, vpon the same causes and quarrels you do agaynst me, this I will speake vnfeynedly, as I shall answere before God and the worlde: they are sober, honest, wyse, quiet men, faythfull and learned preachers, and that tyme of absence which is giuen vnto them by statute, they do carefully bestowe in their cures, and other places where there is néede, according to their duetie and conscience, except the necessarie gouernment of the Colledge, and publike vtilitie do constrayne them to the contrarie. The worste of them and he that is moste negligent, dothe more good in the Churche and common wealth, than you do, or any of your adherentes. I will not speake all that I might iustly, least I shoulde seeme to flatter, and in parte to commende my selfe: but this is the summe, none of vs refuse triall, eyther of lyfe, gouernment, learning, liuing, or what soeuer is to be requyred in the ministers of God, and dutifull subiectes towardes theyr Prince.
                     It is an egregious slaunder when you say, they be pernicious examples of riotous feastinges, &c. I know the contrary: and thinke not you, but God will take due punishment of this your notorious malice, vttered vpon priuate quarrell, as it is well knowne to al this societie. In déede they loue one an other, agree among themselues, obey lawes, kéepe order, labour to suppresse Schismes, and this is that, that whetteth your tongue, and the tongues of other disordered persons agaynst them. I could requite all these your harde speaches, if I were disposed to deale so maliciously: But I will temper my selfe, desiring God not to impute these things vnto you: the Reader I shall desire eyther to iudge the beste, or to suspende his iudgement vntill he haue the triall.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The. 3. Diuision.
               
                  Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 225. Sect. 2. 3.
                  You say all these come from the Pope, &c. It is not materiall frō whence they come, so they be good, profitable, & necessarie, for the mainteyning of religion, learning, wise & learned men: but I pray you from what Pope came they? or in what time did the Pope inuent them? I tolde you before that such places and Colledges were in AugustinesDeane allowed by S. Augustine. time, & that he both hath the name of M. Deane, and alloweth of his office. If you had redde any auncient learned Authors (as your writings declare you haue not) then shoulde you finde that Collegiate churches be of great antiquitie, euen since the yeare of our Lord. 235. But what can you speake agaynst Cathedrall churches, which you may not as well speake agaynst the Colledges in the vniuersities? They were not in the Apostles time neyther yet in the primitiueBarbarisme and confusion secretely intended. Church: must they therefore now be dissolued? your meaning is belike to bring all to confusion and barbarisme.
                  You say, no reformed church in the worlde knoweth them, wherein I thinke you speake more than you know. Can you name any reformed church that hath plucked them downe? Peraduenture in diuers places where the gospell is now preached, they had neuer such rewards for learning. But what haue we to do in such cases with other reformed churches? we haue to consider what is most meete for this church, and state: & not to follow other, as though we were children: I see no cause why other reformed churches should not rather follow vs, than we them, seing in no respect we be inferiour to them. Well, to conclude, your wordes be but vaine, and your proofes none at all: and therfore I doubt not but Cathedrall churches shall be able to withstande both your opprobrious speaches, & the greedinesse of all their aduersaries, so long as it shall please God to blesse this land with so vertuous & learned a Queene, & so wise and discrete counsellours.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 164. Sect. 2.
                  And where he sayth it is not materiall, although these Deanes, Uycedeanes, Canons, Petycanons, prebēdaries, &c. come from ye Pope, it is, as if he should say, that it skilleth not although they come out of ye bottomlesse pitte. For whatsoeuer cōmeth from the Pope which is Antichrist, commeth first from the Deuill: and where he addeth this condition (if it be good. &c.) in deede if of the egges of a Cokatrice can be made holesome meate to feede with, or of a spiders webbe any cloth to couer withall, then also may the things that come from the Pope & the Deuill, be good, profitable, and necessary vnto the church. And where he sayth that Collegiate churches are of great annciēcie, he proueth not the aunciencie of the Cathedrall churches, onlesse he proue that cathedrall and collegiate be all one. But I will not sticke with him in so small a matter, and if our controuersie were of the names of these churches, & not of the matter, I could be content to graunt his cause in this point as good as antiquitie without ye word of god (which is nothing but rottēnesse) could make it.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     This Replie neither answereth directly nor truly, to any thing yt I haue set down.Tract. 7. For first it is vntrue that all things cōming frō an Antichristian Pope, cōmeth first frō ye Deuill. I haue sufficiently proued ye contrary in that portion, where I speake ofGood thinges may come from euill mē. apparel of ministers: an euill man may do some thing that is good, euen as a good mā may do some thing that is euill: & as God doth worke ye good by ye one, so doth the Deuill worke ye euill by the other. Ethnikes haue made good lawes, they haue appointed stipendes & rewards for learning, & such other like good things, which are profitable & not to be reiected for the Authors sakes, though they were members of Satan.
                     
                        Secondly, it is vntrue that Cathedrall Churches came from the AntichristianCathe
                              〈1 line〉
                           ll churches before the Antichristi
                              〈1 line〉
                           l Popes. The 
                              〈◊〉
                            answereth not that which is demaunded. Pope: for I tolde you that they were in the yeare of our Lorde. 235. at what tyme the Bishops of Rome were godly men and Martyres.
                     Thirdly, you haue not answered my question, for I demaunded from what Pope they came or in what time they were firste inuented: And to this you say not one worde: wherfore in effect you haue answered nothing. If they be of so late a fundatiō, it must néedes appeare who was the firste inuentor of them: but if that can not he founde (as belike it can not) then must their antiquitie be very great.
                     Collegiate and Cathedrall Churches be all one, for any thing that I can reade to the contrarie: if it be not so, shewe the difference.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 4. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 164. Sect. 2.
                  But for so much as those auncient Collegiate churches were no more like vnto those whiche we haue now, than things most vnlike, our Cathedrall churches haue not so muche as this olde worne cloke of Antiquitie, to hide their nakednesse, & to keepe out the shower. For the Collegiate churches in times past were a Senate ecclesiastical, stāding of godly learned ministers and elders, which gouerned and watched ouer that flocke which was in ye citie or towne where such churches were, & for that in such great cities & townes commonly there were the most learned pastors & auncients, therfore the townes & villages rounde about in harde & difficuite causes, came and had their resolutions of their doubtes at their handes, euen as also the Lord commaunded in Deuteron
                        〈1 line〉
                     e,Deut. 17. that when there was any great matter in the countrie, which the Le
                        〈1 line〉
                     tes in matters perteyning to God, and the iudges in matters perteyning to the common wealth, could not discusse, that then they should come to Hierusalem, where there was a great number of Priests, Le
                        〈1 line〉
                     tes, and learned iudges, of whom they should haue their questions dissolued, and this was the first vse of Collegiate churches.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     True it is, that in times past there was in euery citie, 
                           Collegium presbyterorum cui
                           In euery citie a colledge of 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 
                           praeerat Episcopus, a Colledge of ministers ouer whom the Bishop bare rule, the which lerome calleth 
                           Senatum Ecclesiae, the Senate of the churche: and the same is now called a collegiate or Cathedrall churche. It is also euident that these Presbyteri, were all Priests, & that they with the Bishop had the deciding of al cōtrouersies in doctrine or ceremonies, & the directiō of diuers other matters in al those places that were vnder that citie, that is in all that shyre or Diocesse: & therfore sayeth M. Caluine (speakingInstitut. cap. 8. Sect. 52. of the primitiue church) Euery citie had a colledge of Seniors which were Pastors & Doctors, for they all had the office of preaching to the people, of exhorting, and of correcting, the which office S. Paule doth commit to Bishops: and this is that Seigniorie, wherof the auncient writers speake so much, & which you vntruly & without consideration say to haue bene in euery parish, and to consist as well of other as of Priests, & Ministers of the worde, and although that kinde of gouernment, which these churches had, is transferred to the Ciuill Magistrate, to whom it is due, and to such as by him are appointed, yet is it not so cleane blotted out, as you would make vs beleeue. ForOur Cathedral churches not much differing from those of auncient time. the Bishop who was then, and is now the chiefe of that colledge or Church, keepeth his authoritie still, & may if he please call to gither those ministers or Priestes of the Cathedrall Church to consult of such things as are expedient, & in diuers p
                           〈1 line〉
                        tes he can do nothing without them. Moreouer diuerse of the same churches, some 
                           〈◊〉
                         office, and some appointed by election, are bounde to attende vpon prouinciall 
                           〈◊〉
                        , so oft as the Archbishop at the cōmaundement of the Prince doth call the 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ame. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        wise they be places wherein are nourished for the most parte, the best, the wise
                           〈1 line〉
                        , the learnedst men of the Clergie in the lande, whiche not onely, in the respect of their soundnesse in religiō, profoundnesse in learning, diligēce in preaching, but wisedome also, experience, & dexteritie in gouerning, are not onely an ornament to the realme, profitable to the Churche, honour to the Prince: but also a stay from barbarisme, a bridle to sectes & heresies, & a bulwarke agaynst confusion. Wherefore as the vse ofThe hse of Cathedrall churches as necessarie now as afore 
                              〈◊〉
                           . them then, for those times & states was good and godly: so is the vse of them now in this age and state no lesse conuenient, godly, and necessarie, whiche you nor all your fautors shall euer be able to disproue.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The. 5. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 164. In the ende.
                  Afterwarde the honor whiche the smaller Churches gaue vnto them in asking them councell▪ they tooke vnto themselues, and that whiche they had by the curtesy and good will proceding of a reuerent estimation of them, they did not onely take vnto them of right, but also dispossessed them of all authority of hearing and determining any matters at all, And in the end they came to this which they are nowe, which is a company that haue strange names and strange offices, vnheard of of al the purer churches, of whom the greatest good that we can hope of is, that they do no harme. For although there be diuerse which do good, yet in respect that they be Deanes, Prebendaries▪ Canons, Petycanons, &c. for my parte I see no profite but hurte come to the church by them.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     All this is vntrue, and your owne enely imagination: for these Churches haue not encreased theyr authoritie, but diminished it rather, as it is euident. The namesTract. 8. Ca. 2. and offices vsed in them, I haue proued before in the title of Archbishops, &c. to be neyther straunge nor vnhearde of in the purer and auncient Churches. And though you sée no profite that commeth to the Churche by them, yet those that be quietly disposed in the Churche, those that haue a care for the good gouernment of the Church, those that haue not by any schisme deuided themselues from the Churche, sée great profite and singular commoditie.
                  
               
            
            
               The. 6. Diuision.
               
                  T. C. Pag. 165. Sect. 1. 2.
                  And where he sayeth they are rewardes of learning, in deede then they should be if they were conuerted vnto the maintenance and bringing vp of Schollers, where now for the most parte, they serue for fat morsels to fill (if might be) the greedy appetites of those, which otherwise haue enough to liue with, and for holes and dennes to keepe them in, which eyther are vnworthie to be kepce at the charge of the churche, or els whose presence is necessary and dutifull in other places, and for the most part vnprofitable there.
                  Last of all, whereas M. Doctor sayth that we haue not to follow other churches, but rather other churches to follow vs, I haue answered before: this onely I adde, that they were not counted only false Prophets which taught corrupt doctrine, but those whiche made the people of God beleeue, that they were happie when they were not, and that their estate was very good, when it was corrupt. Of the which kinde of false prophecie I say and Ieremy especially do complayne. And therefore vnlesse M. Doctor amend his speach, and leaue this crying, peace, peace, all is well, when there are so many things out of order, and that not by the iudgement of the Admonition and fauourers thereof onely, but euen of all whiche are not willingly blinde, I say if he do not amende these speaches, the crime of false prophecie will sitte closer vnto him, than he shall be euer able to shake of, in the terrible day of the Lorde.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     There muste be as well rewardes for those that haue spent much time in gettingThere muste be rewardes for learning already atteyned. learning, and be learned, as there muste be meanes to maynteyne men whiles they be in learning. Grammer schooles, and the Uniuersities serue for the one: and Cathedrall churches with such other preferments serue, for the other: spoyle the one and the other can not possibly stande. Your immodest and vncharitable speaches worke most discredite to your selfe.
                     That which I speake of other Churches by way of comparison, I speake for the truth of the doctrine, sincere administration of the Sacramentes, and all other poynts of Religion, by publike authoritie established in this Realme, wherein I say agayne, that there is no cause why it should giue place to any Churche that n
                           〈1 line〉
                        we is. And yet I do not defende the faultes of men, or other corruptions (from the which no Church is frée.) But for the cryme of false prophecie wherewith you charge me, I truste it be farre from me: I woulde pronenesse to contention, and vncharitable iudging▪ were as farre from you. Howbeit we both must stand or fall to our owne Lord: and therefore it is no good iudging before the time.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Of ciuill Officies in Ecclesiasticall persons. Tract. 23.
            
               A triall of the places alleaged by the Admonition, agaynst such ciuill offices as are exercised by Ecclesiasticall persons in this realme.
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 165. Sect. 3.
                     The places alleaged by the Admonition to prone that ministers of the church may not intermeddle with ciuill functions (one onely excepted) are well and fitly alleaged: and most of them vsed to that ende of writers, which if I should name, Lorde howe lowe would you throwe him downe. all would confesse, that they are such as with whom M. Doctor is not worthy to be so much as spoken of the same day.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte▪
                        
                        This is more than modestie would suffer, and tootoo outrageous: for whatsoeuer the worthinesse of these men is otherwise, yet am Ia minister of the woorde as well as they: I am a member of the Church of Christ as well as they: I am bought with his bloud as well as they: & therfore to say, that I am not worthie to be so much as spokē of the same day wherein they are named: is but extréeme immodestie, & passing contempt. There is not so much attributed to Iesus Christ: nor the Popes flatterers, did neuer so excessiuely extoll him. Are they so woorthie that a man may not be spoken of the same day that they are named? who be they trowe we, or what is their names? But belike you are afrayde to name them, least by speaking of me the same day you shoulde do vnto them some great dishonour: in your iudgement they are better than God himselfe, for the simplest that is may be named the same day that God is. In déede a pretie cloake to couer your vayne bragging, for I thinke you woulde haue named them, if you had knowne them. But to the matter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     Admonition.
                     Moreouer, in that they haue (Luc. 9. 60. 61. Luc. 12. 14. Rom. 12. 7. 1. Tim. 6. 11 2. Tim. 2. 3. 4. Bishops pri sōs popishe, Eugenius the firste bringer of them in. ciuill offices ioyned to the Ecclesiasticall, it is agaynst the worde of God. As for an Archbishop to be a Lorde president, a Lord Bishop to be a Countie Palatine, a prelate of the Garter, who hath much to do at S▪ Georges feast when the Bible is caried before the Procession in the crosses place, a Iustice of peace, or Iustice of Quorum, an high Commissioner. &c. And therfore they haue their prysons, as Clinkes, G
                           〈1 line〉
                        t: houses, Colehouses, towres and 
                           〈1 line〉
                        astles, which is also agaynst the Scriptures. This is not to haue keyes but swordes, and playne tokens they are, that they exercise that which they would so fayne seeme to wante, I meane dominion ouer theyr brethren.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 214. Sect. 2.
                        To proue that ciuill offices ioyned to the Ecclesiasticall is against the worde of God, first you note Luke. 9. verse. 60. 61. where it is thus writtē. And Iesus sayd vnto him, let the dead burie the dead, but go thou and preach the kingdome of God. Then an other sayd I wil follow thee Lord, but let me first go bid them farevvell vvhich are at my house. How conclude you any thing of these places against ciuill offices in Ecclesiastical persons? Christs meaning in this place is to teache vs (I meane all Christians) that when he calleth vs, we ought not to be hindred from following (and that forthwith) by any excuse of doing dutie towards our friends, or respect of worldly commoditie, or for feare of any payne or trouble, and this is spoken generally to all Christians, and not alone to any one kinde of men.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 165. Sect. 4.
                     For the first place if so be that the minister ought rather to leaue necessarie duties of burying9. Lu
                              〈1 line〉
                           . his father, and saluting his friendes vndone, than that he shoulde not accomplishe his ministerie to the full, much more he ought not to take vpon him those things, which are not onely not necessarie dueties, but as it shall appeare, do in no case belong vnto him. And although it may be applied to all Christians, yet it doth most properly belong vnto the ministers.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is no answere to that which I haue sayde: for I say that the meaning of Christ in this place is, that when we are called to eternall life by him we ought not to protracte the time, nor to séeke any delayes, but leaue all and follow him: this is the meaning of Christ, & this is the summe of my Answere: and to this you say nothing: but make a new collection, that the minister ought rather to leaue necessarie duties of burying his father. &c. which (though it be not the direct sense of this place) yet I graunt it to be true: for such ciuill offices as I allow in Ecclesiasticall persons are helpes for them to do their duties. Wherefore as this place is vnaptly applied by the Admonition, so is it vnanswered by you, & it may as well be vsed to debarre anyother Christians from ciuill functions, as ministers of the woorde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 215. Sect. 1..
                     Secondly, for the same purpose you vse Luke. 12. verse. 14. where Christ speaking to him that sayde vnto him, Master bid my brother deuide the inheritance vvith me, answereth on this sorte, Man vvho made me a iudge or a deuider ouer you? Christ came in deede to be iudged, & not to iudge, he came to worke the worke of our redemption, not to decide controuersies touching landes and possessions. But will you therfore take from Christian men authoritie to iudge? for this exāple of Christ can no more be applied to Bishops than it may be to kings, bicause the doings of Christ is a patterne for all Christians, and yet Christians may iudge matters, and decide controuersies amongst their brethren. Looke. 1. Cor. 6. The Anabaptists vse this text for oneArgument of the Anabaptistes confuted. of their reasons to condemne magistratie among Christians: & therfore a very learned and late writer, in his exposition of this place, writeth thus: 
                           Hinc colligitur quantopere insaniant, qui ex hoc loco magistratum inter Christianos damnant: nam Christus non argumentatur à re ipsa, tanquàm profana sit, sed à vocatione sua, quòd missus sit in alium finem, tametsi res erat per se satis sancta & pia. Hereof may it be gathered, hovv greatly they dote vvhich condemne magistrates amongst Christians by this place, for Christe doth not reason of the thing it selfe, as though it vvere profane, but of his ovvne vocation, bicause he vvas sent to an other ende, although the thing of it selfe is holy and good.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 155. Sect. 4. & vlt.
                     And as for the other place of Luke touching our sauiour Christes refusall to deuide the inheritaunce12. Luke. betwene the brethren, it is moste aptly alleaged to this purpose. For although our sauiour Christ doth not there take away from men authoritie to iudge, yet he sheweth thereby sufficiently, that it belongeth not vnto the ministers of the worde, to entermeddle in ye iudgement of ciuil causes. For our sauiour Christ framed that answere hauing respect to the boundes of his calling.
                     For as he beyng minister of the Gospell did all those things which were perteyning to his ministerie: so by refusing this office of iudgement in ciuill causes, he gaue to vnderstand, that it did not appertayne vnto the compasse of that office, which he exercised, which was ye ministerie. And therefore it is altogether out of season that M. Doctor here alleageth, that ye Anabaptistes vse this reason to proue that Christians may not haue magistrates. For howe doth this follow, that bycause this place of S. Luke proueth not, that we ought to haue no Christian magistrates, that therfore it proueth not, that the minister should be no magistrate, as if there could be no ciuill magistrates, onlesse ministers of the worde were. And the place which he alleageth out of the learned man, doth not only, not make any thing for him, but doth quite ouerthrow his cause. For he sayth that our sauiour Christ did not refuse this as a thing in it selfe vnlawfull, but bycause it did not agree with his vocation. Now the vocation of our sauiour Christ, was to be a minister of the Gospell, therefore it doth not agree with the vocation of a minister of the gospell to iudge or to intermedle in ciuill gouernment. And if M. Doctor had bene so studious of M. Caluins workes, as by his often4. Lib. Inscit. 11. cap. allegation of him, he would make the world beleue, he might haue redde in him this sentence cited for this purpose, to proue that the ministers haue not to do in ciuill thinges.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Neyther do you héere replie to my Answere, for I tolde you that Christ came to be iudged, not to iudge in matters of lands and possessions: I tolde you likewise that this example of Christ perteyneth no more to Bishops than it dothe to Kings, and therefore can no fitlyer be by you applied agaynst Bishops, than by the Anabaptistes agaynst Christian Magistrates. To all this in effect you haue sayde nothing. Your owne collection is soone answered. Fyrst, no man giueth to Bishops authoritie to iudge in matters of inheritance, for suche controuersies are to be decided by lawe, whiche hath other Iudges appoynted for it. Secondly, Christ spake this to declare that his kingdome was not of this worlde, but of the worlde to come, not earthly, but heauenly, not temporall, but eternall: and therefore he spake it touching his owne person onely, and not as a rule perteyning to other Christians. as the Anabaptists feyne. Thirdly, the authoritie in ciuill matters that is committed to ministers inCiuill offices in our ministers tende to ye gouernment of the church. this Churche, is committed vnto them by the Prince, for the better gouernment of the Churche, and the fuller satisfying of their duetie, consisting for the moste parte onely in punishing and correcting sinne. And lastly, it is not made a thing incident to the ministerie, or as parte of that office, but it is added as profitable, conuenient, and necessarie for the present state of the Churche, and fuller accomplishing of the ministers duetie.
                        I haue tolde you in my Answere to the Admonition, that this example of Christ dothe no more perteyne vnto Bishops, than to other Christians (whiche béeing true and vnconfuted by you) then dothe it followe that the Anabaptistes maye aswell alleage it agaynst other Christians, as you maye doe agaynst Bishops or Ministers.
                        The learned mans interpretation dothe well agrée with my cause: for Christ refused it, bicause he came to be iudged, and to suffer death, for the redemption of the world, which is the vocation that this learned man speaketh of, and is onely proper to Christ. I denie not but that M. Caluine may apply this texte to that purpose, but M. Caluine dothe expounde him selfe, writing vpon this same place, when he saythe, that euery man must respect his owne vocation, & quid illi sit aptum, and what is meete for it. Nowe the ciuill authoritie that Ecclesiasticall persons haue in this Churche, is meete for theer vocation: And therefore M. Caluine speaketh nothing agaynst it. In the same booke & chapter, he alleageth these words of Bernarde▪
                            whiche he writeth to Pope Eugenius of this matter: 
                              Ergo in criminibus non in possessionibus potestas vestra. &c. VVherefore your power is in offences, not in possessions. And this conclusion he bringeth in vpon the wordes of S. Luke chapter. 12.
                        I would not, as I sayde before, haue Bishops Iudges in controuersies of enheritance,Wherein the Bishops authoritie consisteth. I doe not affirme that they may in the right of their ministerie, chalenge any ciuill authoritie, as the Bishop of Rome dothe. But forasmuche as the authoritie is 
                              in Criminibus, in offences, as Bernarde sayth, therfore if it please the Prince to giue it them, they may lawfully execute so muche authoritie ciuill, as shall further and helpe them in suppressing sinne. And this is agaynst nothing that M. Caluine hathe sayde. For M. Caluine and other learned wryters of this age, doe vse this place of S. Luke and suche like, agaynst the vsurpation of Romishe Bishops, chalenging suche authoritie in ciuill matters as due vnto them, Iure diuino, and so placing them selues in Princes offices, dyd estéeme all their duetie towardes the Churche to consist therein, and dyd nothing else perteyning to the office of a Bishop. As for the authoritie that our Bishops haue in suche matters, I thinke that neyther M. Caluine, nor any other godly man can disallowe of it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 215. Sect. 2.
                     In the thirde place you alleage Rom. 12. verse. 7. He that hathe an
                        
                        office, let him vvayte on his office, or he that teacheth, on teaching. What is this to the purpose? He that hath an office, muste attende vpon his office, and he that teacheth, on teaching, therefore Bishops mayThe Bishop gouerneth aswell by discipline as by preaching. not haue ciuill offices. The office of a Bishop is aswell to gouerne by discipline, as by preaching: this is a very simple argument.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 166. Lin. 9.
                     Furthermore M. Doctor asketh what S. Paules place to the Romanes (where he wylleth12. Rom. that he which hath an office, must wayte of that office, he that teacheth of his teaching) maketh to this purpose. Surely M. Doctor very muche. Neyther can there be a place more properlyI
                              〈1 line〉
                            is certen that diuers of these gifts mentioned Rom. 12. (as teaching and exhor ting) maye concu
                              〈1 line〉
                           re in one mā, so that he maye be apt for diuers functions: neyther dothe the Apostle there tye one man to one gifte or function onely. alleaged, bothe for the very playnenesse of the wordes, and also for the circumstance of the place. For Saincte Paule speaketh there agaynst those, whiche woulde ouerreache their callinges, and hauing certayne callinges, contented not them selues with them, but woulde haue an oare in euery mans boate, and would take more vpon them than they were able to doe, or the measure of their giftes woulde stretche vnto. And therefore sheweth that as the body is beste preserued when euery member thereof dothe his office, and destroyed when one member wyll take vpon it to doe the office of an other: so the Church is then best gouerned, when euery ecclesiasticall person keepeth him selfe within the limits of his calling, not medling with that whiche perteyneth vnto an other. But M. Doctor sayth, that the bishop gouerneth as well by discipline, as by preaching: so he dothe. But I pray you by what discipline? what a reason is this, he gouerneth by discipline, Ergo by ciuill discipline. You say in the next sentence, that the authors of the Admonition eyther dote or dreame. But if these be your sharpe disputations when you are awake, surely they are very blunt when you dreame. But I had rather iudge the best, that M. Doctor was ouerwatched.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely M. T. C. it maketh nothing at all to that purpose, neyther doth S. Paul speake it to that ende: but he speaketh it to moue euery one diligently and truely to walke in his vocation and calling, and therfore in the same place he sayth, qui praeest in diligentia: and as I haue tolde you, this ciuill authoritie that I speake of, is not claymed, but committed: is no hinderance, but an helpe to the ecclesiasticall function.Ciuill authoritie not claymed, but commi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ted to our Bishops. Neyther is this to vsurpe any other mans vocation, but duetifully to vse that office that is giuen vnto vs by the Prince, to helpe vs forwarde in our owne vocation, and calling.
                        An ecclesiasticall Pastor must vse that discipline that is appoynted vnto him by the Magistrate and orders of that Church whereof he is minister, be it ciuil or ecclesiasticall, so that if the kinde of discipline vsed in that Church be ciuill, as it is in thys Church for diuers crymes, then dothe he gouerne by ciuill discipline, and the argument is good, neyther will you be able to answere it when you are best awake, howsoeuer I made it in my dreame, or béeing ouer watched.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 216. Sect. 1.
                     Fourthly, you cite. 1. Tim. 6. verse. 11. But thou O man of God, fleeA place alleaged to no purpose. these things, and follovve after righteousnesse, godlynesse, fayth, loue, patience, and meekenesse Truely I thinke you dote, or else dreame, your applications of scripture be so straunge. What speaketh Paule heere agaynst ciuill offices in ecclesiasticall persons? He only willeth them in the person of Tim. to flee couetousnesse, and to followe ryghteousnesse. &c.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     This it that place that T. C. confesseth to be alleaged to no purpose: and therefore héere they are left to answere for thēselues, as they be in the most of their quotations.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 216. Sect. 2. 3.
                     The last text heere quoted is the. 2. Tim. 2. verse. 3. 4. Thou thereforeExpos
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ion of 2. Tim. 2. 3. 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                            suffer affliction as a good souldiour of Iesus Christ: no man that vvarreth entangleth him selfe vvith the affayres of this life, bicause he vvould please hym that hath chosen him to be a souldiour. This latter sentence is generall, and perteyneth to all men. The meaning is this, whosoeuer would be a souldiour vnder Christ, muste leaue all worldly things, and followe him. It speaketh nothing eyther of ciuill or ecclesiasticall offices. For if you will knowe what he there meaneth by the affayres of this life, heare what M. Caluine sayth, writingCaluine vpon that place: 
                           per negotia vitae intelligit familiae administr 
                                 〈◊〉
                               cur
                                 〈1 line〉
                               & 
                                 〈◊〉
                               occupationes: By the affayres of this life he vnderstandeth the care of gouerning his familie, and other ordinary businesse.
                     
                     If you will learne howe this place is to be applyed, the same M.
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            Caluine teacheth you like wise in these wordes following: 
                           Nunc applicanda est comparatio ad rem praesentem, quod quisquis vult sub Christo mil t
                                 〈1 line〉
                              e, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               relictis omnibus mundi tricis & auocamentis se illi totum sua
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               studia addi
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ere: Novve this comparation is to be applied to the present purpose, that vvhosoeuer vvill playe the vvarriour vnder Christe, leauing all vvorldely matters and impediments, muste giue him selfe vvholly vnto him. This therefore is genetall, and perteyneth to all Christians, but chiefly and especially to the ministers of the worde, who maye not occupie them selues in worldly businesse, as other men do: that is, they muste not be marchaunts, husbandmen, craftes men, or hinder their vocation withSome ciuill offices rather helpes than hinderances to the 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            a Bishop. suche lyke worldly affayres. As for suche ciuill offices as be committed to them, they be rather helpes to their vocation, than impediments: for the office of a Iustice of peace, of an highe Commissioner, and suche like, is to punishe vice and iniquitie, to see good order kepte in the common wealth, aswell in matters touching religion, as other common and publike businesse. Wherefore as these offices be not meere ciuill, but partely ecclesiasticall, and be for discipline and correction of sinnes: so in my opinion they be most meete to be committed to some of the wysest and best of the Cleargie, to the ende that suche as by the word will not, by conuenient dyscipline may be cōpelled to do their dueties. Neyther are such offices to be accounted worldly affayres, but rather heauenly and spirituall, forasmuche as they serue to the mayntenance of religion and godlynesse, and to the suppressing of sinne and wickednesse. If it be true that Augustine sayth: Seruiunt Reges Christo, leges ferendo pro Christo. It is also true, Seruiunt Episcopi Christo, leges exequendo pro Christo.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 166. in the midst.
                     The last place whych is alleaged by the Admonition, is out of the Epistle to Tim. where it sheweth, that for so muche as the state of a minister, is as that of a souldiour, and therefore as the2. Epist. 2. souldiour, to the ende he might the better please his captayne, and doe his seruice of warfare, quitteth all those things whych he loueth, and wherof otherwyfe he might haue care, and might enio
                           〈1 line〉
                         euen so the minister ought to dispatche him selfe, of all those things, whiche maye be any let to the office of his ministerie, although he might otherwyse lawfully vse them. And if so be for the performing

of the ministerie to the full, he must quite those things whiche he may lawfully vse, howe muche more might the Admonition conclude, that he ought not to entangle him selfe with those things, which (out of the places of S. Luke, and to the Romaines) it had shewed to be vnlawfull for him to meddle with? And although M. Doctor say the sentence be generall, yet it is particularly ment, and most properly of the ministers, which M. Caluine teacheth M. Doctor in the same place, where he hath cited his authoritie twice to no purpose. For what althoughe M. Caluine doe not there apply in prescript words this sentence to proue that ministers ought not to meddle with ciuill offices, dothe it followe therfore that this place can not be vsed thereto? In saying that he ought to abstayne from all lets which may hinder his vocation and ministerie, he doth consequently say, that he ought to abstayne from all ciuill offyces, and if so be M. Doctor had beene so well read in the auncient Doctors (as he would seeme) he might haue knowne that this place is vsed of Cyprian to the same purpose that it is alleaged heere. For Cyprian speaking agaynst an Elder which9. Epist. 1. lib. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . had taken vpon him to be executor to one whiche was dead, alleageth this place.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        That whiche is spoken of a souldiour perteyneth to all Christians as well as to a minister: for euery Christian man is a souldiour: these ciuill functions be helpes to the ministerie, and may be lawfully vsed as I haue sayde before. M. Caluine truely interpreteth the place, and his interpretation maketh fully for my purpose, and directly agaynst you, as the Reader may easily perceyue, so that your many words are soone with this breuitie answered.
                        Cyprian alleageth the place to good purpose: for to be an executor is a troublesome matter, and dothe oftentimes hinder men from their other callings, so that somtimes euen temporall men (as we call them) doe auoyde the same for the trouble that thervpon commonly ensueth: And yet I doubt whether you woulde refuse to be an executor, or no, if it were offered vnto you by some: neyther doe I thinke it vnlawfull, so that the troublesomnesse of it be not too much, and an hinderance in déede to weightier matters.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 166. tovvards the ende.
                     To these reasons of the Admonition, may be added that whych the Admonition hath in the. 230. page, that the regiment of the Church is spirituall, and respecteth the conscience, and therefore hath not to doe wyth ciuill offices, which respect properly the common wealth, and the outwarde, godly, honest, and quiec behauiour. And therfore their meanyng is, that as the ciuill gouernour dothe vse suche kynde of punishmente as may brydle the outwarde man, and holde hym that he dare not offende in the open breache of that godlynesse, honestie, and quietnesse which S. Paule commendeth1. Tim. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . vnto vs: so the ecclesiasticall regiment dothe vse that kynde of discipline, whereby the conscience and inwarde man may be kepte in that wylling obedience vnto Gods commaundement, touching a godly, honest, and quiet lyfe.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The gouernment of the Church in the respect of Christ, whiche by his holy spirite ruleth in the heart and conscience of man, is onely spirituall: but it is not so in the respect of the visible Churche, and earthly members, and ministers of the same: for then must you of necessitie shut out the ciuill Magistrate from all kind of gouernmēt in the Church, which is the matter you shoote at, cloake it as muche as you can. But of the regiment of the Churche, and of the vntruthe of this your assertion I haue spoken before: and speake of it also in that which followeth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 230. Sect. 1. 3.
                     You byd vs in the margent (to proue that the regiment of the Church should be spiritual) reade Ephe. 1. verse. 23. 1. Thes. 5. verse. 13. 1. Tim 5. verse. 2. Heb. 10. verse. 30.
                     
                        In the. 1. Thes. 5. the Apostle beseecheth them to loue suche for their vvorkes sake, as labour among them, are ouer them in the Lord, and admonishe them. What argument call you this? S. Paule mou
                           〈1 line〉
                        s the Thes. to loue their Pastors: Ergo, the gouernment of the Church is onely spirituall.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 166. in the ende.
                     And to note the distinction of these regiments ciuill and spirituall, the place vnto the Thessal.1. Thes. 5. is well alleaged: for by the words (such as rule ouer you in the Lorde) the Apostle dothe put a difference betweene the ciuil & ecclesiastical regiment. For albeit that godly ciuill Magistrates do rule ouer vs in the Lorde, yet S. Paule 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         that is, by excellencie, ascribeth that vnto the ecclesiasticall gouernours, bicause that wheras the ciuill Magistrate, beside his care for the saluation of the soules of his people, is occupied, in procuring also the wealthe and quietnesse of thys lyfe: the ecclesiasticall gouernours haue all their whole care set vpon that onely, whych perteyneth to the lyfe to come.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        True it is that the ciuill gouernment is distinguished from the ecclesiastical: but there is some thing common to them both, as these ciuill offices wherof we speake.
                        The place to the Thes. which the Authors of the Admonition vse, pag. 227. to proue that the gouernment of the Churche ought to be spirituall, can not be vsed to make any distinction betwixt ciuill and ecclesiasticall gouernment. For by your owne confession this portion (are ouer you in the Lord) which you would haue to make this distinction, is aswell spoken of the ciuill Magistrate, as it is of the Pastor, and so it is in déede, and therfore this text is abused both by them and you. The Apostle vseth the same maner of spéeche; speaking of the obedience of wiues towards their husbands, 
                              Vxores subditae estote proprijs viris, sicuti decet in Domino: VViues be subiect vnto your owneCol. 3. husbands, as it behoueth you in the Lord. And yet you will not say that the gouernment of the husbande ouer his wife is onely spirituall. And therefore howsoeuer you 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ally out the matter, with saying that S. Paule heere 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            ascribeth this vnto the ecclesiasticall gouernours, yet it will not serue your turne, for he ascribeth it also to those that be ciuill. The ecclesiasticall gouernours haue all their whole care set vpon that onely whych perteyneth to the lyfe to come: True it is, and to the same ende ten
                              〈1 line〉
                           eth the ciuill gouernment which they doe exercise, as I haue tolde you before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 230. Sect. 4.
                     In the. 1. Tim. 5. verse. 2. he willeth Timothie to exhorte the elder vvomen as mothers, the yonger as sisters: whervpon you conclude thus: Elder women must be exhorted as mothers, the yonger as systers, with al purenesse: Ergo, the gouernmēt of ye church must be spirituall.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 167. Lin. 5.
                     And to this ende also is alleaged by the Admonition the place of Tim. wherein the Apostle teacheth1. Tim. 5. part of the ecclesiasticall discipline, whych the minister may vse, to consist in reprehensions and rebukes, which must be tempered according as the estate and age of euery one doth require. Their meaning is not (as M. Doctor doth vntruely surmise) to shut out the ciuil Magistrate, or to debarre him of punishing the wicked, but that it apperteyneth not vnto the ministers to deale that wayes, whose correction of faults lyeth partly in reprehensions and admonitions, which he speaketh of there, partly in excommunication, whereof is spoken before.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        But how ap
                              〈1 line〉
                           ly this place is alleaged to this end, euery child may vnderstand. For what a collection call you this. S. Paule willeth Tim, to exhorte the elder women as mothers, the yonger as sisters, therfore the regiment of the Church is only spiritual, & an ecclesiasticall person may not intermeddle with any kind of ciuil affayres? one Christian man must exhort an other, & reproue an other also, as occasion requireth, therefore he may not execute any ciuil office: the reason is al one. Your defense of this place is very slender, and you might with as muche credite to them haue passed it ouer, as you haue done diuers other.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 1. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 230. Sect. 2.
                     In the place to the Ephes. the Apostle sayth, that God hathe appoynted Christ to be the head of the Churche, vvhiche is his body, euen the fulnesse of him that filleth all in all things. Here we learne that ChristSpirituall go uernment taketh not away ciuill Magistracie. is the head of the Churche: but howe proues this that the gouernment of the Churche is onely spirituall? Will you heereby take away ciuill Magistrates, and other gouernoures that God hathe placed in his Churche? It is subtilly done of you to quote the places onely, and not to apply them, nor to conclude of them: for surely if you had layde downe the words, and applyed them to your purpose, not wyse and learned onely, but very children woulde haue laughed you to scorne.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 167. Lin. 12.
                     Further touching the place of the Ephes. for so muche as our sauiour Christ as he is head of his Church, is the spirituall gouernour thereof, it is meete that their gouernment which are appoynted vnderneath him, as he is head, should be likewise spirituall, as his is. For as for the cyuil1. Cor. 11. Magistrate, although he be appoynted of Chryst (as he is God) in whyche respecte there is none aboue Christ, yet he is not appoynted of hym, in respect that he is head of the Churche, in regarde whereof God is aboue Christ, and as the Apostle sayth, the head of him.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Christ is the head of the Churche, and spiritually gouerneth the same in the conscience,The gouernment of the Church is not only spiritual but bicause it hath also an outwarde and visible forme, therefore it requireth an outwarde and visible gouernment, whiche Christ dothe execute aswell by the ciuill Magistrate, as he dothe by the ecclesiasticall minister, and therefore the gouernment of the Churche, in the respect of the externall and visible forme of it, is not onely spirituall. Christ gouerneth by him selfe spiritually onely, and by his ministers bothe spiritually and externally, and therefore your reason is nothing. But why doe you not answere in this place, to that which I charge them with, touching the ciuillT. C. content to passe 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              y the ab
                                 〈1 line〉
                              dging of ciuill autho
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Magistrate? In the former place where I spake no suche thing, you sayde that I vntruely surmised, that they shut out the ciuill Magistrate from punishing the wycked: But héere when I charge them, that by their application of this place, they take away ciuill Magistrates and other gouernours, that God hath placed in his Churche, you answere not one worde. In déede bothe you and they by your false interpretations of this and such lyke places, doe altogither seclude the ciuill Magistrate, from any gouernment of the Churche, and in effect say with the Papistes, that he dothe gouerne as he is man, and not as he is a Christian, and that he gouerneth men in that they be men, and not in that they be Christian men: which may well be spoken of the Turke, hauing Christians subiect vnder him: but it is wickednesse to thinke it of a Christian Magistrate, and it dothe not muche differ from the opinion of the Anabaptistes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 1. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 230. Sect. 5. 6. & Pag. 231. Sect. 1.
                     
                        In the. 10. Hebr. verse. 30. it is thus written: For vve knovve hym that hath sayde, vengeance belongeth vnto me, I vvill recompence sayth the Lorde. And agayne: The Lorde shall iudge his people.
                     
                        Uengeance belongeth to God, and he shall iudge his people: Ergo, the gouernment of the Church must be spirituall.Fonde arguments, and to no purpose.
                     
                     I am ashamed of these reasons, and so will you be likewise, if you be not past shame. If you meane that the gouernment of the Church is spirituall, bicause God by his spirite, gyftes, and ministerie of hys worde dothe gouerne it, you saye truely, although these places be vnaptly alleaged: but if you meane, that therefore there neede no ciuill Magistrates, no ciuill and politike lawes, no externall discipline, no outwarde ceremonies and orders, you are greatly deceyued, and ioyne with the Anabaptistes, whose errour in that poynt is sufficiently by dyuers learned men confuted. And therefore I will not as yet intermeddle therewith, vntill I vnderstande further of your meaning.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is lefte vnanswered.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The reasons which T. C. vseth agaynst ciuill offices in ecclesiasticall persons, examined.
               
                  Chap. 2. the first Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 167. Sect. 1.
                     Nowe that I haue shewed that the places quoted by the Admonition, are for the most parte to the purpose of that they be quoted for, I wil adde a reason or two to this purpose, before I come to answere to those reasons which are brought by M. Doctor. Here I must desire the Reader to remember (which I sayde before, when I spake agaynst non residencie) the multitude & difficultie of those things which are required of the minister of the word of God. And withal I wil leaue to the consideration of euery one, the great infirmitie and weaknesse which is in men, both the which considerations set togither, it will easily appeare howe vnmeete a thing it is, that the minister shoulde haue any other charge layde vpon him, seeing that it beeing so weightie an office, as wyll require all the giftes he hath, be they neuer so great, it must needes fall out, that so muche as he dothe man other calling, so muche he leaueth vndone in this.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Reader may easily iudge howe fitly they were alleaged, in that they néeded your commentarie to teache the application of them, which otherwyse woulde haue asked some cunning to make them to serue the turne. But as the places be vnfitly quoted by them, so are they in déede as slenderly defended by you: as may appeare in your Replyes, and my Answeres.
                        Your first argumēt why ecclesiastical persons may not exercise ciuil offices is this: The multitude and difficultie of those things whych are required of the minister, are suche, and the weaknesse and infirmitie of man so great, that the minister can not execute any other offyces. &c. This had some likelyhoode in it, if the minister should execute any office contrarie or repugnant to his ecclesiasticall function. But séeing I haue before declared that such ciuill offices as be nowe committed to Bishops, and other of the Cleargie, be necessarie helpes to their other callings, and moste profitable for the good and quiet gouernment of the Churche, this argument of it selfe falleth to the grounde. But why may you not as well reason thus? the multitude and greatnesse of those things that are required of a Christian, be suche, and the infirmitie and frayltie of man so great, that if he did nothing but giue him selfe to spirituall meditation, and neuer meddle with worldly affayres, he were not able to doe his full duetie: therefore no Christian man may practise any suche thing, or meddle in worldly and ciuill matters. This argument is the roote of Anabaptisme.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 167. in the midst.
                     And what the hande of man is able to reache heerein, it is to be considered in the Apostles, whome if the office of the ministerie dyd so wholly occupie and set a worke, that they could admitte no other charge with it, yea and were fayne to cast of that whych they had, it is cleare that none of those which lyue nowe can beside that function, admit any other publike calling. The story is knowne in the Acts, that the Apostles euen during the tune that they kept togither at Ierusalem,Act. 6. and taught the Churche there, were fayne, that they might the better attende vnto preaching and praying (by which two thyngs S. Luke summarily setteth foorth the office of the ministerie) to giue ouer the charge of prouiding for the poore vnto others, bycause they were not able to do both. Now for so much as the Apostles endued with suche giftes as none haue beene since, or shall be hereafter, could not discharge togither with the office of the minister that also of the Deacon, howe shoulde any man be founde, that togither with that office, can discharge the office of a ciuill Magistrate? And if the Apostles would not haue the office of a Deacon, whiche was ecclesiasticall, and therefore of the same kynde with the ministerie ioyned vnto it, howe muche lesse wyll they suffer that the ministerie should be ioyned with a ciuill offyce, and therefore of an other kynde? For reason teacheth that there is an easier mingling of those whych are of one kynde, than of those whiche are of dyuers kyndes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is euident that the Apostles, from the ascention of Christ into heauen vntillWhy the Apo stles left of the Deaconship. Caluine.
                            this time, did execute both the office of the Apostles, and the office of Deacons also. Wherby it is manyfest that these offices may at sometimes méete togither in one, and the selfe same person. And M. Caluine vpon the. 6. of the Actes sayth: That they dyd not altogither caste off this care for the poore, sed leuationem quaesijsse vt suo muneri intenti esse possent, but that they sought an easing thereof, that they might be intentiue vnto their offyce. The causes therfore that moued the Apostles to leaue off from executing the one, that is, the Deaconship, is to be considered. One cause was, the great encrease of the number of Christians, whiche was nowe growne to suche a multitude, that the Apostles coulde not well both make prouision for the poore, and gyue them selues also bothe to preaching and praying.
                        An other cause was the murmuring and grudging of the Gretians, who thought that the Apostles had more regarde to prouide for their owne countrey men the Iewes, than for the Erecians béeing straungers vnto them. Wherefore the Apostles béeing willing to eschewe this grudging and repyning, dyd for auoyding the suspition of partialitie, will the whole multitude to choose them Deacons: and both those causes be expressed in the beginning of the. 6. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           hapter of the Acts.
                        The thirde cause was, for that the Apostles knewe, that they shoulde shortly be dispersed, and that their office was to goe from place to place, to plant Churches, and preache the Gospell, so that they coulde not nowe execute the office of Deacons, as they dyd whilest they remayned togither.
                        This beeing so (as it can not be denied) there can be no likely argument gathered of this place, that ecclesiasticall persons may not haue some kinde of ciuill functions. And if a man well consider howe busie and troublesome an office the Deaconship was at that tyme (the Churche béeing in persecution, and the number of poore great) he shall easily perceyue, that there is no comparison betwixt the troublesomnesse of that office then, and the ciuill offices nowe committed to ecclesiastical persons, which be so farre from hindering their ecclesiasticall functions, that they worke the cleane contrarie effect. And yet it is certayne, that the Apostle S. Paule, and Titus, with Luke, or as some thinke, Barnabas, did togither with the office of preaching, make collections for the poore. 2. Corinth. 8.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 167. somvvhat tovvards the ende.
                     Agayne, how can we iustly reproue the Papistes for the vse of bothe the swords, spirituall an
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        
materiall, when as we are founde in the same faulte our selues? And surely howsoeuer long custome hath caused it to seeme, yet in deede it is a very great and vntollerable confusion, which may be the easelyer vnderstanded, if so be we set before our eyes, how vncomely and disordered it is, in the like, or rather in the very same case. For let vs imaginethe Ma
                           〈1 line〉
                        or or Bayliue of a towne, or the King or Emperour of the lande, to come into the pulpit and make a sermon, afterwarde to minister the sacraments, and from the Churche to goe with the scepter in his hande vnto the place of iudgement: who would not be amased to see this, and wonder at it, as at a s
                           〈1 line〉
                        aūge and monstrous light? assuredly the self same deformitie it is, when as the minister of the word is made a Iustice of peace, of Quorum, a Commissioner, an Earle, or any suche like, to whom the iudgement of matters perteyning to the court of the ciuill Magistrate is committed, especially seeing there are God be 
                           〈1 line〉
                        raysed) of the Nobilitie and Gentrie of this realme, that are able to discharge these offices much better, than those ecclesiasticall persons to whome they are committed.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Bishop of Rome doth chalenge vnto him selfe the whole power and authoritieThe ciuill iurisdiction that the Pope 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ay meth, not lyke to that in vse in this church of the ciuill Magistrate, and that (as he sayth) by the word of God. He baasteth that temporall Princes haue their authoritie from him: and that it is in his power bothe to displace and place them. This we vtterly and most iustly condemne: but that iurisdiction ciuill that we allowe in ecclesiasticall persons, is not the whole power of the ciuill Magistrate, but onely so muche as may helpe to the good gouernment of the Churche, and the suppression of vice. Neyther doe we chalenge it as due, but receyue it from the ciuill Magistrate as conuenient, and execute it by his authoritie, not by our owne. This you could not but vnderstande, if you had not bin disposed to qua
                              〈1 line〉
                           il.
                        You say, 
                              〈1 line〉
                           tis an vntollerable confusion. &c. but this is a Popish surmise, and the example vsed craftily to verifie the same: for the Papists doe imagine (or at the 
                              〈◊〉
                            doe maliciously spread abrode) that by giuing to the Prince chiefe authoritie in ecclesiasticall matters, we also giue vnto hir power to minister the sacramentes, and to preache the worde: In like maner you would insinuate vnto the Reader, that by allowing ciuill functions in ecclesiasticall persons, we also allowe them to execute all kinde of ciuill functions: which is spoken of you as well to deface the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate in matters ecclesiasticall, as it is to improue ciuill offices in ecclesiasticall persons. It is neyther confusion, nor vncomelynesse to come from the pulpit, and administration of the Sacraments, to the punishment and correction of vice and wickednesse. Neyther is it any monstruous or straunge sight, for an ecclesiasticall person to execute that kinde of discipline agaynst offendours, which by lawfull authoritie is established in the Church, whether it be by béeing Iustice of peace and Quorum, or a Comm
                              〈1 line〉
                           issioner, or any other suche like office and function.
                        But remember I pray you what you sayd before in the treatise of Seni
                              〈1 line〉
                           rs: youT. C. muste 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ther di
                                 〈1 line〉
                              sent from Beza, or graunt the controuersie. 
                                 Tract. 17. cap. diuis.
                              
                            there set it downe that they are ecclesiasticall persons: and yet M. Beza (as I haue there declared) sayth that noble men and Princes maye be of the 
                              〈◊〉
                           , wherfore eyther may ciuill and ecclesiasticall offices méete togither in eccles
                              〈1 line〉
                           icall persons (whiche you denie) or else can not noble men and Princes be of your Seigniorie, as M. Beza affirmeth: or if they be of your 
                              〈◊〉
                           , they must cast off their Baronries, Earldomes, and ciuill dominions (whiche I am sure they wyll not) or else to conclude, your assertion is straunge, and your S
                              〈1 line〉
                           lorie con
                              〈1 line〉
                           used.
                        I doubt not but that many of the Nobilitie and Gen
                              〈1 line〉
                           rie of this Realme are more fitte for these things, than ecclesiasticall men are: neyther can I be persuaded, but that they consider how expedient it is notwithstanding, that such functions be committed to some of the cleargie: and I am well assured that they can not but easily espie the deformitie & confusion that your platforme would bring to this Monarchie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 168. Lin. 2.
                     And if so be that there fall out any question at any time whyche is to be decyded by the worde of God, and wherein the aduyse of the minister is needefull, there the ministers helpe maye andEsra. 9. ought to be required. For thereof we haue not onely an example in This place maketh agaynst your selfe. Esra, where the PrincesDeut. 19. in a matter of difficultie, came and asked the counsell of Esra, but we haue a playne commaundement

in Moses by the Lorde, who commaunded that the cause of periurie shoulde be heard before the Lorde in the Sanctuary, at the hearing whereof the highe Priest should be present, by which commaundemente the Lorde dothe not by bringing thys cause into the Sanctuar e declare, that the iudgement thereof dyd apperteyne vnto the ecclesiasticall courte, but bicause it beeing a matter whiche touched the glory of God very expressely, he would haue the Princes whiche were Iudges there, to be the nearer touched, and the deepelyer affected wyth the glory of God, whereof they sau e the sacrament before their eyes, neyther is the high Priest commaunded to be present to this ende▪ that he should sit as iudge of that matter, but that he might dissolue the difficulties, if any rose of the vnderstanding of the lawe, and that he might pricke forwarde, and stirre vp by admonition▪ the princes to whome the iudgement apperteyned, if so be he should see them colde and slacke to reuenge the iniuried done vnto the Lorde. Which thing may the better appeare, in that the handling of the matter, is there appoynted, not vnto the priests, but vnto the Iudges or princes onely, and so lykewyse of matrimonie and diuorse, although the iudgement thereof apperteyne vnto the ciuill Magistrate, yet the minister, if there be any difficultie in knowing when it is a lawfull contract, and when the diuorse is lawfull, may and ought to be consulted with. Thus may the common wealth and Churche enioy bothe the wisdome and searning which is in the minister, & things may be done in that order whych God hath appoynted, without suche confounding and iumbling of offices and iurisdictions togither.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You woulde not haue a minister to enioy any ciuill office, and yet would you notA greater inrisdiction sought in disprouing the lesse. haue the ciuill Magistrate to determine any thing in matters of weyght, without the aduise and counsell of the minister, that is, the Minister must prescribe vnto the ciuill Magistrate what he should doe in all weyghtie and doubtfull cau. es. This is your drifte in this place, so farre as I can gather: else I knowe not to what purpose you should spende so many words, for they conclude nothing agaynst the cause, but with it rather. In déede I haue heard say, that in some Churches which some of you haue gone about to reforme, the minister was all in all, and in all affayres his aduise and consent was had, else nothing could be done. Whiche authoritie surely passeth all the ciuill turisdiction, that I knowe any man hath or desireth in this Church. But you may intermeddle in the offices of Maiors, Bayliues, Iustices of peace, & in deede haue an oare in euery mans boate, and yet nothing hinder your Pastoral office: such is the excellencie of your wit and giftes aboue other men, that the same thing may be lawfull in you, a little portion wherof may not be permitted to others.
                        You make a fayre glosse vpon the. 19. of Deuteronomie: but howe aptly, the Reader may consider if he marke the place well: the words of the text be these: If a falseDeut. 19. witnesse rise vp agaynst a man to accuse him of trespasse, then bothe the men that striue togither shall stande before the Lorde, euen before the Priests and the Iudges whiche shall be in those dayes, and the Iudges shall make diligent inquisition. &c. First heere is no word of ye Sanctuarie, for this that is sayd (before the Lord) M. Caluin in his harmonie doth interprete on this sorte: 
                              Coram leboua. i. corā sacerdotibus & iudicibus qui fuerunt in diebus illis: Before Iehoua, that is, before the Priests and Iudges which were in those dayes. And in deede God is sayde to be there present, where his true ministers are assembled: wherfore your descanting of the Sanctuarie▪ is without any ground. Moreouer it dothe not appeare, by any thing in this place, but that the Priest had as muche to doe in the matter, as the iudge had: wherefore this place can not serue your turae in any respect.
                        The place in the. 9. of Esoras maketh altogither agaynst you: for the rulers cameThe Replyer ouerthroweth his owne cause. to complayne vnto Esoras, that the people had married with the Gentiles, and Esdras tooke vpon him as one hauing authoritie, to reforme it, and to separate them from their wyues, as it euidently appeareth in the tenth chapter, and. 4. and. 5. verse. For certayne of them came vnto Esoras, and spake vnto him in this maner: Aryse, for the matter belongeth vnto thee. &c. It appeareth that you haue very smal care what you alleage, so it may seeme to be something.
                        You adde in the ende, and say: and so likewyse of matrimonie and diuorse. &c. But the Reader muste take heede that he imagine not this assertion of yours, to be conteyned in any of these two places quoted by you. It is but your owne bare affirmation, you alleage no authoritie for it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 168. in the midst▪
                     
                     For although Aristotles 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         and Platoes 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         that is, instruments seruing to two purposes, be lawfull in offices of the common wealth, where things are more free, and left in greater libertie to be ordered at the iudgement and aduise of men, especially considering that vpon the diuersitie of the formes of common wealthes, varietie of regiment may spring, yet in the Church of God, where things are brought to a strayghter rule, & which is but one & vniforme▪ the same may not be suffered. And yet euen those common wealth Philosophers, whiche doe licence vpon occasion, that two offices may meete in one man, holde that it is best, and conuenientest, that euery one should haue a particular charge. For Aristotle sayth, it is moste agreable to nature, thatNot Hercules himselfe against tvvo 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         should be 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         that is, one instrumēt to one vse. And Plato vseth the prouerbe, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         agaynst those whych will take vpon them diuers vocations, and not content them selues with one, and they make the meeting of many functions in one man, to be a remedie only in extreme neede, and pouertie of able men.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These be but words onely conteyning no sounde proofes, and require but a short answere, whiche is, that these ciuill and ecclesiasticall offices, whiche we ioyne togither in one person, tende to one and the same ende, and serue for the same purpose, that is, the quiet and good gouernment of the Churche, and the suppression ofTract. 17. cap. vit. vyce and sinne. I haue proued before, that the externall forme and kinde of gouernment in the Churche is not one and vniforme (as you heere affirme) but variable, according to place, person, and time.
                        Diuers offices may be committed to one man in a common wealth, though there be more fit for the same, excepte you wyll make the state popular, and restrayne the Prince from the libertie of bestowing suche offices vpon suche as she thinketh moste méete for them, which, if it be well marked, is parte of your drifte. Belike you or some of your friendes, lacke offices, and therefore you woulde gladly haue a newe distribution.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 2. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 168. somevvhat past the midst
                     And althoughe bothe be vnlawfull, yet as the case standeth in our realme, it is more tollerable that the ciuill Magistrate should doe the office of a minister, than that the minister shoulde intermeddle with the function of the Magistrate. For when the accounts shall be cast, it will fall out, that there are more sufficient and able men to serue in the common wealth of this realme, than in the Church, and greater want in the one, than in the other.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This reason of yours if it were true dothe but accuse the Prince and hir Councell of lacke of due consideration of the state of this Realme: for this is a reason of Policie, and not of Diuinitie. Undoubtedly you are set vp in the chayre of controlement, and your giftes are so great, that you dare presume to prescribe both new Diuinitie, and newe Pollicie. I doe nothing doubte but that the state of this common wealth is better knowne and considered, than that there shall néede any of your aduertisementes for the gouernment of it: and therefore I passe ouer these wordes of yours, as voyde of reason, and full of presumption, and suche, whereby of stomacke onely you séeke to discredite and to disable the state of the Churche, and ecclesiasticall persons, agaynst whome you haue conceyued displeasure.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 2. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 168. somevvhat tovvards the ende.
                     And if beside this, both authoritie of the worde of God, & light of reason, we will looke vnto the practise of the church many yeres after the tyme of the Apostles, we shall finde that the church hath beene very carefull from tune to time, that this order should be kept, that the ministers should not entangle them selues with any thing beside their ministerie, and those thyngs whych the worde of God doth necessarily put vpon them, least the strength of theyr mynde, and of theyr body, beeyng distracted vnto many things, they shoulde be the lesse able to accomplishe their ministerie vnto the full. Which may also partly appeare by that whych I haue alleaged out of Cyprian, whyche wyll not permit them so much as to be executors of a Testament. And in the. 80. Canon of those which are ascribed vnto the Apostles, it is enioyned that they should not entangle themselues with worldly offices, but attende vpon their ecclesiasticall affayres.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If you compare the state of the Churche before the time of Christian Kings, with the state of it vnder Christian Kings, you make an vnequall comparison. For howe coulde ecclesiasticall persons enioy any ciuill function, when there was no ciuil Magistrate christian to commit the same vnto them? How could by this meanes the gouernment of the Church be thought to be helped by the Ciuill Magistrate, when as it had no greater enimies than ciuill Magistrates, who sought by all meanes to suppresse and destroy it? but nowe to your reasons.
                        To 
                              〈1 line〉
                           yprians authoritie I haue answered before.
                        The Canons of the Apostles haue nowe béene alleaged by you at the least. 4. or. 5. times, and yet is not their credite and authoritie so firme. But that Canon meaneth onely suche worldely causes as be impedimentes to their vocation: and I haue tolde you often that ciuill functions be necessarie helpes, to the dooing and ful accomplishing of their ecclesiasticall office. I haue expressed in my Answere to the Admonition, what worldly affayres a minister of the word may not intangle him selfe with.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. seconde the. 8. diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 168. Sect. vlt.
                     Further in the (*) councell of Calcedon it was decreed, that, none of the clearkes & cleargieTom. 1. can. 3. (as it termeth them) should receyue any charge of those which are vnder age, vnlesse they were such as the lawes dyd necessarily cast vpon him, which it calleth inexcusable charges, meaning by all likelihoode the wardship of his brothers children, or some such thing. Where is also declared the cause of that decree to haue bin, for that there were certayne ministers which were Stewards to noble men. And 
                           〈◊〉
                         the. 7. canon of the same councell it is decreed, that none of the cleargy shoulde eyther goe to warfare as souldiours or captaynes, or should receyue any secular honors, and if they dyd, they should be excommunicated, or accursed.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           The words of the thirde Canon be these: Relation is made vnto this holy Synode,Con. Calced. can. 3. that certayn amongst the cleargie for filthie lucers sake hyer other mens possessions, & take vpon them the causes of secular businesse, and through slouthfulnesse separate themselues frō diuine functions, and runne to the houses of secular persons, & for couetousnesse take vpon thē the gouernment of their substance: therfore this holy vniuersall & great Synode hath decreed, that none of these hereafter, that is, Bishop, or Clearke, or Monke, shall hyer possessions, or intermeddle with secular possessions, except those that by lawe are dryuen to take the tuition and care of suche as be vnder age: or those to whome the Bishop of the Citie hathe committed the gouernment of ecclesiasticall things, and of Orphanes and widowes, which are without succour, or of such persons which neede the helpe of the Church for the feare of God. &c.
                        This Canon conteyneth nothing contrarie to my assertion, the words of the Canon be playne: I shall not néede to vse any exposition of it. Onely I would haue the

Reader marke the weight of your argument, which is this. The Councell of Chalcedon sayeth, that Clerkes may not for filthy lucres sake hyre other mennes possessions, or take vpon them for couetousnesse sake, the gouernment of other mennes possessions, &c. therefore there may be no ciuill office committed vnto them. I will aske no better cō
                           mentaries to the Canon of the Apostles before alledged, or any other suche like, than this very Canon of the Councell of Chalcedon.
                        To what purpose do you alledge the. 7. Canon of that Councell? did you euer heare me say that I would haue a minister to be a Souldier or a captaine in warre? or enioy any such secular honor or offices? wherefore you lacke probation when you are constrayned to vse this.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The reasons vsed in the Answere iustified.
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 1. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 169. Lin. 4. & Sect. 1. 2.
                     Now I come to M. Doctors arguments which he bringeth to establish this disorder.
                     And first he sayth ministers of the worde may not occupie themselues in worldly businesse, as to be marchants, husbandmen, craftes men, and such like, but they may exercise ciuil offices. Wher first of all I perceyue, M. Doctor is of this mynde, that the order of God is not to be broken for small gayne, or when a man must take great toyle of the bodie to breake it: but if it may be broken with getting of honor, and doing of those things which may be done without toyle, and with great commendation, then it is lawfull to breake it. In deede so the Poet (but in the person of an vniust and ambitious man) sayde, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . that is. If a man muste do vniustiy, he must do it to beare rule.
                     Secondarily, I do see that M. Doctor will not be shackled and hindred from his ministerie, by a payre of yron fetters, but if he can get a payre of golden fetters, he is contented to be hampered and entangled from doing the office of ministerie committed vnto him. For vnlesse these should be the causes which should moue him to take the one, and refuse the other, verily I see none.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        This is to deride, & not to answere. M Bucer writing vpon the. 4. to the Ephes.
                           Bucer. rehearsing such worldly businesse as withdrawe the minister from his function and therefore be not meete for him to exercise, sayth thus: Such businesse, as warfare, market affayres, marchandise, hucksters craft, the ouersight of Innes, Tauerns, and bathes: to exercise vnliberall craftes, as to digge mettals and stones, to burne lyme, to carie sande, to be schauengers, and such like. You haue not yet proued that Gods order is broken, if the ciuill offices which I speake of be committed to Ecclesiasticall persons. Your iesting tauntes I leaue to those that professe that cunning.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 2. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 169. Sect. 2.
                     For whereas he sayth it is a helpe, and maynteyneth religion, in deede that is the reason of theLib. 4. cap. 11. Papistes which M. Caluin confuteth in his institution.
                     And although it be good and necessary to punish vice and iniquitie, by corporall punishmentes and by ciuill corrections, yet it doth no more followe that that should be done by the ministers, than it followeth that for that preachyng and ministring the Sacramentes, and excommunication are good and necessarie, therfore the same is fitte to be executed by the ciuill magistrate. I graunt the ministers haue also to punish vice, for as the ciuill magistrates punishe lighter faultes with some penaltie of monie or losse of member: so the church and the minister especially with the church, hath to punishe faultes by reprehensions and rebukes. And as the ciuill magistrate punisheth greater faultes by death: so the minister with other which haue interest, hath with ye sworde of excommunication power to kill those which be rebellious, and to cut them from the churche, as the other doth from the common wealth. And if it be a helpe to the ministers office, that he shoulde meddle with ciuill punishments, why should it not be a help vnto the Magistrates office that he should excommunicate and do other thinges perteyning to the Ecclesiasticall discipline?
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In what woordes doth M. Caluine confute it, or by what reason? you cut of the matter very shorte: in that booke and chapt. of his Instit. which you haue quoted in the margent, there is no such reason either alleaged or confuted. Only in the. 9. Section, he speaketh agaynst the temporall dominion of the Popish Bishops, whiche deriue their excessiue power not from the ciuill Magistrate, but fcō the Pope, cloking it with this pretence, that it is an ornament and beutie to the kingdome of Christ: which is far from any thing alleaged by me, why it is conuenient that our Bishops haue ciuill authoritie committed vnto them.
                        I would gladly heare a reason either of the Scripture, or any other authenticallIt is not so lawfull for the Prince to preach, &c. as for a minister to vse corporall punishment. wryter, why it should be as lawfull for a ciuill Magistrate to preache, minister the Sacraments, and excōmunicate, as for the Ecclesiasticall minister to vse corporall punishment: it was lawfull for Samuell to kill Agag, being the office of Saule: but it was not lawfull for Saule to offer vp sacrifices, that being the office of Samuell. The office and function of a mynister is not in his owne power to commit to whom he list: but the office of the ciuill Magistrate may be cōmitted to whom soeuer it shal1. Sam. 15. please him best to like of, and to thinke most fitte for gouernment.1. Sam. 3.
                        
                        True it is that excōmunication is an Ecclesiastical censure which the mynisterExcommunication not the only punishment vsed in the Church. Gualter.
                            may exercise if the state of the Church will beare it (for reprehension is a discipline lawfull for euery Christian to vse) but it is not the onely censure: for the ciuill magistrate may appoynt other, as shall be to the state of the Church moste conuenient. You know what M. Gualter sayeth. 1. Cor. 5. As the Romaine Bishops vpon this place and such like, haue grounded their excommunication, which is the most effectuall instrument of their tyrannie, whereby they haue cruelly vexed not onely priuate men, but also Kinges and Emperours, and haue bene the causes of ciuill warres and sedition: euen so the Anabaptists whilest they perswade themselues, that there can be no discipline without excōmunication, they trouble the churches euery where, and make thēselues laughing stockes to all the world, &c. Let euery church follovve that kinde of discipline vvhich is most meete for the countrie vvherein they liue, and vvhich may be moste commodious in respect of time and place: and let no man here rashly prescribe vnto an other, or seeke to binde all men to one and the same forme.
                        
                        Of old time there hath bene other kinde of punishments, than either reprehensiōs or excōmunication, as it may appeare euen in that Canon attributed to the Apostles which you haue before rehearsed: where the punishment appoynted, is depriuation, as it is also in the most of the other Canons, and in diuerse other councels.
                        You say that if it be a helpe to the ministers office, that he should meddle with the ciuill punishmēts: why should it not be a helpe to the magistrates office, that he should excommunicate, &c. The answere is soone made. The Magistrate may do that by corporall punishment that the minister can not do by Ecclesiasticall discipline: neither is there any man so desperate, whom the magistrate by his authoritie may not brydle, but such is ye time now that fewe regarde the greatest censures of the Church.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 3. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 169. Sect. 2.
                     And whereas M. Doctor sayeth they may not be husband men, craftes men. &c. and yet may haue ciuill offices, I thinke far otherwise, that although neyther be lawfull, yet the one were more tollerable than the other. For seing after the ministerie of the worde there is no calling vnder the sunne weightier, & which requireth greater exercise of the minde, than the office-of the magistrate, it is agaynst all reason to lay this heauie burthen vpon a man, that is already loden, and hath as much as he is able to beare. It were more equall if they will needes adde vnto the weight of this burthen, to laye some lighter charge of exercising a handy crafte, than to breake his backe with the charge of a ciuill Magistrate.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        These wdrldly affayres of husbandrie, occupations, &c. must néedes withdrawe

him from his booke & so make him more vnapt to do his dutie: and they be not at all incident to his office, nor méete for his calling: but the Ciuill offices, that I speake of be both méete for his calling, perteyning to discipline, and helpes to his office & function, as I haue sayde: wherefore they be so farre from breaking his backe, that they make the rest of his burthen a great deale the easier.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 4. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 169. Sect. 3.
                     And whereas in the pollicie of M. Doctor it seemeth a furtherance to the Gospell to ioyne these togither which was also the pollicie of the Idolaters as I haue before declared) in the wisedome of God it hath seemed farre otherwise, which I doubt not did therfore separate the ministerie from this pompe, which is commendable in the ciuill magistrate. least the efficacie and power of the simplicitie of the worde of God and of the ministerie should be obscured, whilest men would attribute the conuersion of soules vnto the gospell (due vnto the worde and to the spirite of God) to these glorious shewes. And least whilest the Minister haue the word in one hande, and the swordem the other, men should not be able to iudge so well in their consciences▪ of the mightie operation of the worde of God in them. For they might doubte with themselues whether these are and outwarde shewe of the minister, caried some stroke with them in beleuing the worde.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        One of your reasons conteyned in this place, in effect is this. If ministers shoulde enioy ciuill functions, men would attribute the conuersion of soules vnto these shewes: but that ought they not to do: therefore. &c. I denie your Maior as a fonde and vaine imagination. An other reason you frame on this sorte: If the mynister haue both ciuill and Ecclesiasticall power▪ men should not be able to iudge in their consciences of the mightie operation of the worde of God in them: for they might doubt whether the feare of the outward shewe of the minister carriedThe Repliers argument siniteth as well at the 
                                 〈◊◊〉
                               magistrate as at the Ecclesiasticall. some stroke with them, &c. This is as vayne an imagination as is the other: and they both may as aptly be applied agaynst the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate, as agaynst the ciuill iurisdiction of the minister: yea in déede they serue to the ouerthrow of all kinde of ciuill punishment. For if the Magistrate make sharpe lawes for comming to the Churche, hearing the woorde of God, contemning religion, and such like, men that by such meanes are driuen to heare the woorde of God. &c. & so at the length conuerted, may doubt whether the woorde hath wrought this in them or the feare of outwarde punishment. Do you not marke how he still smiteth at the Magistrate? Percey
                              〈1 line〉
                           te you not how neare he approcheth to the opinion of the Anabaptistes, who would haue no kinde of discipline in the Church but only excommunication?God vseth corporall punishment as a meanes to saluation.
                        
                        But to Answere you briefly, God vseth corporall punishments as a meanes to driue▪ euen the elect to the hearing of the worde of God, & to honestie of lyfe. He vseth it also to brydle the wicked, that by their exāples other men might learne to beware, and that they themselues also may be kepte in order. And no man that is truly conuerted by the preaching of the woorde, can doubt but that God by the working of his spirite, thorough the ministerie of his woorde, hath wrought that good in him, though by externall meanes (as feare of punishment, and such lyke) he was first as it were enforced to heare the woorde, and to kéepe himselfe in order. In deede if these reasons of yours were of any force, the Magistrate might put vp his sworde, especially in Ecclesiasticall matters, and so might the minister lay aside his authoritie also, least any thing be ascribed there vnto Your glaunce (that this was also the pollicy of the Idolaters) though you haue no where proued it, yet haue I answered it before.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 5. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 169. Sect. vlt.
                     But M. Doctor sayth that ciuill offices are not to be counted worldly affayres, but heauenly and spirituall▪ it is so: and yet when they are compared with the Ecclesiasticall offices. they may be called secular offices, for so much as they to gether with the care of religion, procure and prouide

for the things whereby we may quietly and commodiously liue here, where the Ecclesiasticall offices are immediatly and onely bente to procure the glory of God and the saluation of men, and in that signification of heauenly and spirituall which you take, marchandise, husbandry, and the handycrafte be heauenly, and spirituall, although not in the same degree. All lawfull callinges came from God, and returne to him agayne, that is, he is both author of them and they ought to be referred to his glory, so that if the mynister may exercise all things which be heauenly and spirituall, you may as well bryng him downe to the plough, as promote him to the court.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I call them Ecclesiasticall, bycause they perteyne to the inwarde man, to theThe cluill iurisdiction now vsed is in some respect ecclesiasticall. reformation of manners, to the punishment of sinne, to the mayntenance of Religion, to the quietnesse of the Churche, and good order in the same: so do not all cyuill offices, much lesse, husbandry, marchandise, handycraftes, goyng to the plough and suche lyke, whiche onely perteyne to the body and to this lyfe, not beyng referred to the endes, that I haue before named. Wherefore here your wittes fayled you, and I looke for a better Answere.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 6. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 170. Lin. 6.
                     
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                         M. Doctor sayth that the office of a commissioner is Ecclesiasticall, bycause it handleth Ecclesiasticall causes, I maruell that he is so ignorant, that he can not put a difference betwene giuing iudiciail sentences, and appoynting bodely punishments, (whiche are meere ciuill) and betweene the vnderstanding the truth of euery such cause according as the worde of God defineth of it: which is a thing common as well vnto the magistrate as vnto the mynister, & wherein the mynister bycause he ought to be most ready, ought (if neede be) consulted with.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Surely I thinke you scarse vnderstande your selfe: for if the causes be Ecclesiasticall, why may not the punishment by the Magistrate appoynted vnto them be executed by Ecclesiasticall persons, hauing authoritie from the Prince by commission so to do: and if the Ecclesiasticall person may giue sentence and iudgement in these Ecclesiastical causes, why may he not consent also to the punishments appointed for the same? I do not meane he should be the Iaylor, or tormentor himselfe, but to iudge the person offending worthy of this or that kinde of punishment, and to giue sentence of the crime that he hath committed, & to determine of the cause that is called into iudgement.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 7. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 170. Sect. 1.
                     An other of M. Doctors reasons is, that as kinges do serue Christe by makyng lawes for him, so Bishops do serue Christe by executyng lawes for him: as though it perteyned not vnto the Magistrates to execute lawes as well as to make them, and as if the magistrate were not therefore called a speaking lawe, bycause by executing them he dothe cause the lawes after a fashion to speake. This is to deuide the stake of the magistrate, betweene him and the Bishop, yea to gyue the Byshop the best parte of it. For we know that with vs, the people be at making of the lawes, which may not meddle with the execution of them. And if M. Doctor say, that he meaneth not hereby, to shut the Prince from executing the lawes, then as his similitude (when it is at the best) proueth nothing: so by this meanes it halts downe right, and is no similitude.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The Prince executeth his lawes by himselfe, & he also executeth them by other to whome he hath giuen that authoritie for the fuller and better execution of them: in this number are the Bishops, for the authoritie they haue in suche matters, they haue from the Prince: and therefore their executing of it is not to deuide stake with the Cyuill Magistrate, but to do good seruice both to God and the Magistrate.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Chap. 3. the. 8. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 217. Sect 1. 2.
                     What say you to Elye and Samuell, were they not both PriestsSamuell priest & iudge. and iudges? what office did the Prophete Elias execute, when he killed the false prophets of Baal. 1. Reg. 18. or Christ when he whipt the buyers and sellers out of the temple? what office did Paule committe to Timothy, when he sayde aduersùs Presbyterum, &c?
                     
                     I woulde not haue a mynister to be a warriour, or a farmer, or a marchant, or haue any such like osfice, which consisteth in gayne or bodily labour only. But why he may not haue suche an office as is profitable to encrease godlinesse, and punish vngodlinesse, I heare as yet no reason. As for the office of an high commissioner, it is Ecclesiasticall, for they haue to do only in causes Ecclesiasticall.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 170. Sect. 1.
                     And for Elye and Samuell, they are extraordinarie examples, whiche may thereby appeare, for that both these offices first meeting in Melchisedech, and afterwarde in Moses, were by the commaundement of God seuered, when as the Lorde toke from Moses (beyng so wise and godly a man) the Priesthoode and gaue it to Aaron, and to his successors. And so, for so much as when the Lord would polishe his churche & make it famous, & renoun
                           〈1 line〉
                        ed in the world he gaue this order: it appeareth that he would haue this to be a perpetuall rule vnto his church. And by so much it is the clearer, for that the Lorde did not tarie vntill Moses death, but tooke the priesthoode away from Moses, which was a man as able to execute both, as eyther Elye or Samuell.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is not certayne whether Moses were euer Priest or no: for where it is saydIt is doubtfull whether Moses were priest. in the. 99. Bsalme. Moses & Aaron in sacerdotibus eius, the Hebrewe worde is doubtfull and signifieth as well a Prince, as a Priest: & therefore vpon this place it cannot necessarily be concluded, that Moses was a Priest. Moreouer at that time the chiefe rulers & men of greatest authoritie were called Priestes: but you neuer redde that Moses offered vp any sacrifices for sinne, which was the proper office of the Priest: Neyther can you tell vs where he was euer consecrated Priest. In déede Harding against the Apologie doth alledge this example at Moses, being as he sayeth both a ciuill Magistrate and a Priest, to proue that the Pope may be both King and Priest.
                        But be it as you say, that these two offices were distinguished in Moyses & Aaron, & that the Priests office which consisteth in offering oblations & sacrifices was taken from him, yet did he kéepe still his former authoritie in gouerning the church, and in prescribing to Aaron what he should do, euen in matters perteyning to the worship of God: so that these two offices (I meane ciuill and Ecclesiasticall) are not so distinct, but that they may both aptly & well méete & ioyne togither. Further moreCiuill and ecclesiasticall offices mette in one. you know that howsoeuer the priesthood & ciuill Magistracie were deuided in Moses and Aaron, yet mette they both togither againe not onely in Elye & Samuell, but in Es
                              〈1 line〉
                           ras, Nehemias, Mattathias and some other, which examples proue that vpon occasion these offices may meete togither in one Person, & they quite ouerthrow your allegation of Moses.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 9. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 170. Sect. 1.
                     And this may be also easily seene, for that in a manner alwayes, where there was any good & stayde estate of the church, these offices were ministred by seueral persons, and then mette and were mingled, when the estates were very ruinous and miserable. A
                           〈1 line〉
                        d if this be a good reason to proue that ministers may exercise ciuill offices, it is as good a reason to proue that princes may preach, and minister the Sacraments. For if the ministers may exercise ciuill offices, bicause Elye & Samuell (beyng ministers) did so: the Princes and iudges may preach the worde and mynister the Sacraments bicause Elye and Samuell (being Princes and iudges) did so. And so we see how M. Doctor going about to desend one confusion, bringeth in an other.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Here you confesse that which hetherto in your whole booke you haue denied, andT. C. confesseth the groūd of all these cō
                              trouersies. that which is in deede the whole grounde of the chiefe matters in controuersie, that is, that the gouernment of the Churche may be diuerse according to the diuersitie of the time and state of the same: as in the time of persecution it may be otherwise gouerned than in time of peace, otherwise when the state is established, than when it is ruynous and in decaye, for say you: In a manner alwayes where there was any good and stayed estate of the church these offices were ministred by seuerall persons, and then mette and were mingled, when the estates were very ruynous.
                        Thus haue you graunted of your owne accorde, that which hitherto you haue so stifly and stoutly denied: such is the might & force of the truth. And yet the church was in good state all Sainuels time, and the moste parte of Elyes also, for any thing that I can reade to the contrarie.
                        I brought in those examples to proue that these offices haue mette togither, andThe state of ye controuerūe altered by the Replier. therefore be not so diuers as you would make them. I do not vse them to this ende, that I would haue a Priest to be a King, you know the state of our question is onely whether Bishops may exercise those ciuill functions of Iusticeship of Peace, and such like, which the Prince committeth vnto them or no, and not whether they may sitte in the Princes throne, and take hir Scepter out of hir hande whether she will or no, as the Pope doth. And therfore whereas you saythat by these exāples of Elye and Samuell, I may as well conclude that Princes may preach the worde and minister the sacraments, as Priests and ministers execute cruill offices: I thinke you do not consider that these ciuill offices be but accidents to the priesthode, & therefore may well be remoued, as they were from Samuell, when Saule was chosen King: for Samuell kepte his Priesthoode though he lost his ciuill authoritie: but the Priesthoode is not so to the cyuill magistrate, except he will be ordinarily and lawfully admitted therevnto. I thuike that there is no degree of dignitie that maketh a man vnmeete for the ministerie, if he be therevnto lawfully called, and haue other giftes méete for the same: wherefore as it followeth not that a minister, in the respect that he is a minister ought to haue a ciuill office, but that he may haue one if he be by the ciuill Magistrate therevnto appoynted, so it doth not follow that a ciuill Magistrate ought to be a minister of the woorde, but that he may be if he be méete and therevnto ordinarily and lawfully called and admitted. The Prieste may not take vpon him the office of the ciuill Magistrate, vnlesse he be called lawfully vnto it: nor the ciuill Magistrate may not take vpon him the office of a Priest, vnlesse he be ordinarily therevnto admitted. And this is no confusion at all.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 10. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 170. Sect. 2.
                     As for Elias killing the false Prophetes, and our Sauiour Christs whippyng out of the temple, it is straunge that M. Doctor will alledge them, as thinges to be followed, when he may as well teach, that we may call for fire from heauen, as Elias did, and beyng demaunded answere nothyng, as our Sauiour did: as to followe these actions whiche are moste singular and extraordinarie. And if these one or two examples be enough to breake the order that God hath sette, by this a man may proue that the mynisters may be fishers, and tente makers, bycause Peter and Paule (beyng ministers) did fishe and make tents. And truely these are not so extraordinary, and from the generall rule as the other be. And it was permitted in a Councell, that rather than a minister should haue two benefices, he might labour with his handes to supply his wanteTom. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                            Nic
                              〈1 line〉
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                            1
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         withall.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Yet by these examples, & especially by the examples of Christ, it may appeare, that Ecclesiasticall persons haue vsed corporall punishments, which you call ciuill.

I knowe examples make no rule, and therfore al your argumentes out of the scriptures, alleadged before to proue that the election of ministers ought to be popular, receyue the same answere that you giue to me in this place: and yet examples if they be not agaynst any commaundement, or good order established, declare what hath bene, and what vppon the lyke occasions may be done, but not what of necessitie ought to be doone. If you can proue any order of God sette downe, that an Ecclesiasticall person may by no meanes exercise any ciuill offices, I yelde vnto you: if you can not do it, then do I alledge no examples tending to the breakyng of any order that God hath set. I knowe not why the ministers of the Gospell may not do as Peter & Paule did vpon the lyke occasion. And therfore your alledging of ye corrupt Councel of Nice (which not withstanding you haue not 
                              〈◊〉
                            alleaged) is not necess
                              〈1 line〉
                           ie. I haue spoken of that Canon before, and therfore will not trouble the Reader with it nowe, being from this purpose.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 11. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 170. Sect. 2. 3.
                     When Sainct Paule willed Tim. that he shoulde not receyue an accusation agaynst an elder, vnder two or three witnesses, he did committe nothing lesse, than any ciuill office vnto him. And M. Doctor himselfe hathe alleadged it before, as a thing incident to the office of a Byshop: and therefore he doth forget himselfe maruellously now, that maketh this a ciuill office.
                     And doth M. Doctor thinke that S. Paule made magistrates? Or is he of that iudgemente, that the Church in the time of persecution, may make ciuill officers? But it is true, that he that is once ouer the shoes, sticketh not to runne ouer his bootes.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I alleadged it before, to proue the superioritie of Bishops ouer other ministers:The iur
                                 〈1 line〉
                              
                              tion of Timothie in some respect ciuill. Now I do alledge it to proue that the same byshops may exercise that iurisdiction which you call ciuill: for in that the iudgement of such causes were committed vnto him, it argueth his superioritie: in that there is named accusers, and witnesses, it declareth a kind of eiuil iurisdiction, to the which those words do perteine. So that Timothie being an ecclesiastical person had prescribed vnto him that kind of proceeding to iudgement, that may be called ciuill.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 12. Diuision.
                  
                     Ansvver to the Admonition Page. 218. Sect. 1.
                     It pleaseth you to say that it is against Gods worde for Byshops to haue prisons, but your margent is very barren of proofes: for you haue not quoted one place of scripture to proue it: onely you say that Popish Eugenius did first bring them in, whiche is a very slender argument to proue them to be against the word of God. Did not Peter punish Ananias and Saphira very streightly for their dissimulation. Surely farre more greeuously than if he had put them in prison, and yet their offence was not against any ordinarie law made in the Churche or common weale. But where reade you that Eugenius did first inuent them?
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 170. Sect. vlt.
                     And last of all to proue that byshops may haue prisons, he citeth Peter which punished Ananias and Saphira with death, M. Doctor muste vnderstande that thys was 
                           〈◊〉
                         power, and was done by vertue of that function whyche Sayncte Paule calleth 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,1. Cor. 12. whiche is one of those functions that the Lorde placeth in hys Churche for a tyme. But is thys a good argumente. Bycause Saincte Peter punished with the worde,

therfore the minister may punishe with the sword? And bicause Sainct Peter didde so once, therfore the Bishop may doe so alwaye? And bycause Sainct Peter did that whiche appertayneth to no ciuill magistrate▪ and whyche no ciuill magistrate, by any meanes maye or can doe, therfore the minister maye doe that whyche apperteyneth vnto the Ciuill magistrate? For if there hadde bin a ciuill magistrate, the same coulde not haue punished this faulte of dissimulation whiche was not knowne, nor declared it selfe by anye outewarde action: So that if this example proue any thing, it proueth that the minister may doe, that no man may doe, but the Lorde onely, whyche is to punishe faultes that are hidde and vnknowne. If this bee ignorance it is very grosse, and if it be against knowledge, it is more daungerous. I haue determined with my selfe, to leaue vnto M. Doctor his outcryes, and declamations, and if I shoulde haue vsed them as often as he giueth occasion, there woulde be no ende of writing. The Lorde giue M. Doctor eyther better knowledge, or better conscience.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I vse this example of Peter, to shewe that is not agaynst Gods worde for the ministersMinisters may vse temporall punishment. of the Gospell to punishe any by imprisonmente: For Peter béeing a minister of the Gospell dyd punyshe with death, whiche is muche more than to imprison: and as Peter did this lawfully by an extraordinarie power, so maye the ministers of the woorde punishe by imprisonmente whiche is a farre lesse kynde of punishment, beyng lawfully therevnto authorised by the ciuill Magistrate, accordyng to the orders of the common wealth and state of the Churche. Therfore my reason is this: Peter punished with temporall punishement, being a minister of the worde, and he dyd nothing repugnant to his vocation, therfore it is not repugnant to the office of a minister of the worde to punishe with temporall punishment. Agayne, Peter punished with death: therfore the minister maye punishe with imprisonment: I speake 
                              de facto, of the deede done, not 
                              de modo, of the maner of doing is. And I doubte not but that séeing it was lawfull for Peter to kill by an especiall and extraordinarie power: so it may be lawfull for the minister of the word to imprison, by an vsuall and ordinarie power. And so are all your Collections made in vaine, and framed according to your owne pleasure, not so my meaning. If you haue done it of ignorance, you are to be excused: if of set purpose, you are to be blamed.
                        And wheras you say, that M. Doctor must vnderstand, that this was ecclesiastical powersPeters punishing of Ananias was by ciuill iurisdiction▪ 
                              Beza de Haeret. à Magist. puniendis.
                            I say on the other side that you must vnderstand, that this was not ecclesiasticall but méere ciuill, which you might haue learned of M. Beza in diuers places of his booke de Haereticis à Magistratu pun. For thus he writeth. 
                              Cedò igitur, Christus quo iure flagellum his corripuit? quo iure Petrus Ananiam & Sapbiram occidit? quo iure Paulus Elymam excaecauit▪ Num ecclesiastici ministerij? minimè profectò: nisi iurisdictiones confundas. Ergo ciuilis Magistratus iure: Nihil enim est tertium. Tell me therefore, by what lawe did Christ take the whip in hand twise? by what law did Peter kill Ananias and Saphira? by what right did Paule strike Elymas with blindnesse? did they those things by the right of the ecclesiasticall ministerie? no truly, except you will confound iurisdictions. They did it therefore by the right of ciuill magistracie: for ther is no meane. And to the same purpose doth he speake sundry times in that booke.
                        What outcries I haue vsed, or declamations which you haue not in ample manner requited, adding to the same al opprobrious kind of speaches, and iesting taunts that you could deuise, let the indifferent Reader iudge: wherfore I hartely wish vnto you, both better knowledge, and better conscience.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 13. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 171. Sect. 1.
                     Unto M. Doctor asking where it appeareth that Pope Eugensus brought in prisons into the Church, as also vnto the three or fower such like demands▪ which he maketh in this booke, the authours of the Admonition answer at once, that this, and the other are found in Pantaleon, and M. Bales Chronicles.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What authors doe they alleadge for them? for bothe these be but very late writers, and this is a matter of historie, and therfore requireth some greate antiquitie nerer vnto the tyme of Eugenius, who liued Anno. 650. but you knowe verie well that our Bishops claim not this authoritie by any constitution or canon of the Pope: neither doe they exercise it in their owne name: but they haue it from the Prince, and in hir name, and by hir authoritie do they vse it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 14. Diuision.
                  
                     Bishop of Sarum.
                     Both these gouernments vvere confounded in Moses. Therfore they may be confounded, and the Priestes of Israell had the iudgement and gouernmentEcclesiastical: and ciuill iurisdiction confounded in Moses. of the people, and S. Augustine was troubled with hearing and determining of causes, as it appeareth by Possidonius. And where you say, to be a chief or a ruler is a ciuill gouernment: nay, in ecclesiasticall causes, it is ecclesiasticall gouernment, and not ciuill. And these differences of gouernmentAugustine heareth ciuill causes. may not so vnaduisedly be confounded. This is the key of ecclesiasticall correction, and belongerh onely to the ecclesiasticall officer, and to none other. Hereof Saincte Paule sayth, Seniorem ne corripueris nisi sub. &c. Tradidi illum Satanae. &. This iurisdiction, is not ciuill but ecclesiasticall, and therfore may be exercised by an ecclesiasticall person.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 171. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Here I wyll take in that whiche the Bishop of Sarisburye hath in the last page of his half sheete touching this matter.
                     And fyrst of all I well agree that he sayth, that to giue vnto Sathan (which is to excommunicate, and to correct an ecclesiasticall person by reprehension, or putting him out of the ministerie, if the cause so require) is mere ecclesiastical, and not ciuill, and that those things ought to be done of the officers of the Churche. This onely I denye, that the ministers ought to medle with ciuill offices. For proofe whereof, the Bishop alleageth the example of Augustine, whiche as Possidonius writeth was troubled with the hearing & determining of causes, Wherin Possidonius sayth nothing, but that I willingly agree vnto. For the minister with the elders ought both to heare and determine of causes, but of such causes, as perteyne vnto their knowledge, whereof I haue spoken before. And that Possidomus ment such causes as belonged vnto Augustine, as he was a minister, and not of ciuill affaires, it appeareth by that which he writeth immediatly after, where he sayth: Being also consulted of by certain in their worldly affaires, he wrote epistles to diuers, but he accounted of this, as of compulsien, and resiraynte from his better busynesses. Wherby it appeareth, that S. Augustine medled not with those worldly affaires, further than by way of giuing counsell, which is not vnlawfull for a minister to doe, as one friende vnto another, so that his ministerie be not therby hindered.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        What S. Augustine did in such matters, and whether he weroccupied in worldlyAugustine iudge in worldely matters. matters or no, and that he was not a counsell giuer only, but also a iudge, it shall best appeare by his owne wordes spoken of himselfe, whiche are so playne and euident, that after you haue hearde them, you will be ashamed of this answere to Possidonius, and of your former assertion also. Augustine therefore in his booke 
                              de opere
                              Aug. lib. de opere Monac. 
                              Monachorum,
                            of this matter writeth thus: VVho feedeth a flock, and doth not receiue of the milke of the flocke? And yet I call to witnesse vpon my soule the Lorde Iesus, in whose name I doe boldely speake these thinges, that touchyng myne owne commoditie, I hadde rather euerye daye (as it is appoynted in well ordered Monasteries) to woorke some thyng wyth my handes, and to haue the other houres free, to reade, and to praye, or too dooe somme thynge in the Holye Scriptures, than too suffer the
                           
                           tumultuous perplexities of other mennes causes touchyng secular businesse, eyther in determinyng them by iudging, or in cutting them off by intreatyng: to the whyche troublesAugustine thinketh that the how ghost hath bounde Bishops to ciuill causes. the Apostle hathe bounde vs, not by his owne iudgement, but by the iudgement of hym whyche didde speake in him, and yet hee himselfe did not suffer these troubles, for the discourse of his Apostleship was otherwyse. Here in playne woordes hée declareth, that it was secular busynesse aboute the whyche he was occupyed: and although he séeme to complayne of the multitude of suche businesse, yet dothe hee acknowledge the same to bee lawfull, iuste, and conueniente, and therefore he addeth, and sayeth: VVhyche laboure notwythstandyng, wee suffer not without the consolation of the Lorde, for the hope of eternall lyfe, that wee maye bryng foorthe frute wyth pacience: for wee are seruauntes of that Churche, and especially to the weaker members, what members soeuer wee are, in the same bodie. And a little after hee sayeth, That hee coulde not omitte those businesse, withoute the omittyng of his dutye. To the same effecte dothe he speake in that Treatise that is among his Episiles in number an hundreth and ten, where he desyreth the people that they woulde not moleste hym for the space of fyue dayes wyth theyr worldely matters, by reason of certayne busynesse commytted vnto hym, as it appeareth in these woordes: It pleaseth mee and you, for the care of the scriptures, whych the brethren and fathers, my fellowe Byshops dydde vouchesafe to laye vppon mee inAng. epi. 110. the Councells of Numidia and Carthage, for the space of fyue dayes no man shoulde trouble mee. These thynges were propounded, you were contente, youre decree and consente was rehersed: it was kepte but a small tyme, and afterwardes you did violently brust in vnto mee, neyther coulde I bee suffered to doe that whyche I woulde: In the forenoone and in the after noone, I am troubled with mennes busynesse: I desyre you for Chrystes sake, to suffer me to committe the care of my troubles to Eradius this yong man, and prieste, whome thys daye in the name of Christ, I appoynt to be your bishop and my successour.
                        
                        
                           Possidonius nameth no elders, but speaketh onely of Augustine, and whosoeuer shall with diligence pervse the nintéenth chapter of Possidonius, shall be enforced to confesse that he meaneth Augustine was occupyed as well in ciuill, as ecclesiasticall matters, and in determinyng of them, as in writyng of letters for them, or in giuyng of counsell. Wherefore this example of Augustine is moste fitly alleaged of the Bishop of Sarum, and manyfestly declareth what was the vse in his dayes touching suche matters.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 15. Diuision.The Bishop of Sarū in the defense of the Apol. in the. 5. parte. 4. chap. 2. sect.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 171. Sect. 2.
                     And for the truth of thys matter, that ministers oughte not to meddle wyth ciuill affayres, But you shall not fynde him contrary to him selfe, as you surmyse. I will appeale to no other, than to the Bishop himselfe, who doth assume playnly the same that the admonition here affirmeth.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        In that place the Bishop of Sarisburie speaketh onely of the Pope, who vsurpethM. Iewell speaketh not againste ciuill o
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ces in ministers simply but allowed them by his owne practise the whole and full authoritie of a secular Prince, and doth chalenge the same 
                              iure diuino, by the authoritie of Gods worde. He speaketh not of suche Bishops, to whome so muche ciuill authoritie is committed by the Prince, as maye serue to the correction of vice, and good and quyet gouernmente of the Churche: forsomuch as he did himselfe exercyse the same. And surely it is not well done of you, thus to charge that worthie man with contrarieties vniustly. For doth he that confuteth the Popes vniust claime, and vngodly vsurpation of both the swords in that maner yt he claymeth & vseth them, condemne al maner & kind of ciuil iurisdctiō by christian

Princes committed to Bishops, being helpes vnto them in dooing their duetie, and tendyng to the good and quiet gouernmente of the Churche? Surely you are good in confounding, but too bad in distinguishing: wherefore you haue vntruly reported of that worthie Bishop.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 3. the. 16. Diuision.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 171. Sect. 3.
                     And therfore I conclude that forsomuche as Wherefare you not asha med of vutruthi bothe the holie scriptures do teache, that ministers ought not to meddle with ciuil offices, and reason, and the practise of the Church do confirme it, that they ought to kepe themselues within the limites of the ministerie and ecclesiastical functions, least whylest they breake forth into the callyng of a Magistrate, in stead of shewing them selues 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , that is ouerseers, they be founde to declare themselues 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         that is busy bodies, medlyng in things which belong not vnto them. And thus putting them in remembrance of that whiche they knowe well mough that they ought 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        ▪
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . that is to say, studie to adorne that charge whiche they take in hand, and do professe. I leaue to speake any further of this matter.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Melchisedech being a Priest did exercise ciuill iurisdiction, for he was king of Salem.The scriptures teach that ecclesiasticall persons maye haue ciuill iurisdiction. Gen 14. Aaron being a Priest did iudge the whole people in temporall matters euen in causes of inheritance. Num. 27. In the. 17. of Deuteronomie, there is a commaundement, that ciuill matters of difficultie shal be referred to the Priests and to the iudge. Elye and Samuel Priests did iudge the people in matters temporall.Gen. 14. Nume. 27. Deut. 17. 1. Sam. The people of Israell after theyr captiuitie were gouerned by Priestes and Prophetes, as by Esdras, Nehemias, Mattathias. &c. The Scripture in no place commaundeth the contrarie, nor moueth vnto it, & yet you are not ashamed to say, that the holye scriptures doe teache, that ministers oughte not to meddle with ciuill offices.
                        Lykewyse in Augustines tyme it is euidente by the woordes before recited,The practise of the churche concerning ciuill offices in ministers. that it was not straunge, but vsuall, and counted a péece of duetie for Bishops to deale in Ciuil causes, and that as Iudges. The authours of the Centuries, in the fourth Centur. chap. 7. say that Bishops in that age did giue sentence in ciuil causes, if anye didde appeale from the Ciuill courtes to their authoritie. Sozomene Lib. 1. cap. 9.
                           Bishops gaue sentence in ciuil causes 
                                 Cent. 4. cap. 7. Sozom. li. 1. cap. 9.
                            wryteth thus of Constantine the Emperour. This was a greate argumente of his good affection towardes Christian religion, that he made a lawe for the freedome of clearkes in all places, and also hee gaue libertie for those that were called into iudgemente to appeale to the Bishops, if they were disposed to refuse the ciuill magistrates: and he commaunded that their sentence should stand, and be of more force, than the sentence of theAppeale graū ted from ciuill magistrates to Bishops. other iudges, euen as though it had proceeded from the Emperour hymselfe. And that the Magistrates and their ministers should see that acomplished, that was determined and iudged in suche causes by the Bishops.
                        
                        
                           Nicephorns lib. 7. cap. 9. maketh mention of one Philaeas a Bishop, that was greatlyNiceph. lib. 7. cap. 9. commended, for his wisedome and dexteritic in determining ciuill matters committed vnto him. Sozomene lib. 6. cap. 32. testifieth of Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine
                           
                              
                                 Soz. li. 6. c. 32. Epiphanius busied with ciuill canses. that together with his pastorall office, he was occupyed, and that with greate commendation in ciuill and politike affaires.
                        
                           Eusebius lib. 7. cap. 32. testifieth, that Dorotheus being a Priest of the Churche ofEuseb. lib. 7. cap. 32. Antioche, and wel learned, did scrue the Emperour in ciuill businesse.
                        
                           Theodosius the Emperour made a lawe, wherein it was decréed, that all ciuil stryfes and controuersies shoulde be referred to the iudgemente of the churche, if eitherDorotheus. Duaren. lib. 1. of the parties did desire it. And the same lawe did Carolus Magnus, afterwards renew and confirme: and yet doe you saye, that the practise of the churche dothe confirme that

Bishops may not meddle with ciuill offices.
                        If you flée to reason: is it not good reason, that a Bishop shoulde haue that office,Some ciuill iurisdiction giuen to Bishops is agreable to reason and that authoritie, that maye helpe hym, in dooing his duelie, in correctyng vice, in procuryng peace, in maynteyning good order, in cuttyng off sectes, schismes, and suche lyke? in accomplyshing all whiche be that séeth not howe muche he is helped by suche ciuill authoritie, as the Prince committeth vnto hym, is eyther voyde of reason, or wilfully blynded.
                        Wherfore I may moste iustly conclude, that for so muche as the holye ScripturesThe conclusion of this matter. doe teache, that Ecclesiasticall persons maye meddle with ciuill effices, the practyso of the Churche confirmeth the same, and reason telleth that it is conuenient: and seeing that suche as practise them both in the maner and forme before declared, breake not foorth into any other mannes callyng, busy not themselues in things whiche belong not vnto them, but walke in their callyng, occupie themselues in matters incidents vnto it, and do good seruice both to God, their Prince, and their countrey: these offices may very aptely concurre and meete together in one person, and be profitably linked and ioyned together in one man. This did Augustine confesse, and acknowledgeth that the Apostle hath bounde them to these troubles, not by his owne iudgement, but byBishops bounde by the holie ghost to ciuill troubles iudgement of him that did speake in him: as I haue before declared: This haue the godlie Bishops, Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, &c. consented vnto: this doo the graue, wise and learned Bishops in our tyme in this Churche by experience knowe.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     The eightenth. And birds of the same fether, are couetous patrones of benefices, persons, vicars, readers, parish priests, stipēdaries, & riding chaplains, yt vnder the authoritie of their masters spoile their flocks of ye food of their soules,Phi. 21. 2. 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                         such seeke not the Lord Iesus, but their own bellies Iud. 12. cloudes that are without rayne, trees without fruiteMat. 23. 27. painted sepulchers full of dead bones, fatted in all aboundance of iniquitie, and leane locustes, in all feeling, knowledge and synceritie.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 226. Sect. vlt. &. 227. Sect. 1.
                        It is true that couetous Patrones of benefices be a great plagueCouetous patrones. to this Church, and one of the principal causes of rude and ignorant ministers. God graunt some speedie reformation in that poynt.
                        Neyther can I excuse all persons, vicars. &c. but all this is spoken without the booke, and therefore not fitlye of you alleadged agaynst the booke.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 171. Sect. 4.
                     Unto the two sections I haue spoken in that which hath bene sayde touching excommunication, canons, and Prebendaries. &c. And vnto that whyche is conteyned in the. 226. and. 227. I answere that I can not excuse couetous patrones of benefices, but couetous parsones and vicars be a greate pi gue vnto this Churche, and one of the principall causes of rude and ignorant people.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I confesse that the couetousnesse of some of them one waye, and the contentiousnesse of some of you an other way, hath done muche harme in the Church, & brought no small hinderance to the Gospell. I pray God open the heartes of all, that euery man may espye his owne deformitie, and be therof ashamed.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 171. Sect. vlt.
                     Lykewise vnto the two next sections, I haue answered before, in speaking against the spirituall courtes, which are now vsed, & vnto the next after that in speakyng of the ordeyning of ministers.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        
                           You haue not answered to this conteined page. 233. I vvill neitheriustifie that vvhich is amisse, nor condemne that vvhich I knovve not. Only this I say, that this taunting spirit of yours seketh rather defamation than reformation, vttereth spitefulnesse of stomacke rather than godlie zeale: for what a deriding of authoritie & disdayn towards the same is this? three of them would

be enough to sting a man to death, for why they are high commissioners. VVhat example haue you of any godly man, that vsed thus to deride and floute magistrates, you say all this springeth out of that Pontificall, whiche you must allow by subscription. &c. But it had bin well if you had tolde vs out of what part of that Pontificall they spring, and how they be thereof gathered. This you passe ouer in silence.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     And thus much be spoken as touching this booke, against which to stand, is a wonder to two2. Tim. 2. 7. 2. Cor. 4. 4. forts of men, the one ignorant, the other obstinate. The Lord giue those that be his, vnderstanding in all things, that they may haue iudgement: as for the other, whome the God of this world hathe blinded, least theyMath. 13. 15. should see and confesse the truth, and so be saued, and that do in the full growth of wickednesse, maliciously resist the truth, God confound them, that his peace may be vpon Israell, and his sauing health vpon this nation.
                     
                        Ansvver to the Admonition. Page. 234. Sect. vlt.
                        Nay surely it is a wonder to wise, learned, and godly men, to see this booke so painefully penned, with such aduise perused, and by so long practise allowed, now to be defaced, as it were with friuolous,Foure sortes of aduersaries to the Church. vnlearned and vnapt reasons, and that by fower sorts of men, Atheists, Papists, and Anabaptists, and as you woulde be counted Puritanes. God of his infinite mercie, giue you charitable, quiet, & thankfull minds, and eyther conuert your harts, or roote al such disturbers out of this Church, that we may with one hart and mind serue our Lord God.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 171. Lin. vlt.
                     And vnto that which is conteyned in the latter end of the. 234. and the beginning of the. 235. I say that the Church shall iudge of the aptnesse or vnaptnesse of our reasons, & albeit we do fynde fault with diuers things in the booke, yet we neither oppugne as enemies, nor are by the grace of God eyther Papists, Anabaptists, Atheists or Puritanes, as it pleaseth M. Doctor to call vs. And to the prayer against disturbers of the Church, I say with all my heart. Amen.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I would to God you did not oppugne it as enimies. &c. Surely then would not your fiercenesse nor your bitternes of speach haue bin such as it is: But God forgiue you, and to the prayer I say agayne. Amen, Amen.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     If this be not playne inough by that which is already set foorth, we mind by Gods grace to make it playner, and shoulde do it better, if it were as lawfull for vs (as for our aduersaries) to publish our mindes in print, then should appeare what slender stuffe they bring that are so impudent by open writing to defend it. And if it might please hir Maiestie, by the aduise of you righte Honorable, in this high Court of Parliament, to heare vs by writing or otherwise, to defend ourselues, then (such is the equitie of our cause) that we would trust to find fauoure in hir Maiesties sight: then those patched Pamphlets, made by sodeine vpstarts, and new conuerts, should appeare in their colours, and truth haue the victorie, and God the glory: if this cannot be obteyned, we will by Gods grace addresse ourselues to defende his truthe by suffering, and willingly lay our heads to the blocke. And this shall be our peace, to haue quiet consciences with our God, whome we will abide for, with all patience, vntill he make our full deliuerance.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition Pag. 243.
                        And I will not spare my laboure from time to time to vtter my mind and conscience in these matters: protesting that if by learning you can perswade me, I will say agayne with Augustine, Errare possum, baereticus esse nolo. All the rest of your stoute and suspitious braggs, of your vndecent and vnseemely words, I let passe, and leaue them to be considered as notes of your spirit and modestie. The Queenes Maiestie may assure hir selfe that she hath of learned men a number sufficient, able by learning to mainteine both hir authoritie and lawes

which hir Maiestie hath hitherto vsed, and made for the further
                              〈1 line〉
                           e of the Gospell, and mainteyning of good order and peace in the Church. The Lord of his infinite goodnesse long preserue hir, and giue vs thankfull hearts to God for hir.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 172. Sect. 1.
                     Unto the next section I haue answered in the treatise of the apparell. And vnto the next after, in the treatise which declareth to whome it doth appert
                           〈1 line〉
                        ine to make ceremonies and orders of the Church. And vnto the section contayned in the. 243. page I say that M. Doctor being asked of oynions, auswereth of garlike. For the Authours of the Admonition, desiring that it might be as lawfull for them to published by print their minds, or to be heard dispute, or that their mind put in writing might be openly debated, M. Doctor answereth with Augustines sentence (which he hath made the fote of his song) nothing to the purpose, of that which they says, the performance of which promise we will notwithstanding wait for.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Why? what haue they sayd there worth the answering, that I haue not directly answered vnto? they boast of their writing and of their disputing: And I tell them that I will not spare my laboure from time to time, to vtter my mind and consciēce in these matters also. What other answer would you haue me to make vnto them? The saying of S. Augustine commeth in due place: you call it the foote of my song, and I am very well content you should so do, for I intend to sing that song, so long as I liue, neither can any mislike it, but such as either be, or intende to be herelikes. I purpose God willing to performe all the promises that I haue made, and when I shrinke from any of them, let me heare of it.
                     
                  
                  
                     Admonition.
                     For the Articles, concerning the substance of doctrine, vsing a godly interpretation in a poynteDoctrine. The right gouernment of the Churche cannot be separated from the doctrine. 1. Tim. 3. 2. or two, which are eyther too sparely, or else too darkely set downe, we were and are ready, according to duetie to subscribe vnto them. We would to God that as they hold the substance togither with vs, and we with them, so they would not denie the effect and vertue thereof: then shoulde not our words and works be deuorced, but Christ should be suffered to reigne, a true ministerie according to the word instituted, discipline exercised. Sacraments purely and sincerely ministred: thys is that we striue for, and about which we haue suffered, (1. Pet. 3. 17) not as euill doers, but for resisting poperie, and refusing to be stoong with the tayle of Antichristian infection, ready (2. Pet. 3. 15.) to render a reason of our fayth, to the stopping of all our enimies mouthes. We therefore for the Churche of Gods sake, whiche ought to be most deare vnto you, beseech you, for our soueraignes sake, vpon whome we pray that all Gods blessing may be poured abundantly, we pray you to consider of these abuses, to reforme Gods Church according to your duties and callings: that as with one mouth we confesse one Christe, so with one consent this reigne of Antichriste, may be turned out headlong from amongst vs, and Christ our Lord may reygne by hys word ouer vs. So your seates shal be established and setled in great assurance, you shall not neede to feare your enimies, for God wyll turne away his threatned plagues from vs, which he in mercy do for his Christes sake. Amen.
                     
                        Ansvvere to the Admonition. Pag. 245. 246.
                        It is very well, that you so like of the articles, but yet it pleasethOf subscribing to the Articles. you not to subscribe vnto them: you say bycause of a point or two which are eyther too sparely, or else too darkly set downe: but indeede your meaning is to subscribe to nothing, which by authoritie you are required to do, and that argueth an arrogant mind, and a disposition that loueth alway to be singular.
                        You note in the margente that the right gouernmēt of the ChurchThe argumēt of the aduersary retorted agaynst himselfe. can neuer be separated from the doctrine: but by your owne confessiō we haue the doctrine, Ergo of necessitie we also haue the righte gouernment. Here in few words you haue cast downe whatsoeuer you seemed before to build, so do commonly vnskilfull builders.
                        I would to God that for so much as (contrary to your former assertion)

you now confesse that we haue the veritie of doctrine, you could be content to say, downe great heart, and submit your selues to the Queenes Maiestie, and hir lawes, according to your dutie: then no doubt Christ should without resistance reigne in this Church, and the frutes of the Gospell would much more appeare.
                        You bragge much of your suffering, you are little beholding toPersecution pretended wher none is. your neighbours, when you are thus constreyned to prayse your selues. But I pray you whether dothe he persecute that modestly and soberly defendeth the truthe, or he that vnlawfully reuengeth hymselfe, with rayling and backbi
                              〈1 line〉
                           ing? you loue very well to haue the worlde knowe howe greatly you be persecuted, and therefore if one of you here in Cambridge be punished but twenty pence for his open contempte of statutes to the whiche he is sworne, in post hast it is carried into all quarters, and especially to London, where greate complaynte is made of this greeuous persecution, when as you and your disciples, cease not (as I sayde) moste falsely and slaunderously to reporte of suche as executing good lawes, discharge theyr conscience to God, and their duetie towardes the Prince.
                        We therefore exhorte you, if there be any feare of God before your eyes, any reuerence towards the Prince, any desire of promoting the Gospell, any louing affection towardes the Church of Christe, to submit your selues according to your dueties to godly orders, to leaue off contentiousnesse, to ioyne with vs in preaching of the word of God, and beating downe the kingdome of Antichriste, that thys your diuision procure not Gods wrath to be poured vpon vs.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 172. Sect. 2.
                     Here M. Doctor contrary to the pretestation of the authours of the Admonition, whiche declare that for the abuses and corruptions, they dare not simply subscribe, saithe, that therefore they will not subscribe, bycause they are required by lawfull authoritie, which how both presumptuous and vncharitable a iudgement it is, let all men iudge, especially vpon this matter, whiche hath bin declared. And where M. Doctor would vpon y• marginal note pr
                           〈1 line〉
                        , yt we haue good discipline, bycause we haue good doctrine, & ther vpon doth wonderfully triumph, he playeth as he of whome it is said 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , that is hauing gotten nothing holdeth it fast. For can M. Doctor be so ignorant, that this manner of speach (doctrine and discipline cannot be s
                           〈1 line〉
                        uered) is vsed of that that they ought not to be seuered▪ when as we say (following S. Paule) that we can do nothing against the truth, do we not meane that we ought to do nothing or can do nothing lawfully against it? And do not all men know when we say that a man cannot be separated from his wife, but for the cause of A
                           〈1 line〉
                        ultery, that we meane he ought not, or he cannot lawfully? Therefore this is (as all men may see) a meere cauill and triumph ouer his owne shadow. There is no bragge of suffering made by the authours of the Admonition. The modestie wherwith he hath defended this cause, cannot be hidden. That he would haue other men punished for well doing, when he is not content that the open wrongs which he doth, should be once spoken of, I haue shewed how vnreasonable it is.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I speake of their denying to subscribe to the Articles concerning the substance of doctrine, which they confesse to be sound vsing a godly interpretation in a poynt or two. &c. what other abuses so euer there be in the booke of common prayer, or in the Church, yet that is no sufficient cause, why they shoulde refuse to subscribe to the truth of doctrine professed in this Church, and conteyned in those Articles. Wherefore séeing

they confesse them to be sound, and yet denie to subscribe, who can otherwise iudge of them, than I haue signifyed in my Answer.
                        I acknowledge my selfe to be ignorante that in this and suche like phrases thysCan is not taken for ought, if it be spoken simply word Can, is taken for ought. When Saint Paule saithe, that we can do nothing againste the truth, he meaneth simply as he speaketh, and doth not there vse Can, for ought. For indeede we can do nothing against the truth, though we do the worst we can. It is no vsuall phrase, but an vnproper kind of speach to say, that a man cannot do a thing, when he should say that he ought not to do it, except he adde some thing, as he cannot do it lawfully, or well, or orderly, and such like. Wherefore my dulnesse is such that I cannot vnderstande suche darke speaches, vntill they be interpreted, and yet whether they woulde so interprete themselues or no, it maye be doubted.
                        If they bragge not of persecution, wherevnto tende these wordes of theirs, this is that we striue for, about which we haue suffered, not as euill doers. &c. and quote in the margent to proue it. 1. Pet. 3. as though they were persecuted by infidels?
                        How immodest soeuer I am in defending this cause, yet if it be compared eyther toSchismatiks deserue to be sharply reproued. their passing bitternesse, or to your spitefull speaches, and vnséemely tauntes and iestes, I shall appeare tootoo simple: and although I must néedes say thus much, that disturbers of the common peace of the Churche, and Schismatikes, deserue to be with sharpe wordes reproued, yet haue not I vsed that sharpenesse and bitternesse, whyche diuerse learned menne bothe olde and newe haue vsed in the lyke case.
                        If I haue done any man wrong let him come foorth and proue it, and I will render vnto him quadruple.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 172. Sect. 3.
                     Finally as you exhort vs to submitte ourselues to good order, whiche haue bin alwayes, and yet are ready to do: to leaue to be contentious, which neuer yet began: to ioyne with you in preaching the word of God, which haue stopped our mouthes, and will not suffer vs to preache: so we exhort you in Gods behalfe, and as you will once answer it before the iust iudge, that you will not willingly shut your eyes against the truth, that if the Lord vouchsafe to open it vnto you, you kicke not against it? Wherefore we pray you to take heede, that neither the desire of keeping your wealth and honoure which you are in, nor the hope which you may haue of any further promotion, nor yet the care of keeping your estimation, by mainteining that whiche you haue once set downe, nor the sleighey suggestion of craftie and wyly Papists, do driue you to stumble against this truth of God, which toucheth the gouernment of his Church, and the purging of those corruptions whiche are amongst vs, knowing that you cannot stumble vpon the word of God, but foorthwith you runne yourselfe against Christ, which is the rocke. And you know that he will not giue back, but breaketh all to fitters, whatsoeuer that rusheth against him.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You do not submit your selues to the order of the Church, which is a good and decent order: you haue filled the Churche with maruellous contentions, and haue strangely deuided, euen such as professe the Gospell: your mouthes are not stopped but through your owne procuring.
                        I do not withstand that which you vntruly call the truth, for any such cause as you surmise, (God who seeth my hart knoweth) but bycause I sée these your deuises to be set downe by you without any sufficient warrant in the word of God: agaynste the practise and order of the primitiue Churche, tending also to daungerous errours, and meere confusion both of the Church and of the common wealth.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 172. Sect. vlt.
                     And if the matter herein alleadged, do not satisfye you, then I desire euen before the same GOD, that you confute it, not by passing ouer thynges whyche you can not

answer, or by stauing both the words and the meaning of the booke, and taking your owne fansie to confuce, or by wrougling with the fault of the print, or by carping at the translation, when the wordes being changed the sense remayneth, or by alleadging that such a one, or such another was of this or that iudgement, as you for the most part (hauing nothing but his bare name) haue done. All whiche thinges you haue committed in this booke▪ but that you confute it, by the authoritie of the worde of God, by good and sound reasons, wholy, and not by peecemeale. And if you bring the practise of the churches, we desire that it may be out of authorities which are extant, which are not counterfeyte, and which were in the best and purest times. And if you thinke that the credite of your Doctor ship or Deanry will beare out that which you cannot answer your selfe, besides that (*) 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , is neuer shut▪ remember M. Doctor that lighte is come into tht worlde, andThe reuenging eye. men will not be deluded with nothing, nor abused with visards, neyther let it embolden you which peraduenture hathe made poli presume the more in▪ this booke) to write any thing vppon hope, that no man dare answer it. For neyther the Queenes Maiestie nor hir honorable counsell, as we are perswaded, will deale so sharply with those, whome they know to be faithfull, and lawfull subiects, which pray that all the treasures of Gods wisedome may be poured vpon them: neither haue we cause to thinke, but that as the euill opinion which is in part conceiued of vs, hath growen vppon false and vntrue informations, whiche you and such other haue giuen in crying in their eares, that we be Anabaptists, conspired with Papists, Puritanes, Donatists, bringers in of confusion and anarchy, enimies to ciuill gouernment, and I know not what: euen so when hir Maiestie, and their honours shall vnderstand how farre we are from those wicked opinions, they will leaue that opinion of vs▪ and rather esteeme of vs, by that we haue preached, taught, and now write, than that whiche other men report of vs, being thinges which we neuer taught▪ spake, or so much as dreamed of.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is so farre from satisfying me in any point, that it greatly confirmeth me in some thing, where vnto before I did but incline. Such is the weakenesse of your grounds.
                        Your request made vnto me is against all reason, for how can you require that ofThe Replye
                                 〈1 line〉
                               requireth that of others which he him selfe woulde not performe. me towarde you, which you haue in no respect perfourmed towards me? for firste, you haue not set downe my booke, that the Reader mighte perceiue, how vprightly you deale with me: secondly, you haue passed ouer many thinges and left them vnanswered: Thirdly, you haue vnreasonably wrested my words, and in most places you do nothing but wrangle: you haue mangled my booke, and so skipt from place to place, that the Reader shall hardly perceine, what you take or what you leaue: to be short, you haue vsed few scriptures, and those vntollerably wrested. How then can you require the contrary of me? But I haue satisfied your request to the full I trust: saue only I do not intend to learne of you how to answer, what authoritie to vse, but if the authorities and reasons that I bring shall be sound to be light, they shall the more easily by you be remoued.
                        I depend not vppon the credit of my Doctorship or Deanry, neither would I wish you too much to trust to the opinion of your owne learning and witte: I say with Sainte Augustine, Let scripture be compared with scripture, reason with reason, authoritie with authoritie, cause with cause, and let vs both according to the same be iudged.
                        I doubte not of the answering of my booke, neyther do I feare it: you knowe thatConference by writing hath bin often offered to the Replier. I haue offered you diuerse tymes this kind of conference, though not in thys publike manner. I haue spoken nothing agaynste you, before hir maiestie, whyche your bookes and doings, haue not proued to be true. Hir Maiestie and their honours know what they haue to do, the Lord blisse them with his holy spirit, and in all their doings guide them.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of the additions, detractions, and alterations made by the admonitors in both the partes of the Admonition.
               
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 173. Sect. 1.
                     Beside that often thne
                           〈1 line〉
                         M. Doctor doth account the expositions and explanations, corrections, he 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ueth vs somewhat the lesse hope, that he will correct his errours, for that he purfueth the authours of the Admonition so harde, correcting their very small and few slips, whiche they haue made, calling this singular 
                           〈1 line〉
                        destie and commendable hum
                           〈1 line〉
                        tie amongst other reproches, dalying and inconstancie, when it is our profession euery day to learne better things. For vnto what end should we liue, if time, if experiēce, if reading, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        iusing, if conference should teach vs nothing? And therefore when thinges are printed againe, it is good and prayse worthy, to polishe those thynges which are some what rud
                           〈1 line〉
                        , to mitigate these things which are too sharpe, to make playne & to giue light to those things which seeme darker, and to correct that which is amisse. I thinke M. Doctor should not be ignorante, that wise men haue their 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , there second councells, and those also wiser and better than their first, as that sentence doth declare. I will therefore say no more hereof, but admonish M. Doctor that he receiue more louingly those whiche correcte themselues, seing that the best defense to his booke, must be, not a correction here and there, but a cleane blotting, or striking out, not an amending, but a new making almost of his whole booke. Other matter in his censures, he hath almost none at all woorth the answering, sauing that he hathe a place or two, which toucheth the matters before entreated of.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It behoueth such as will take vpon them to plucke downe that which is wel builded,They whiche wil pul down the olde, and place a newe platforme, oughte to be v
                                 〈1 line〉
                              rie circumspecte. and to make a new platforme, to be well aduised what they do, and assured of their cunning: if this ought to be in humane matters, and in externall affaires of the life of man, how much more ought it to be in diuine matters, and things perteyning to the kingdome of heauē. I do not mislike that modestie and humilitie, that is contente to be corrected, and to acknowledge that whiche is ami
                              〈1 line〉
                           e. But I can by no meanes allowe that pryde and arrogancie, that presuming to condemne the whole state of a Churche, and to prescribe vnto the same a newe platforme, is by and by after, through vnskilfulnesse, and lack of discretion at the first, constreyned to misselyke that newe platforme also, and to p
                              〈1 line〉
                           ce it and patch it like a beggers cloke, with putting too and taking fro, with altering and chaunging sometyme this, and sometyme that, like vnto foolishe and vnskilful buylders. It behoueth suche as will take vpon them in church matters to pluck downe that which is alreadie buylded, and to prescribe a new platforme, to be certain of their 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ing, expert in their doings, groū
                           ded in learning and experience: not yonglings and nouices, whose yea to day is nay to morow, whose heads are full of new toys and deuises, who publish in print their first cogitations and counsels, before they haue any leysure to thinke of their second. This is that whiche I misselyke, and reproue in the authors of the Admonition: for
                              
                                 〈◊◊〉
                              . if they had published their myndes as scholars, and not as maisters: as learners, not as teachers: as putters in mynde of that whiche best liked themselues, not as prescribers what all other men ought of duetie to followe, theyr sodaine corrections had bene much more tollerable. But I will not multiplie wordes with you, neyther will I require that whiche you contemptuously enoughe haue spoken of my selfe, only I admonishe the Reader to take héede howe he doth credite such rashe and yong buylders, whiche so soone as they haue ended their buylding, must be constrayned to plucke downe the same agayne.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Additions, detractions. &c. of the fyrst parte of the Admonition.
                     In the preface, to Archbishops, Byshops, Suffraganes, Deanes. &c. they haueDoctors and Bachelers of diuin
                              〈1 line〉
                           ie mislyked. added Vniuersitie Doctors, and Bachelers of diuinitie. It should seeme that they would haue a confusion of degrees (which they call equalitie) as well in vniuersities, as in Parishes, and other their imagined congregations: marke whether this geare tend not to the ouerthrow of vniuersities, and of all good learning.
                  
                  
                     
                     T. C. Pag. 173. tovvards the ende of the first Section.
                     For whereas he accuseth the Authors of the Admonition in the first leafe, as though they should condemne Doctors and Bachlers of diuinitie, and so bring in confusion of degrees, he vpon the. 5. leafe confesseth that they allow of a Doctor. Although he that taketh away degrees of Doctor or Bachler of diumine, doth not bring in confusion, nor taketh not away all degrees of schooles, especially seeing they are now made bare names without any offices, and oftentymes they are admitted to these degrees, which neyther can, nor will teach.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I say that belike they allowe of a Doctor of law, bicause they haue left that title out in their seconde edition: and haue in stead thereof placed Doctors, and Bachlers of diuinitie. The cause why you leaue so much vnto them in this barbarous opinion,The cause why the Replier ioyneth agaynst degrees in diumitie. may be coniectured, to be the repulse that you suffered when you earnestly desired the one of them. If the degrées be bestowed vpon vnworthie persons (which you are not able to proue at this day) the fault is in the persons that so bestow them, not in the degrees, the taking away whereof, must néedes in the ende bring in confusion and barbarisme: and in déede they can by no meanes stand with your platforme, and therefore do you here insinuate that you are content to allow all the degrées in schooles, but onely the degrées in diuinitie, and yet as I sayde before, not long since you greatly desired euen the highest of them.
                     
                  
                  
                     Additions, detractions, and alterations in the first part of the Admonition.
                     
                        In the Preface.
                        In the margent, for the. 15. of Mathew. vers. 23. they haue quoted the. 15. of Math. vers. 13. to proue that tyrannous Lordship cannot stand with Christs kingdome: the wordes be these: But he ansvvered and sayd, enery plant vvhich my father hath not planted, shall be rooted vp, meaning that such as be not by free adoption and grace grafted in Jesus Christ, shall be rooted vp. But this proueth not their proposition: I do not alow tyrannous Lordship, but I disallow such vnapt reasons.
                        In the same Preface speaking of Bishops. &c. they haue added these wordes: they were once of our minde, but since their consecration they be so transubstantiated, that they are become such as you see. It may be that consideration of the tyme, place, state, condition, and other circumstances hath altered some of them in some poynts, as wise (and not wilfull) men in such matters by such circumstances be oftentimes altered: but that any one of them were euer of your minde in most things vttered in those two treatises, I can not be perswaded.
                     
                     
                        Fol. 1.
                        For the. 1. Act. vers. 12. is noted. Act. 2. vers. 2
                              〈1 line〉
                           . to proue that in the olde Church there was a try all had both of the Ministers abilitie to instruct, and of their godly conuersation also. The text is this: And it shall be that vvhosoeuer shall call on the name of the Lorde shall be saued. Which is farther frō the purpose a great deale, than the other place is. There is also in the same leafe left out, King Edwards Priests: whicheKing Edwards priests left out. argueth with howe little discretion, and lesse aduise, the first Admonition was pe
                              〈1 line〉
                           ed.
                        Speaking of learning master Nowels Catechisme, these wordes be added: and so first they consecrate them, and make them Ministers, and then they set them to schoole. This scoffe is answered before, and might very wellA scoffe. haue bene left out. And a little after, where it was before, then election
                           
                           was made by the common consent of the whole Church: now it is thus corrected,A correction of a place. 
                           then election was made by the Elders, with the common consent of the whole Churche: which altereth the matter something, but yet is not proued by the text alleaged out of the first of the Acts, and by me answered before.
                     
                     
                        Fol. 2.
                        For Act. 14. verse. 13. is quoted Act. 14. verse. 23. which ouersight I my selfe haue corrected in my answere to that place.
                        There is also left out an Albe, which before was sayde to be requiredAlbe left out. by the Pontificall in the ordering of ministers. As I sayde before, so I say agayne, that in the booke of ordering ministers, now vsed, and printed since 
                              Anno dom. 1559. there is neyther required albe, surples, vestiment, nor pastorall staffe.
                        This lyne is also added, these are required by their Pontifical, meaning surplesse, vestiment. &c. which is vntrue, as I haue sayde before.
                        For the. 1. Tim. 1. verse. 14. nowe it is. 1. Tim. 1. verse. 19. but it is not to proue any matter in controuersie, onely it is vncharitably and vniustly applyed.
                        For. 1. Sam. 9. verse. 28. is placed. 1. Sam. 9. verse. 18. the selfe same place that I haue answered before.
                        Where before it was thus written: Then ministers were not so tyed to any forme of prayers inuented by man: nowe these wordes inuented by man be lefte out, and there is added, as necessitie of tyme required, so they mighte poure. &c. I knowe not their meaning, excepte they woulde neyther haue vs bounde to the Lordes prayer, nor any other.
                     
                     
                        Fol. 3.
                        It was before, remoue Homilies, Articles, Iniunctions, a prescript order: noweAlteration of words. it is that prescript order. Wherby it should seeme that they haue learned to allowe of a prescript order of prayers, but not of that prescript order which is in the booke of publike prayers. This is no dallying, neyther yet inconstancie.
                        For the. 3. of Mat. ver. 12. is placed. 3. of Mat. ver. 1. to proue that in the olde time the word was preached before the sacramēts were ministred: the place now alleaged is this: In those dayes Iohn the Baptist came and preached in the vvildernesse of Iudea. This proueth that Iohnpreached, but it proueth not, that whensoeuer Iohn did baptise, then he did preache.
                        Oueragaynst these words, the Nicene creede was not read in their cōmunion,
                           A protestation by the way. is written in the margent, Note that we condemne not the doctrine conteyned therein. If you condemne not the doctrine therin, what do you then cō
                           demne? or why mislike you the cōmunion, bicause that creede conteyning true doctrine is read at the celebration therof? It is well that you make this protestation, if you meane good fayth.
                        Here is also added the. 42. ver. Act. 2. to proue that then the sacrament was ministred with cōmon & vsual bread: which place I haue answered before, in answering to the. 46. verse of that chapter.
                        Where as before it was thus, interrogatories ministred to the Infant, GodfathersThey allowe godfathers & godmothers at the last. and Godmothers brought in by Higinus: nowe Godfathers and Godmothers brought it by Higinus is left out. It is happy that you are sosoone persuaded to

allow of godfathers and godmothers: I perceyue you tooke vpon you to set downe a platforme of a Church, before you had well considered of it.
                     
                     
                        Fol. 4.
                        For, some one of the congregation, is nowe, some of the congregation: wherby they seeme to allowe mo godfathers than one, whiche they dyd not before.
                        For the. 14. of the Acts, verse. 4. is noted the. 15. of the Acts, vers. 4. to proue that the office of Seniors was to gouerne the Church with the rest of the ministers: but without reason. For it is onely there written, that at Ierusalem there was Apostles and Elders, & that Paule and Barnabas declared vnto them what things God had done by them. I denie not the thing it selfe (whereof I haue sufficiently spoken before) but the argument.
                        
                           These Seniors then bicause their charge was not ouer muche, did execute their office in their owne persons: Nowe these words, bicause their charge was not ouer much be lefte out. Wherfore they haue left them out I knowe not.
                     
                     
                        Fol. 5.
                        They haue lefte out Doctors three tymes in this leafe, whiche before they recited with Chauncelors, Archdeacons, Officials, Commissaries,Why Doctors of 
                                 〈◊〉
                               be left out. Proctors. Belyke they haue remembred that this worde Doctor, is founde in the newe Testament, and especially Doctor of lawe.
                        To proue equalitie of ministers, they haue added Phil. 1. verse. 1. 1. Thes. 1. 1. The first place is this, Paule and Timotheus the seruaunts of Iesus Christ to all Saincts in Christ Iesus that are at Philippi, vvith the Bishops and Deacons. The seconde is this: Paule and Syluanus and Timotheus vnto the Church of the Thessalonians. &c. Truely I knowe not howe to conclude of those places an equalitie of all ministers: I would to God you would set downe your places, and frame your arguments yourselues.
                     
                     
                        Fol. 6.
                        They haue forgotten to quote Heb. 6. 1. and haue left out the body andTayle of Antichrist. braunche of Antichrist, and for the same haue put in the tayle: But these are but trifles, and very slender corrections.
                     
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To all these there is nothing sayde, belike the Authors of the Admonition muste answere for them selues, or else prouide another Proctor.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the additions. &c. of the seconde parte of the admonition.
                     
                        Fol. 2.
                        For the first of Tim. 3. verse. 3. nowe they haue quoted. 1. Tim. 3. verse. 6. agaynst reading ministers: Where S. Paul would not haue a minister to be a yong scholer: but he speaketh nothing agaynst reading.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 173. Sect. 2.
                     Unto the seconde leafe of the addition of the second parte of the Admonition, M. Doctor sayth that bicause the. 3. to Titus, maketh not agaynst reading, therfore it maketh not agaynst reading ministers, that is, ministers that can doe nothing but reade.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        It is in the. 1. Tim. 3. and it maketh agaynst vnlearned Ministers, not agaynst the reading of Ministers: for he may be a reading Minister, and yet learned.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Detractions. &c.
                     It was before reading is not feeding, nowe it is thus amended, forCorrection of a sodeyne. bare reading of the worde, and single seruice saying, is bare feeding: whereby they now confesse, that reading is feeding, although it be (as they say) but bare feeding. We were in good case if the platforme of our Church depended vpon these men, which alter their iudgements so sodenly. It is a true saying, 
                           Conueniet nulli qui secum dissidet ipse. Hovve can he agree vvith other, that doth not agree vvith himselfe?
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 173. Sect. vlt.
                     And where as he would picke out a contradiction in the wordes of the Admonition, bicause they say bare reading is but bare feeding, the discord is in his cares, not in their wordes. For when they sayde it was no feeding, they ment such feeding as could saue them, and so in calling it bare feeding, they note that there is not This is anec
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           m, and contrarie to that which 
                              〈1 line〉
                           ou haue pa. 158. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 15. &c. inaugh in that, to keepe them from famishment. And indeede vnlesse the Lord worke miraculously and extraordinarily (which is not to be looked for of vs) the bare reading of the scriptures without the preaching, cannot deliuer so much as one poore shepe frō destruction, and from the wolfe. And if some haue bene conuerted wonderfully, yet. M. D. should remember that 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . That is, the water doth not alway beare yron.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Reading is not feeding, and reading is beare feeding, be both vntruthes, and derogate from the Maiestie and dignitie of the worde of God: but yet in these speaches there is contrarietie, for bare féeding is féeding. What they ment by, not feeding, their words following doe declare, for (say they) it is as euill as playing vpon a stage and worse to. &c.The Replier falleth into contrarietie whiles he seeketh to cleare the Admonition of it. whereof I haue spoken before. But whilst-you go about to excuse them of contrarietie, you fall into it your selfe, for page. 158. of your booke, comparing the reading of the Scriptures, with reading of Homilies, yeu say, that the worde of God is also plaine and easie to be vnderstanded, & such as giueth vnderstanding to Idiots and to the simple. &c. And now you say, that there is not enough in the reading of the scrptures, to keepe the people from famishment. &c. the which how farre it differeth, from your former words, no man is so blindPag. 158. Lin. 15. &c. that can not sée. Beside this, it is a Popish, and an vngodly opinion, contrarie to the worthinesse and profitablenesse of the Scriptures: contrarie to the wordes of ChristIobn. 5. Iohn. 5. Search the Scripture, &c. contrarie to the wordes of the Apostle. 2. Tim. 3. Omnis
                              2. Tim. 3. Tract. 13. 
                              scriptura diuinitùs inspirata. &c.
                            And contrarie to all that, that I haue alleaged before for the reading of the Scriptures, to the which for the further confutation of this vngodly error, I do referre the Reader.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Detractions, &c.
                     
                        Fol. 3.
                        Iu the same leafe and fift reason, to these wordes: Besides, that we neuer reade in the new Testament that this worde (Priest) as touching office is vsed in theCorrection with exceptiō. good part: In the seconde edition is added, except it speake of the Leuiticall Priesthoode or of the Priesthood of Christ. Here as I thinke they haue forgotten that which Peter speaketh to all Christians, in his. 1. Epist. cap. 2. ver. 5. And ye as lyuely stones be made a spirituall house and holy Priesthod to offer vp spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God, by Iesus Christ. & ver. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood. &c. And Apo. 1.
                           
                           And make vs Kings and Priests vnto God &c. I willed them before to shew me one place in the whole newe Testament, where this word Priest as touching the office, is takē in euill part: I may be deceyued, but I desire to learne.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 174. Sect. 1.
                     And vpon the. 3. leafe, where he giueth instance in the Apocalips of the word (Priest) to be taken otherwise, than for the Leuitical priesthood, and priesthood of our sauiour Christ. M. D. cannot be ignorant that the Admonition speaketh of those which be priests in deed, & properly, and not by those which are priests by a inctaphore and borowed speach. And wheras he desireth to learne where the worde, priest, is taken in euill part in all the new testament. Although all men see how he asketh this question of no mind to learne, yet if he will learne (as he sayth) he shall find that in In what Chapter▪
                         the Acts of the Apostles it is taken diuers times in euill part. For seing that the office & function of 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , that is, of priests was (after our sauiour christs ascētion) naught & vngodly: the name wherby they were called, which did exercise that vngodly function, cannot be otherwise takē than in the euil part.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        And what say you to the places of S. Peter, is not this worde (priest) taken in good part there also? I desired to haue one place in all the new Testamēt named vnto me, where this word priest is taken in euil part, & you send me ouer to the Acts of the Apostles naming neither text nor chapter: & yet that satisfieth not my request, for the Authors of the Admonition in their corrections, except the Leuitical priesthood, and the priesthood of Christ, whereof onely there is mention made in the Actes of the Apostles, except it be in the. 14. of the Acts, where Luke speaketh of heathnish priests, as of the priest of Jupiter: so that my question is as yet vnanswered by you.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Additions. &c.
                     
                        Fol. 5.
                        But of the Bishops benediction by laying on of his handes heare master Caluines iudgement in this Instit. cap. 19. Section. 4. Talem manuum
                              Imposition of handes in confirmation allowed by Caluin. 
                              impositionem quae simpliciter loco benedictionis fiat, laudo, & restitutam hodiè in purum vsum velim. Such imposition of handes as is simplie made in the stead of blessing, I do commende, and vvish that it vvere restored at this day to the pure vse. There shall you also read the verie self same forme and maner of confirmation allowed, which is now vsed in this Church of England.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 174. Sect. 2.
                     Master Doctor vpon the. 5. leafe, cyteth M. Caluins authoritie to proue that the laying on of the handes vpon yong children, & the confirmation which is here vsed is good. In the which place, although he allow of a kinde of confirmation, yet he doth not commend
                           〈1 line〉
                         that which we haue. For he doth plainly reproue Ierome, for saying that it came from the Apostles, which notwithstanding the confirmation with vs doth affirme. Besides that there are other abuses which I haue noted there, which M. Caluin doth not by any worde allow. He alloweth indeede of a putting on of handes of the children, when they come out of their childehoode, or begin to be yong men, but as well as he doth allow of it, he was one of those which did thrust it out of the Chuch where he was Pastor. And He re you make M. Caluine contrarie to him selfe, but vntruly. so he alloweth of it, that he bringeth (in the sixt Section of the same Chapter) a strong reason to abolish it. Where he asketh what the imposition of handes shoulde do now, seeing that the giftes of the holy Ghost by that ceremonie is ceased. Therefore seeing that we haue M. Caluins reason agaynst this imposition of handes, his name ought not to be preiudiciall vnto vs: especially seeing that we haue experience of great inconuemences which come by it, which maister Caluin could not haue, that thing being not in vse in that Church where he liued. Which inconuenience in things which are not necessarie, ought to be a iust cause of abolishing of them: And this is not my indgement onely, but the iudgement of the Churches of Heluetia, Berne, Tigurine, Geneua, Scotlande, and diuers others as appeareth in the. 19. Chap. of their confession.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.The common refuge of the Replier is to discredite the Authour.
                        
                        Here you would shift of M. Caluins authoritie if you knew how: but béeing ouerpressed with his manifest wordes, you flie to your common & vsual refuge, that is,

to discredite the Authour, by charging him with contrarieties in this matter: for you confesse that he alloweth a kind of confimation: you say also that he alloweth in deed of a putting on of handes of the children, when they come out of their childhoode or begin to be yong men: and againe you affirme: that he was one of those, that did thrust it oute of the Churche where he was Pastor: and that he bringeth in the 6. Section of the same Chapter a strong reason to abolish it. Thus you set Master Caluine against himselfe, and that in the sameCaluin vntruely charged with contrariety by the Replyer. Chapter, which cannot but turne to his great discredite, if it were true: but you greatly abuse both the Reader and him: for in the. 4. section which I haue alledged, he speaketh of that maner of confirmation & imposition of handes which was vsed in the olde Church, and the same that is nowe vsed in the Church of Englande, which he alloweth and wisheth restored: In the fifth and sixth sections he speaketh of the maner and forme of confirmation, and laying on of handes vsed by the Papists, and disproueth that: as his owne wordes, (which I haue for that purpose more at large set downe) do plainly declare: for in the fourth Section of the. 19. Chapter thus hee wryteth. This was the maner in tymes past, that the children of Christians shoulde beeCaluin inst. cap. 9 sect. 4. set before the Bishop, after they were come to yeares of discretion, that they might performe that, which was required of them, that being of age did offer themselues to baptisme. For these sat among the Catechumeni, vntill (being rightly instructed in the mysteries of fayth) they were able to vtter a confession of their fayth, before the Bishop and the people. The insants therefore that were baptised, bicause then they made no confession ofA kind of con
                                 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  described by Caluin, not disagreeing from ours. fayth in the Church: at the ende of their childehoode, or in the beginning of their youth, they were againe presented of their parents, and were examined of the Bishop, according to a certaine and common forme of a Catechisme. And to the intent that this action (which otherwise ought of right to be graue and holy) might haue the greater reuerence and estimation, there was added also the ceremonie of laying on of handes, so the childe was dismissed, his fayth being approued with a solemne blessing. The auncient fathers make often mention of this order. Pope Leo, If any man returne from heretikes, let him not againe be baptised, but let the vertue of the spirite (which was wanting) be giuen vnto him by the laying on of the Bishops handes. Here our aduersaries will crie, that it is rightly called a Sacrament, wherein the holy Ghost is giuen. But Leo himselfe doth in another place expounde what he meaneth by those wordes: He that is baptised (sayth he) of heretikes, let him not be rebaptised, but let him be cōfirmed, with the inuocation of the holy Ghost, by the imposition of handes: bicause he receyued only the forme of baptisme without sanctification. Hierome also maketh mention hereof, contra Luciferianos. Although I doe not denie, that Herome is somwhat herein deceyued, that he sayth that it is an Apostolicall obseruation: yet is he most farre from these mens follies. And he mittigateth it when he sayth that this blessing was graunted only to the Bishop, rather for the honour of priesthood, than by the necessitie of the law. VVherefore such an imposition of handes which is simply in stead of a blessing, I commend, and would wish it were at these dayes restored to the pure vse.
                        
                        These words be euident, & declare a maner of confirmation correspondent to ours.
                        In the fifth Section he wryteth thus. But the latter age haue brought in a counterfey
                                 〈1 line〉
                              eThe abuse of confirmation in the popish Church. confirmation in stead of a Sacrament of God, the thing it selfe beeing almost quite blotted out. They feyne this to be the vertue of confirmation, to giue the holy Ghost vnto the encrease of grace, whiche was giuen in baptisme to innocencie of lyfe, to confirme them vnto battail, which in baptisme were regenerated vnto life. This confirmation is wrought with annointing, and this forme of wordes: I signe the with the signe of the holy Ghost, and I confirme thee with the oyntment of saluation, in the name of the father, and of the sonne, and of the holy ghost. &c. And in confuting this maner of confirmation, and imposition of handes, he procéedeth on in this fifth Section, & in the sixth Section. Wherefore Master Caluine is not contrarie to himselfe, neyther disalloweth that kinde of confirmation and imposition of handes in the sixth Section, which he alloweth in the fourth. But in the one he approueth the maner of the auncient and purer Church touching confirmation: in the other he disproueth the vse & doctrine of the papistical church, cōcerning the same. This might you haue sene, if you had bin disposed: but you care not whom you discredit so that you may winne credit to your selfe.
                        
                           The confession of the Churches of Heluetia, Berne, &c. speake only of the PopisheThe Repl
                                 〈1 line〉
                               viech that against our confirmation which is 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of the Papistes. Confess. Heluet. cap. 19.
                            confirmation, which the Papists make one of their seuen Sacraments, as it is manifest by the wordes of the confession which be these. Confirmation and extreame vnction or anealing, are the inuentiōs of man, which the church may wante without any dammage: Neither vse we them in our churches, for they haue some things which we can not allowe. Nowe to vse that against Confirmation, reformed & purged from these things which they mislike, which is spoken of the Popishe confirmation with all the abuses, can it be (thinke you) the parte of an honest, and playne dealing man?
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Additions. &c. Fol. 6.
                     In the ende of that fiftenth article or reason, this is added: And whiche of them haue not preached against the Popes twoo swordes: now whether they vse thē not them selues? Touching the Popes twoo swordes, we are of the same minde still, for the Pope contrary to the word of God taketh from Princes vnto him selfe, that authoritie which is due vnto them by the worde of God, and would haue them to receiue that authoritie from him, whiche he hath no power to giue: the Pope also requireth the full authoritie of a ciuill magistrate, and exempteth him self from all subiection, which is 
                           〈1 line〉
                        lat cōtrary to the word of God: our BishopsBishops doo not vse the ciuiil sworde as the pope doth. in this church do not chalenge (as of their owne right) any such ciuil authoritie, but only according to their dutie execute that, that by the Prince, and lawes of this realme, for iust considerations is laide vpō them. Neither do they meddle in all ciuill causes, or exercise all ciuill iurisdiction, but suche only as helpeth to discipline, and to the good gouernment of this church and state: wherfore we may safely preach against the Popes twoo swordes, and yet lawefully defend that iurisdictiō and authoritie, that any Bishop hath in this church for any thing that I knowe.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 174. Sect. 3.
                     Upon the sixt leafe M. Doctor saith that the Pope taketh the sworde from Princes, but our Bishops take it at their handes, and giuen of them: as though challenge were not made against the Pope for vsing the materiall sworde, and not only for vsing it against the wil of the Princes. For by that reason if Princes would put their swordes in his hande, as sometimes they haue done; he might lawefully vse them. And wheras he saieth that our churchmen meddle not with all ciuill causes, or exercise all ciuill iurisdiction, but such as helpeth to discipline, and the good gouernment of the church, & the estate. What sayth he, that is not truly sayd of any ciuill magistrate in the realme. For no one doth meddle in all causes. And further I would gladly knowe what ciuil iurisdiction is in this realme, which helpeth not vnto the good gouernment of this church and estate. For if they medle with al that, there is none which they haue not to do with.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The thing it selfe declareth and the practise of this church is euident, in what sorteDifferēce betwixt the ciuil iurisdiction of the Pope, & of our Bishops. and condition such ciuill offices are cōmitted to ecclesiasticall persons: and that they do not rule as kinges, but as subiectes to kinges, nor that they challe
                              〈1 line〉
                           ge not this of any other authoritie, but from the Prince, and that they vse it to no other end than the good and godly gouernment of the churche: whereas the Pope ruleth as Emperoure and kyng, not as subiecte: challengeth his authoritie of dutie, and by the word of God, not by the graunte of Princes, and vseth it moste Tyrannically, euen to the placing and displacing of kinges and Empereurs at his pleasure. And this is that vsurped iurisdiction which all good men crye out of, and mislike, and not the other which is ordinary, vsuall and lawefull. When I saye that Bishoppes haue that ciuill iurisdiction which helpeth to discipline, and the good gouernment of the churche and state: all men may vnderstande that I meane suche ciuill iurisdiction, as is

méete for them to execute, and agreable to their vocation and calling.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Additions. &c. Fol. 7.
                     Whereas before it was thus in the margent, and. 19. reason: To proue that the regiment of the Churche should bee spirituall, reade Ephes. 1. 23. 1. Thes. 5. 13. 1. Tim. 5. 2. Heb. 10. 30. nowe it is thus altered: to proue that the regiment of the churche should be spirituall, reade Caluine in his Commentaries vpon these places Ephe. 1. 23. 1. Thes. 5. 13. 1. Ti. 5. 2. Heb. 10. 30. Belike bicause the scriptures them selues doe not sufficiently proue your assertion, therfore you would haue vs to leaue them, and to rest vpon Caluines interpretation, which is nothing else but to preferre mans iudgemēt before the word of God, or to giue M. Caluine authoritie to conclude that whiche is not determined by the scripture. If this be not your meaning why flie you frō those places them selues to M. Caluines interpretation vpon them? But what if you now abuse M. Caluines Commentaries vpon these places, as you did before the places them selues? In his commentaries vpon Ephe. 1. vers. 23. This is al that he sayth touching this matter. 
                           Nam vtcun
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               Christus omnia perficiat, nutu virture
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               sua: tamen specialiter loquitur hic Paulus de spirituali ecclesiae gubernatione. Quanquā nihil intereà impedit quominùs de vniuersali mundi gubernatione accipias. For hovvesoeuer Christe maketh perfecte all things vvith his beck and by his povver, yet Paule speaketh here especially of the spirituall gouernment of the church. Although that in the meane time it is no hinderance, vvhy thou maist not also vnderstande it of the vniuersall gouernment of the vvorld. These wordes serue little for your purpose. There is no man that doubteth, but that Christe doth spiritually gouerne his church, and reigne in the hearts of the faithfull by his spirit: But your meaning is that the gouernment of the churche is only spirituall, which you can no more gather of these words of Caluine, than you may that of the gouernment the whole worlde ought only to be spirituall.
                     The same Caluine writing vpon. 1. Thes. 5. vers. 12. for the which you haue noted the. 13. sayth on this sorte: 
                           Hoc additum videtur, ad notandum spirituale regimen, tameesi enim reges quo
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               & magistratus Dei ordinatione praesunt, quia tamen ecclesiae gubernationem dominus peculiariter vult suam agnosci, ideò nominatim praeesse in Domino dicuntur, qui Christi nomine & mandato ecclesiā gubernant. This seemes to be added to note the spirituall regiment, For although kings also and magistrates do gouerne by the ordinance of God, yet bicause the Lorde vvould haue the gouernment of the churche knovven peculiarly to be his, therefore namely they are sayde to rule in the Lorde, vvhich gouernethe the church in the name of Christe and by his commaundement. Hetherto Caluine also affirmeth that whiche no man denieth, that God doth by the ministerie of his worde, spiritually gouerne his churche. But this taketh not awaye the eiuill magistrate, neither yet ciuill lawes made by the Magistrate externally also to gouerne the churche. In his Commentaries. 1 .Ti. 5 vers. 2. he speaketh not one worde of this matter for any thing that I can perceiue. Upon the place to the Hebrewes, he onely sheweth that God doth gouerne his church, the which I thinke no man is so wicked as

to denye. You must more plainly set it downe what your meaning in this matter is, before you can be fully answered. For to proue that God doth spiritually gouerne his churche is nedelesse, being deniedAnabaptisme after a sort 
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           fended. of none, either Papiste or Protestante: but therevpon to cōclude that the ciuill Magistrate is secluded from the gouernment of the church, or that there nedeth no externall regiment, is daungerous and sauoreth Anabaptisme.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Page. 174. Sect. vlt.
                     Upon the seuenth leafe he sayth that he knoweth not the meaning of the Admonition, when it proueth that the gouernment of the church is spirituall, their meaning is playne enough and I haue declared it more at large to be, not only that our sauiour Christe ruleth by his spirite in the hearts of his elect, (besides which gouernment M. Doctor seemeth to knowe none) but that there is also spirituall gouernment, which is in the whole church visible and to be seene, exercised by those whome God hath appointed in his steade, called spirituall, bicause wheras the ciuill gouernment vseth the sworde, this vseth the worde. and where the ciuil gouernour addresseth him selfe vnto the body, and hath that for speciall matter to worke on: the spirituall gouernours be occupied in reforming the mynde, and subduing that with those punishementes & corrections which God hath appointed for that purpose. Which signification of spirituall gouernment, M. Caluine doth speake of in both the places alleadged by M. Doctor. and especially in the latter, vnto whome the Admonition sent the Reader, not thereby to giue more weighte vnto the truthe, but that he might haue there a playner, and fuller vnderstanding of that which is ment, and could not for that breuitie and shortnesse which it followeth throughout, vtter at large. Whereby it is manifest, that the Admonition is so farre frō shutting out either ciuill gouernment or externall gouernment in the churche, that it teacheth of an externall gouernment which M. doctor seemeth not to haue heard of, albert there be nothing either more common in the scriptures, or ecclesiasticall writers.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        You replye not to my answere, neither doe you tell vs why you haue lefte out the places of Scripture before quoted, and in place thereof put M Caluine: Neither haue you salued their vnapt and vnfitte alleadging of M. Caluine, who is farre from prouing their purpose in those places which they haue noted. In deede the true spirituall gouernment of the church is the ruling of Christ by his spirite in the heartes of the elect: neither do I denie but that admonition, exhortation, and excommunicationThe whole externall gouernment of the churche is not spirituall. perteine also to the spirituall gouernment of the church, bicause they perteyne to the inward man, and vse no corporall force or punishment: but I d
                              〈1 line〉
                           nye the whole gouernment of the church to consiste herein, for I haue proued before, and it cannot bee denied, but that God hath chiefly and principally committed the gouernmente of his churche to the Christian magistrate, by the sworde also, and by conuenient lawes and orders to gouerne the same with an externall kinde of gouernment: and therfore that which I denye, neither you nor they haue as yet proued, or can proue: that is, that the gouernment of the church is only spiritual. But styll the Reader may note howe you labour cleane to shut out the ciuill magistrate from the gouernment of the church.The ciuil magistrate excluded from gouernment of ye church. For if the gouernment of it be only spirituall (which you laboure to pro
                              〈1 line〉
                           e) then what hath the ciuill magistrate to do therewith? Admonishe and exhort he may not: excō
                           municate he cannot: and therefore hath he by your doctrine no more to doe in the gouernment of the church, which consisteth in these and such like spirituall actions, than the poorest subiecte in this lande. For when you saye that the Admonition is farre from shutting out either ciuill gouernment or externall gouernment in the churche, you speakeSubtil sp
                                 〈1 line〉
                              ch of ye Replier. Gouernour in the church, not of the church. subtilly in saying in the church, not, of the church, for you confesse that the ciuil magistrate is a gouernour in the church, but not of the church, that is, he gouerneth the common wealth which is conteyned in the church, but he doth not gouerne the church. O howe simply and playnely you deale.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Additions. &c.
                     
                        Fol. 8.
                        In the margent ouer against the. 21. reason, there is this note: It conteyneth
                           
                           manifest blasphemie as may appeare. Ephes. 1. 17. meanyng this saying of the Bishop to those that are admitted mynisters: Receyue the holy Ghost. The place in that chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians proueth no such thing, these be the wordes: I cease not to giue thankes for you making mention of you in my prayers, that the God of our Lorde Iesus Christe the father of glory, might giue vnto you the spirite of vvisedome, and reuelation thorough the knovvledge of him. What sequele is there in this argument? S. Paule prayed that God would giue to the Ephesians the spirite of wisedome and reuelation through the knowledge of him: Ergo, this saying of the Bishop (Receyue the holy Ghost) to those that are admitted into the mynisterie, conteyneth manifest blasphemie. Such is your vsuall manner of reasoning.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 175. Sect. 1.
                     Upon the. 8. leafe, M. Doctor sayth he seeth nothing how the place of the Ephes. maketh any thing agaynst this manner of speach of the Bishop; (Receyue the holy Ghost) and yet it maketh thus much, that for as much as the Apostles did vse to pray that the grace of God might be giuen vnto men, the Bishops should not vse this manner of speache, whiche conteyneth the forme of a commaundement.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte,
                        This is farre from prouing the woordes to conteyne a manifest blasphemie. OfTract. 4. Cap. 2. the. 4. Diuis. the manner of speaking these wordes, vpon what consideration the Bishops vse the same forme, and that they may do it, I haue shewed before.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Additions. &c.
                     
                        Fol. 9.
                        
                           All this is added: Neyther is the cōtrouersie betwixt them and vs as they would beare the world in hand: as for a cap, a tippet, or a surplesse, but for greater matters concerning a true ministerie and regiment of the Church according to the worde. VVhich things once established, the other melt away of themselues: and yet consider I pray you, whether their owne argument doth not choake themselues, for euen the very name of trifles doth playnly declare that they ought not to be maynteyned in Christes churche: and what shall our Bishops winne by it? forsoth that they be maynteyners of trifles, and trifling Bishops, consuming the greatest part of their time in those trifles, whereas they should be better occupied. VVe striue for true religiō and gouernment of the Church, and shew you the right way to throw out Antichrist both head and tayle, and that we will not so much as communicate with the tayle of the beast: But they after they haue thrust out Antichriste by the head, go aboute to pull him in agayne by the tayle, cunningly colouring it, least any man should espie his foote steps, as Cacus did when he stole the oxen.
                        What other men haue done, I know not, but for my parte, I alwayes suspected & partly knewe, that some of you had greater mattersGreat matters pretēded not yet vttered. in hand, and of more importance than cap, tippet, and surplisse, which surely was one of the firste causes that moued me to be more earnest against you, than I was accustomed: for I did vnderstād that you were hatching opinions tending not only to Anabaptisme, but to the ouerthrow of the Gospell, & disturbing the quiet state of this

church: and yet who knoweth not that you haue made the cappe, and surplisse your pretence hetherto, vntill nowe of late when you see almost all men condemne your folly.
                        You say, we choake our selues with our owne argumēt, for euen the very name of trifles doth playnely declare, that they ought not to be maynteyned in Christes churche. Surely of themselues they be but trifles, as all other externall Ceremonies and indifferent thinges be: it is the circumstances that maketh them no tryfles, but matters of weight: For thinges indifferent beyng commaunded thus or so to be vsed by the Magistrate (not as necessarie to saluation and iussification, but as conuenient and necessarie for order̄ and decencie) be not now trifles. And whosoeuer without a lawfull vrgent cause, or in a case of necessitie dothe breake the lawe made of them, sheweth himself a disordered person, disobedient, a contemner of lawfull authoritie, and a wounder of his weake brothers conscience. And if any man shall say, that this is to bring vs agayne in bondage of the lawe, and to depriue vs of our libertie: I answere, no: for it is not a matter of iustification but of order: and to be vnder a lawe, is no taking away of Christian libertie.Christian libertie what it is. For the Christian libertie is not a licence to do what thou list, but to serue God in newnesse of minde, & that for loue, not for seruile feare. Of themselues therefore they be but trifles, but beyng commaunded by the Magistrate to be vsed, or not to be vsed, they are no trifles, no more than it was for women to come into the Church bareheaded, or a man to pray hauing his cappe on his head, after that S. Paule had made an order to the contrarie. And therefore these scoffes and floutes (And what shall our Bishops winne by it? forsoth that they be maynteyners of tryfles, and tryfling Bishops, consuming the greatest parte of their time in these tryfles, whereas they should be better occupied) might with more commendation of your modestie haue bene well forborne. They see your doinges tende not onely to contention but to confusion: not onely to disobedience towardes the lawes of the Prince, but also to dangerous errours, yea to the ouerthrow of Religion: & therefore they are neither maynteyners of tryfles, nor tryfling Bishops, but wyse, discrete, vigilant, and learned Fathers, whiche seeke to maynteyne peace, preserue good order, defende the authoritie of lawfull lawes, and in time suppresse erroneous doctrine.
                        You rather spende the time in trifles, when you might be better occupied, for you (omitting all other necessary pointes of doctrine, andInuectiue Sermons. profitable exhortations to good life) stuffe your sermons, and furnish your table talke with nothing else, but with bitter inuectiues against those rytes, as though they were matters of damnation, and against those learned and discrete ministers of the woorde, who (according to their dutie vsing of them) seeke in deede to beate downe Antichrist to plante necessary pointes of Religion in mens heartes, and to teachUnfrutefull sermons. repentance with newnesse of life: which your vnfruitfull, frowarde, and contentious dealyng, reioyseth the Papiste, discrediteth the sounde and learned preacher, offendeth the godlye, woundeth the weake, worketh contempte of Magistrates and superiours in the

heartes of the hearers, destroyeth that which other men buylde, and finally doth good to none. For what fruite can there come to the hearers, by inueighing continually against Cappe, Tippet, Surplesse, Ring in mariage, womens whyte kerchers, baggepipes, funerall sermons, mourning aparel. &c. Bishoppes, Preachers, Magistrates, Prince? These and suche lyke be onely the common places, you entreate of.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 175. Sect. 2.
                     Upon the ninth leafe he hath sundry greeuous accusations and charges of disorder, disobediēce, and contempte, against those which refuse the aparel, and laboureth to perswade that they are great and weighty matters. But his proofes were spent before.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        The proofes that I haue here vsed gawles you shrewdely, & will not be answered with such disdaine: let the learned Reader consider of them, and marke howe well you haue spoken for your selfe.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ansvvere to the Additions. &c.
                     
                        Fol. 1.
                        There is added Portuis, for where before they sayde that our booke of Common prayers was culled and picked out of that Popyshe dunghill the Massebooke, nowe vppon better aduisement, they saye that it was culled out of the portuis and Masse booke. It derogateth nothing from the booke of Common prayers, bicause something therein is in the portuis and massebooke, no more than it derogateth from the scriptures, that some portion of them, as the whole Psalmes, and certain other portions of the Epistles, Gospels, and other Scripture, bee in the same: neyther are they allowed bicause they be in the portuis and massebooke, but bicause they be either Scripture, or moste agreeable therevnto.
                        They also adde in the firste reason, that the comming of women in vayles to be Churched, is not commaunded by lawe, but yet the abuse to bee great, by reason that superstition is growen thereby in the heartes of many, and other are iudged that vse it not. This is an argument of their former rashnesse, but not worthy any answere, especially being confessed to be without the booke.
                        For the. 120. Psalme. is now quoted the. 121. Psalme, which I haue also corrected before.
                     
                     
                        Fol. 2.
                        For the. 26. of Math. is noted the. 28. And this also I corrected in answering that place.
                        Where it was before, and minister a Sacrament, nowe is added, according to their appointmente, to what purpose I knowe not.
                        There is also added in the same leafe these wordes: are not the people well nodified thinke you, when the homely of sweeping the churche is read vnto them:
                        
                        Surely such flouting termes are vsed of none but of nodies in deede, and suche as are more meete to be fooles in playes, where they maye iest, thā to be platformers of churches, in whom wisdome, learning,

grauitie & godlinesse is to be requyred: I know no Homelie entituled of sweeping the Churche, one there is of repayring and keeping cleane of churches: whether it edifie or no, I referre to the wise and discrete Reader to iudge, when he hath perused it.
                        Before it was in yt secōd reason, for the very name Apocrypha testifieth that they
                                 Fol. 3. Apocrypha▪
                               ought rather to be kept close than to be vttered: Now it is, for the very name Apocrypha testifieth that they were read in secrete, & not opēly: This is some correction of their former rashnesse. But of this matter, that is, of reading Homelies in the Church, I haue spoken before. I omit. 2. Tim. 3. vers. 6. which is now vers. 19. & 2. Pet. 1. vers. 20. which is now vers. 19. 20. 21. For these be not matters of any great importance, & they be quoted to proue a matter not doubted of among vs. In the former edition & fourth reason, it is thus written: In this booke we are enioyned to receyue the Cōmunion kneeling, which beside that it hath in it a shewe of papistrie, doth not so well expresse the mysterie of this holy Supper. For as in the old Testament eating the Paschall Lamb stāding, signified a readinesse to passe: euen so in receiuing it now sitting, according to the exāple of Christe, we signifie a rest, that is, a full finishing thorough Christ, of all the ceremoniall lawe, and a perfect worke of redemption wrought that giueth reste for euer, and so we auoyde also the daunger of Idolatrie. In the second Edition these wordes be thus altered: In this booke we are enioyned to receyue the Cōmuniō kneeling, which beside that it hath in it a shew of popish Idolatrie, doth not so well expresse a Supper, neither agreeth it so well with the institution of Christ, as sitting doth: not that we make sitting a thing of necessitie belonging vnto the Sacramēt, neyther al firme we that it may not be receyued otherwise, but that it is more neare the institution, and also a meane to auoyde the daunger of Idolatrie. Here is the significationCorrection. of sitting (which they before made) cleane dashed out, as a thing vnaduisedly before put in. It is also here graūted that the Cōmunion may be receyued otherwise than sitting, with other circūstances, wherof they haue now better cōsidered. Surely this is a great alteration vpon such a sodaine: & I would hardly haue bene persuaded that these men would so sone haue discredited thēselues by theyr inconstancie. But peraduenture the selfe same had not the correction of the booke which were the first penners of it, and therefore how they will like of this correction, it may be doubted. But although the wordes in the texte be altered, yet the quotations in the margent remayne still: Belike they are to be applied as it pleaseth the platformers.
                        All this is added in the seuenth reason: But some will say that the baptisme ofFol. 4. women is not cōmaunded by law, if it be not, why do you suffer it, & wherfore are the childrē so baptized accordingly? cōmon experience teacheth that it is vsed almost in all places, & fewe speake against it: & this I am sure of, that when it was put in the booke, that was the meaning of the most part, that were thē present, and so it was to be vnderstāded, as cōmon practise without cōtrolement doth plainely declare. All these be but cōiectures. Diuers things be suffered & in many places vsed without cōtrolment, which notwithstanding by no lawe be cōmaunded. What the meaning was of those that penned the booke, I know not, neither as I thinke do you. And surely for cōmon practise I can say litle, but for mine own experiēce this I dare affirme, that I haue not knowne one childe so baptised in places where I haue had to do, no not since the beginning of the Q. Maiesties reigne. I speake not of the thing it self, but only of your coniectures: IBaptizing by women not collected out of the booke. thinke if the circūstances of the booke be well considered, it will appeare that the meaning is, that priuate baptisme is rather to be ministred by

some minister (which in ye time of necessity may soonest be come by) thā by any womā. But in this poynt I submit my iudgemēt to such as better know the meaning of ye bok? (being pēners therof) thā I do. In the same leafe & ninth reason speaking of certeyne things vsed about mariage, they adde these words: VVith diuers other heathenishe toyes, in sundry coūtries,Toyes about mariage. as carying of wheat sheafs on their heads, & casting of corne, with a nūber of such like, wherby they make rather a maygame of mariage, thā a holy institutiō of God. These be but toyes in deede, vsed I know not where, not conteyned in any part of the boke of cōmon prayers, & therfore without my cōpasse of defense. They lacke matter whē they stuffe theyr booke with such vaine & friuolous trifles.
                        In the. 10. reason to these wordes, (as for confirmation) is added, which theFol. 5. Papists and our men say was in times past Apostolicall, grounding their opinion perhaps vpon some dreame of Hierome: And in the same place these wordes be left out: VVe speake not of other toyes vsed in it, & how far it differeth, & is degenerated from the first institution, they thēselues that are learned can witnesse: And in the place hereof this is inserted, as though baptisme were not already perfect, but needed cōfirmation, or as though the Bishop could giue the holy Ghost. You your selfe in effect haue confessed in your first edition, that confirmation of children is very auncient, & that it hath bene wel instituted, for there you say that now it differeth & is degenerateConfirmation of children allowed at the last. frō the first institution: But vpon better aduisemēt you haue left out these wordes in your second Edition: as you haue also left out these, with other toyes vsed in it, wherby you confesse (contrary to your former sentence) that the confirmation of Children now vsed is without any toyes. Howsosoeuer it pleaseth you to accompt Hieromes iudgemēt (touching the antiquitie of confirmation) a dreame: yet his dreame may be of as much credite with wise men, as your bare deniall of the same. The wordesThe ende of confirmation. that you haue added in the second place might wel haue bene spared: for you know that confirmation now vsed in this Churche is not to make baptisme perfect, but partly to trie how the godfathers & Godmothers haue performed yt which was enioyned thē whē the children were baptised: partly that the childrē thēselues (now being at the yeares of discretiō, & hauing learned what their Godfathers & Godmothers promised for thē in baptisme) may with their owne mouth & with their owne consent openly before the church ratifie & confirme the same, & also promise that by the grace of God they will euermore endeuour themselues faithfully to obserue 
                              〈1 line〉
                            keepe such things as they by their own mouth & confessiō haue assented vnto. And this reason is alledged among other euē in the booke of cōmon prayers. And that it is not to make baptisme perfect, ye boke of cōmon prayers it self declareth in these words: And that no mā shal think any detrimēt shal come to Childrē by deferring of their cōfirmatiō, he shal know for truth that it is certaine by Gods word that childrē being baptised, haue all things necessary for their saluatiō, & be vndoubtedly saued.
                        
                        You adde, as though the Bishop could giue the holy Ghost: the Bishop may vse the ceremonie vsed by the Apostles, that is, imposition of handes, & may safely say this godly prayer conteyned in the booke: Defend O Lorde this childe with the heauenly grace, that he may continue thine for euer, and dayly encrease in thy holy spirit, more and more, vntill he come vnto thy euerlasting kingdome. Amē. And other such godly prayers there cōteiued. Of any other kind of giuing ye holy ghost, there is no mētion in that boke, & therfore

these additions might very well haue bene leftout of your libel. To the end of the eleuenth reason, these wordes be added, and open our eyes that we may see what that good and acceptable will of God is, and be more earnest to prouoke his glory: to the which I onely answere, Amen.
                        In the ende of the. 12. there is something left out which they haue placed in the. 13. reason: but it is answered before.
                        There is nothing added or altered worth the noting: onely in theFol. 6. fiftenth reason, where they sayd before that we honored Bishops by the titles of kings: nowe they haue recanted that, and condemned themselues of an vntruth, for they haue left out that title.Fol. 7.
                        
                        In the seuenth leaf and 19. reason these words be left out, banners and belles: which argueth that they were before vntruly sayd to be vsed in gang weeke: But to lye, is a small matter with these men.
                        For Lordes grace of Yorke, there is the Archbishop of Yorke. The cause ofFol. 8. this alteration I know not.
                        When you say that you striue for true Religiō & gouernment of the Church, &c.
                           Fol. 9. You say, that you do that, which is to be wished you should do. But your doings tēde to ye defacing of true Religion, & ouerthrow of the right gouernment of the Church, & although you be not the head of Antichrist, yet are you his tayle: for the tayle of the beast, (as learnedTayle of Antichrist what it is. mē say) be false Prophets, Hypocrites, such as stirre vp Schismes & factions among true Christians, and by pretence of zeale, by cloaked and coloured meanes, seeke to draw into the church Antichrist backward, as Cacus did the oxen into his denne.
                     
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        To these things ye Replier hath giuen his consent as it should séeme by his silence.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Articles collected out of the former Admonition, and vntruly sayd (of the fautors of that Admonition) to be falsified.
               To the end of the second Admonition there is ioyned A reprofe of certaine Articles, collected (as it is thought) by the Bishops, (for so they say) out of a litle booke entituled, An Admonition to the Parliament. &c. But as I thinke, it may rather be termed, a recantation, or (if you will) a reformatiō or mitigatiō of certen articles in that first admonition rashly setdowne, & without learning or discretion printed.
               
               
                  1. Fol. 3. lib. 1. pag. 2. First they hold & affirme that we in England are not yetScarce the face of a Church. come to the outward face of a church agreable to Gods worde. Here you finde fault that this worde scarce is left out. Indeede this word scarce was written in the margent of diuers copies of the first Admonition: whether it were so in all, or no, I know not: no more do I whether any such collectiō (as you pretend) was made. But what neede you so muche sticke in wordes, when the thing is manifest? for in effect they denie as much as that proposition importeth: they wholy condēne the mynisterie, the ceremonies, & the gouernment of this church. They say the sacraments be full of corruptions: & in theyr second Admonition Fol 42. they say that the sacraments are wickedly māgled & prophaned: they vtterly condēne our order & māner of common prayer: yea in effect our doctrine also, for in their secōd Admonitiō, Fol. 7 they say, that although some truth be taught by some preachers, yet no preacher may without daūger of the lawes,
                  
                  vtter all truth comprised in the booke of God. What can be spoken more slenderly of the doctrine preached in this church? A mā may truly speake as much of the Romishe churche: for some truthe is taught by some Papists: yea some truth is taught by some Iewe & Turke. When therfore you say, that in this church neither the worde is truly preached, nor the sacramēts sincerely ministred, nor yet Ecclesiasticall discipline (which thre in the first Admonition Fol. 3. is sayde to be the outwarde markes, whereby a true Christian church is knowne) and also condemne our mynisterie as Popish and vnlawfull, with the whole gouernment of
                     Vix▪
                      signifieth somtime non.
                   our Church (as you do in playne termes) may it not be truely sayde, that you affirme vs in England as yet not to be come to the outward face of a church agreable to Gods worde? Furthermore what doth this word scarce helpe the matter, doth it not importe as much? it is a rule in Philosophie, Quod vix fit non fit, that vvhich is scarce done is not done.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 175. Sect. 3. 4. 5.
                  As for Answere to the Articles collected out of the Admonition, it is made in the Replie vnto M. Doctors booke, where I haue shewed how the Admonition is misconstrued and taken otherwise, than eytherit meameth or speaketh, wherevnto I will referre the Reader.
                  And albeit I haue shewed how vntrue it is, that the Admonition, affirmeth that there is no church in England, yet I can not passe by the secrete Philosophie, whereby M. Doctor woulde proue, that the Authors of the Admonition affirme it. For sayth he by ye rule of Philosophie. Quod vix fit, non fit, that which is scarse done is not done. I say this is secrete, for it was neuer taught, neyther in Academia, nor in stoa, nor Lyceo, I haue redde Quod fere fit, non fit, that which is almost done is not done. But I neuer remember any such rule as M. Doctor speaketh of.
                  And besides that in our tongue, those things which are sayd to be scarce, are notwithstanding oftentimes supposed to be. As when a man sayth that there is scarce a man aliue, &c. the scripture also vseth that phrase of speach, of things which are, as when it sayth, the iust man shall scarce be saued, it doth not meane, that iust men shall not be saued. The rest of that I haue answered.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I proue by their owne manifest woordes, that they in déede affirme that we in England are not yet come to the outwarde face of a Church agreable to Gods worde, all whiche proofes you omit and let passe cauilling onely at this woorde (scarce,) which is a manifestWhat y• word (vix) importeth. argument of a wrangler. And yet is not this manner of speaking. Quod vix sit, non sit, so straunge Philosophie, as you would gladly haue it, for this woorde (vix) eyther signifieth with violence, & great difficultie to do a thing: or else it is referred to the time: or else it signifieth (non) as in Ouide vix Priamus tanti, that is, non tanti Priamus, as Donatus doth expoūd it. I thinke you will not haue it to be taken in the first significatiō, by the Authors of ye Admonitiō, for then there is no sense in their wordes: if it be taken in either of the latter significations (as it must of necessitie be) then the Philosophie is not secrete▪ but open and knowne to euery yong Grammarian.
                     In our English phrase, it is commonly taken for non, as when we say a thing is
                           Vix, in english commonly taken for (non). 
                        scarce done, we signifie that is not yet done. Likewise when a man sayth that he is scarce well, he meaneth that he is not well. He hath scarce made an end of his sermon▪ yt is, he hath not made an end of his sermon. It is scarce. ix. of ye clocke, that is, it is not yet ix. of the clocke. Euen so we are scarce come to the outward forme of a church rightly reformed. &c. that is, we are not yet come. &c. Euery child yt cā speake knoweth this to be so.
                     When the scripture saith, that a iust man shall scarce be saued: this woorde (vix) is taken in ye first significatiō, that is, with great difficultie, & in this signification it is oftētimes taken in the scripture: but so can it not be in their manner of speach.
                  
               
               
                  Ansvvere to certayne Articles. &c.
                  
                     2. They will haue the mynisters to be called, allowed, and placed by the people. You say, that this Article is falsified: & yet their wordes in that place of their Admonition be these: Then election was made by the cōmon consent of the whole Churche. And a litle after: Then no mynister was placed in any congregation
                     
                     without the consent of the people. Wherfore the collection is very true, and they belike ashamed of their doings: and therfore they haue corrected these assertiōs in their second edition of the first Admonition on this sorte: Then election was made by the elders, with the cōmon cōsent of the whole church. Surely these men be past shame, else woulde they not denie their owne written assertions.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 175. Sect. 6.
                  And whereas he sayth that it is al one, to say that the election of the mynister must be made by A manifest 
                           〈◊〉
                        , 
                           〈◊〉
                         you leaue out this worde (whole.) the church, & to say, It must be made by the people: it is a great ouersight to make the parte & whole all one, seing ye people be but one part of the church, & the mynister and the other gouernours are, albeit not the greatest, yet the principallest part. I graunt that sometimes a parte is taken for the whole, and so we do call sometimes the gouernours of the churche, the churche, and sometimes the people: But where the question is of the proprietie of these speaches (the Church and the people) there all men that haue any iudgement, can easily put a difference.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     What I haue sayde, how truly you haue reported my wordes, & how aptly you haue replied to my Answere, euen the very simple Reader may easily vnderstand: & therfore for answers to this, I shall only desire him to compare our wordes togither: and then it shall easily appeare how you haue falsified my wordes: for wheras I gather out of these wordes of ye Admonition, Election was made by the common cōsent of the whole Church, therfore their collection is true which say, that they would haue the mynisters to be called, allowed, & placed by the people, you either of purpose, or by ouersight (which is very vsuall with you) haue left out ye worde (whole) & make as though I should say, that it is all one to say that the election must be made by the church, & to say, it must be made by the people: & should confound the people & the church, the part with the whole: which is a manifest vntruth. But by ye way it is to be noted, yt you séeme to separate the people frō the election of mynisters, for you will not haue the worde (Church) in the Admonition to cōprehend the people, else why haue you these words, when the question is of the proprietie of these speaches, (the church and the people)? and surely it may séeme that this is their meaning, bicause in their second edition they say the election was made by the Elders, with the common consent of the people, so that, the election should be made by the Elders, and the people only should cōsent to the election: which is contrary to the rest of your assertion.
                  
               
               
                  Ansvvere to certayne Articles. &c.
                  
                     4. Lin. 9. They hold that a Bishop at no hande hath authoritie to ordeyne ministers. This Article you confesse to be truely gathered: but now you make this glosse (not alone) and yet in their Admonition it is in flat termes, that the ordering of mynisters doth at no hand apperteyne to Bishops.
                  
                  
                     6. Lin. 28. They will haue the mynisters at theyr owne pleasure to preach without lycence. This is true by your owne cōfessiō, for you will haue no other licēce, but your calling to the ministerie, which must be (as you say) by the congregation. Here you shut out both the Princes licence, and the Bishops.
                  
                     7. Lin. 13. fol. 17. Lin. 6. pag. 1. Whatsoeuer is set down in this Article is manifestly affirmed in the Admonitiō, & your answere to it is friuolous, and nothing to the purpose. For in the firste parte of the Admonition▪ 
                     Fol. 2. pag. 1. These be the wordes: In those dayes knowne by voice, learning & doctrine: now they must be discerned frō other, by Popish & Antichristian apparell, as cap, gowne, tippet, &c. And in the second part speaking of the apparell prescribed to ministers, they say on this sort: There is no order in it but confusion: no comelinesse, but deformitie: no obediēce, but disobediēce both against God and the Prince. Are you not then ashamed to say, that this Article (They
                     
                     will haue the mynister discerned from others by no kinde of apparell, and the apparell appoynted they terme Antichristian, and the apparell appoynted by the Prince, disobedience agaynst the Prince) is falsified?
                  
                     Fol. 4. Lin. 1. Pag. 2. They will haue all Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, &c. together with their offices, iurisdictions, courtes, and liuings cleane taken away, and with speede remoued. You say that this is falsified in parte, bicause there is left out Lords grace, Iustice of peace, and Quorum, &c. Surely the Article is truly collected in euery poynt, and playnely affirmed in the. 2. leafe of the first parte of that Admonition. As for your gibing wordes that follow, they be but winde: I warrāt you the cōfutatiō will abide the light, & the Author will shew his face, which you are ashamed to do.
                  
                     9. Lin. 9. The Article is truly collected: looke in the first parte of that Admonition, Fol. 2. Pag. 2. & Fol. 3. And in the second part of that Admonition. Fol. 1. pag. 2. Fol. 5. pag. 1.
                  
                  
                     17. Lin. 12. The collection is true: for their wordes be these: They simply as they receyued it from the Lorde, we sinfuily mixed with mans inuentions and deuises. And therfore you vntruly say, that it is falsified.
                  
                     19. Lin. 16. They will haue no Godfathers nor Godmothers, you say that this Article is also vtterly falsified: what meane you so to forget your sslfe Is it not thus writtē in the first part of ye first Admonitiō, 
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        o. 3 pa. 2.Godfathers and Godmothers once disallowed & after recāted. And as for Baptisme it was enough with them if they had water, and the partie to be baptised, fayth, and the mynister to preache the worde, and mynister the Sacramentes. Nowe we must haue surplesse deuised by Pope Adrian, Interrogatories mynistred to the infant, Godfathers and Godmothers brought in by Higinus, &c? Howe say you? are not Godfathers and Godmothers here disallowed? wherefore be they else in this place recyted? or why are they here ascribed to Pope Higinus? will you now allow any thing in the Church inuented by the Pope? In deede in the second edition of this firste Admonition, these wordes, Godfathers and Godmothers brought in by Higinus, be cleane left out, as I haue before noted. Wherfore eyther you haue not redde the diuersitie of their editions, or else you are very impudent.
                  
                     22. Fol 8. in fine. I maruell why you say, that this collection is falsified? Looke Fol. vlt. pag 2. of the first part of the Admonition.
               
               
                  T. C. Pag. 175. Sect. 6.
                  The rest of those articles are answered in the discourse of the booke. Besides that, the fanlts which are found with the vntrue gathering of them, are not taken away by M. Doctor, but only in confident & bould asseuerations. And if I should say any thing, I should but repeat their wordes.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     The iudgement hereof must also be referred to the Reader, who may coniecture, that you haue litle to say, against any thing that I haue in this parte affirmed.
                  
               
               
                  Out of the second treatise called A view of Popishe abuses remayning.
                  
                  
                     Fol. 10. pag. 1 lin. 33. Reading of seruice or Homilies in the church is as euil as playing on a stage, and worse too. You say that this is falsified. Lord God what meane you? In the seconde leafe of that booke these be their direct wordes, Reading is not feeding, but it is as euill as playing vpon a stage, and worse too. To the same effect they speake diuers times, & so do the Authors of the second Admonition. Surely eyther they are ashamed of their doings, or else you haue not with diligence read their bookes.
                  
                     Thus briefly to haue answered to your vniust accusation of falsly collecting certain articles out of the booke entituled. An Admonition. &c. shall be sufficient. Other articles which you say be gathered out of the same booke, and confesse to be true, I haue omitted, bicause they be sufficiently answered by me in the confutation: and your confirmation of them is vsuall and childishe.
                  I woulde wishe that suche as bee wyse men and in authoritie, would diligently consider that whiche you answere to the Article, Fol 14. (as you quote it) touching the gouernment of the Churche, and the authoritie of Princes and their lawes: and likewyse that whiche is written concerning the same matters in the seconde Admonition: I will make them neyther better nor worse, but wishe the Magistrates, well to marke your iudgements and opinions in these matters, and to foresee the worst. The Lorde blesse this Realme of Englande with the continuance of his Gospell, long life of the Queenes maiestie, and peace bothe foreyne and domesticall. Amen.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothing answered.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ A viewe of the seconde Admonition.
               
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 175. Sect. vlt.
                     In the viewe of the second admonition M. Doctor doth as it seemeth of purpose, cul out those things which he hath spoken on before, and in repeating of them, referreth his Reader vnto hys booke. Diuers other matters there are of great weight which he speaketh not of, if he doe approue them. Why haue you not done so your selfe 
                              〈◊〉
                            your Replie▪
                         it had beene well he had sign fyed his liking: if he doe not, that he had confuted them. And if he trauelled so heauily of bringing foorth of this booke, that it was as heauy a burden vnto hym, as Salomon sayth, a fond worde is vnto an vnwyse man: he might haue taken day to answere it. Now by this slēder answering or rather not answering at al, but only asking how this & that is proued (wheras beeing proued it is vnreproued of him) he doth his cause more harme than he is aware of. For vnlesse his profes he ioyned with his expulsions, imprisonmēts, & with all that racket which he maketh in Cambridge, to the vtter most of that his authoritie will stretch vnto, he may be well assured, that their driuing out wyll drawe in the truthe, and their imprisonment wyll set the truthe at greater libertie, and thereby proue it self to be neyther Papistrie, nor Anabaptistrie, Donatistrie, Catharisme, nor any other heresie, whych are by due correction repressed. But as for the truthe of God, the more it is laden, the strayghter it standeth, and the more it is kepte vnder, the more it euforceth it selfe to ryse, and wyll vndoubtedly get vp, howe great so euer the stone be whyche is layde vpon it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue omitted no matter of substance vnanswered in eyther of the Admonitions. The wordes you héere vtter be contumelious: you onely rayle, you answere not. I neuer expelled any of degrée since my first comming to Trinitie Colledge, but two: the one for pertinacie, the other for periurie. And yet I might haue done lawfully and iustly, and intende to doe if the statutes wherevnto I haue sworne, doe therevnto enforce me. But by your often obiecting this vnto me, men may vnderstande what conscience it is that makes you so zealous, and what diuinitie it is that you so carnestly professe: scil. a minde full of reuengment, and a face puffed vp with arrogancie and vayneglory.
                     
                  
               
               
                  A briefe viewe of the seconde Admonition.
                  I haue also receyued a seconde Admonition to the Parliament,

the author whereof vndertaketh to teache howe to reforme those things whiche the other Admonition founde faulte with. I shall not neede to make any long discourse of it, neyther will I. The answere to the fyrst admonition is an answere to this also. Onely I thought it good to note vnto you, that this booke consisteth of these poynts especially: first it iustifieth the authors of the first Admonition, and seemeth to complayne that they haue not iustice, bicause they appealyng to the highest Court of Parliament, their appeale would not be receyued. And therefore they say the Scripture is playne, that it shall be easier for Sodome and Gomorra in the daye of iudgement▪ than for suche a court, meaning the court of Parliament, and they quote for that purpose in the margent the. 10. of Matth, verse. 14. 15. which is a shamefull prophanation of the Scripture, and an egregious slaunder to that honorable courte. The iustnesse of the appeale I leaue to the Iustices, and skilfull Lawyers to be considered of, for it is not within the compasse of my facultie. Onely I thinke that that scroule can haue no defense of Parliament: first, bicause it is a Libell: secondly, bicause it was published in printe before the Parliament was made priuie vnto it.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Not one worde sayde agaynst this.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ A viewe of the seconde Admonition.
                  In this parte these wordes of theirs would be well considered,Politike Ma cheuils. 
                     there is no other thing to be looked for, than some speedie vengeance to lighte vpon the whole lande, prouide as well as the politike Macheuils of Englande thinke they can, though God doe his worste: It woulde be knowne whome they meane by these politike Macheuils: for they enuy all men of great authoritie, witte, and pollicie.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 176. Sect. 1. 2.
                     And albeit he had no leysure to answere the matters whiche required his answere, yet he carpeth at by matters, and asketh who are ment by the politike Macheuils.
                     What if they meane This is a clake, but their words will not heare it. M. Doctor, and such other, which vnder the pretence of policie, would ouerthrowe the Churche, and that by those things whych haue scarse a shew of policie, and in deede ouerturne the policie and gouernment of the Lorde. And I pray you tell me M. Doctor, who be those superiours which contemne, hate, discourage, and frumpe those whiche execute the lawes of the Realme, of the whiche you speake in the. 88. page. And where you adde by and by, that they enuye all men of great authoritie, witte, and pollicie, I haue answered this speeche before. And truely I thinke there is not in Mesheke so slaunderous a tongue to be founde, as this is, nor the Iuniper cotesare not comparable with it.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Nay they can not meane it of me, nor of suche as I am: for I haue not to doe with the politike affayres of this lande, neyther am I eyther of Court, or Parliament. But I thinke their words following doe clearely seclude me, and all other of my degrée, for thus they adde immediatly: But shutte God out of your assemblies, and 
                              〈◊〉
                            as hitherto in this last Parliament you haue done nothing therin as you ought, no though 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            beene solicited, but haue suffered them that were your solicitours, to be molested. You shall 
                              〈◊〉
                            both that you ought to haue sought the kingdome of God first, and also you shall finde, if 
                              〈◊〉
                            consider not your owne wayes in your hearts, howe you thinke it a tyme to buylde seeled houses,

to deuise lawes for the preseruation and prosperitie of your common wealth, and neglect Gods Churche, leaue that wast. &c. These wordes of theirs shutteth me out from the number of their Macheuils. Well, it is a poynte that woulde be considered. That whiche I speake in the. 88. page, I am ready to giue accounte of, when I am thervnto by due authoritie called. Neyther am I afrayde in time and place, to speake that whiche I thinke. In the rest of this Replie you doe but vtter your impatiencie, and vntemperatenesse of your spéeche, and therfore I will dismisse you, as Dauid dyd Shemei.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  A vievve of the seconde Admonition.
                  The seconde parte consisteth onely of rayling wordes, and slaunderousSlaunder 
                           〈◊〉
                         the Churche of Englande. accusations, first agaynst this whole Churche of Englande, for they say, that we are scarse come to the outwarde face of a Churche rightly reformed, and that although some truthe be taught by some preachers, yet no Preacher maye without great daunger of the lawes vtter all truthe comprised in the worde of God. &c. And a little after they adde and saye, that the truthe in a maner doth but peepe out behinde the screene: which speeches as they be very vntrue (for who knoweth not that the Gospell is wholly, publikely, and freely preached in this Church of Englande) so they be slaunderous, neyther can the Papists speake any worse.
                  In this parte also, to proue that this is no true saying in matters of policie and gouernment, it is not repugnant to the word of God, and therfore it may be vsed: is alleaged this saying of Christ. Mat. 12. He that is not vvith me, is agaynst me. But they haue forgotten the wordes of Christ, Mat. 9. 
                        Qui non est aduersus nos, pro nobis est: He that is not agaynst vs, is vvith vs. Wherevpon we maye muche better conclude, that that which is not repugnant to the Scripture, is consonant to the Scripture, than they can doe the contrarie of the former place. Notwithstanding in both these places (as I think) Christ speaketh rather of men and persons, than of things them selues.
                  In the same parte their speeche of the Queenes supremacie is verySupremacie of the Quene secretly denied. suspicious, and it would be demaunded of them what they thinke in deede of hir Maiesties anthoritie in ecclesiasticall matters, for in this poyut they haue hitherto dealt very subtilly and closely: notwithstanding their meaning may easily be perceyued of suche as diligently consider their bookes.
                  Likewyse in this parte they note certayne contrarietics in thys Churche, as betwixte the Communion booke and Iniunctions, touching wafers: the Communion booke and aduertisementes concerning Churche vestures: the Canons and the Pontificall, in not ordering of ministers sine titulo, and suche like matters of no importance, whiche iustifie rather this Churche, than otherwyse: for surely if they had had weightier matters, they woulde no doubte haue alleaged them. But in these same matters they are muche deceyued, for as I suppose, in matters of ornaments of the Churche, and of the ministers thereof, the Queenes Maiestie, togither with the Archbishop or the Commissioners in causes ecclesiasticall, haue authoritie by Acte of Parliament, to alter and appoynt suche rites and ceremonies as shall from tyme to tyme be thoughte to them moste conuenient. To be shorte, in that poynt they saye, that in thinges
                     
                     of order one Church may many times differ from another without offence, following the generall rules of Scripture for order, as in appoynting time and place for prayers. &c. Which is a very true saying: and flat contrarie to all that is sayde eytherContrarietie in these men. in the first Admonition, or in this seconde: for if suche things may be appoynted in the Churche, not beeing expressed in the word of God, but depending vpon this generall rule, Let all things be done decently and in order. 1 Corinth. 14. then surely the Magistrate hathe authoritie in suche matters, to appoynt what shall be thought vnto them most conuenient, so that it be not repugnant to the worde of God: except you will make this the question: whether in such matters we ought to be directed by the Magistrates, and gouernours of the Church, or by euery priuate Pastor in his seuerall charge.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     All this is let slippe without answere.
                  
               
               
                  The vievve of the seconde Admonition.
                  The thirde parte of this booke condemneth the degrees of Doctors,Degrees in the Uniuersities cōdemned. Bachelers of Diuinitie, and Masters of Arte in the Uniuersities, and slaunderously, vntruely, and opprobriously speaketh of the Uniuersities, and suche as be in them: presumptudusty prescribing a maner of reformation for the same, when as I thinke verily they knowe not what Uniuersities meane. But heere we maye note that they seeke to ouerthrowe all learning and degrees of learning. The same parte also very slaunderonsly and vnchristianly rayleth on some Bishops by name, and the rest of the Cleargie, charging them most vntruely with sundrie things: but bicause it is done by way of Libelling (a Diuelishe kinde of reuenge) therfore I trust godly and wyse men will esteeme of it accordingly. Besides slaunderous reportes, and opprobrious words, there is nothing in thys parte worthy the answering.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 176. Sect. 2.
                     After he accuseth the Admonition. as if it condemned scholes and Uniuersities, with all maner degrees, when it dothe but inueigh agaynst degrees giuen of custome rather than of right, rather by money, than by merite of learning, and when titles of Doctorship be giuen to those which haue not the office of a Doctor, and oftentimes to those which can not doe the office if they had it, and when men doe seeke vayneglory in them and suche lyke.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Reade and marke their wordes, page. 16. and. 17. and the conclusion they vse (after they haue in moste bitter maner inueighed agaynst suche degrées) whiche is this: These vayne names become suche vayne men, but the Churche of God they become not, and are forbidden by our Sauiour. &c. Their owne wordes be a sufficient declaration of their meaning, and so is yours vttered before, a playne proofe of your consenting vntoPag. 173. sec. 1. them, and condemning of all degrées of Schole, properly perteyning to Diuinitie.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  A vievve of the seconde Admonition.
                  In the fourth parte the Author taketh vpon him to set downeA newe plat forme. a platforme of a Churche, to prescribe the maner of electing ministers, of their exercises, of their equalitie, of the gouernment of the Churche. &c. Whiche surely beeing well considered, 
                        〈◊〉
                      appeare not onely a confused platforme, without any sounde warraute of God worde, but also a fantasticall deuise, tending to the ouerthrowe of learning, religion, yea the whole state and gouernment of the common wealth.
                  But bicause I haue before in the confutation of the first Admonition, spoken sufficiently of all these matters, therfore I wyll onely note one or two thinges in this parte to lette you vnderstande that these platformers buylde not vpon that foundation that they would haue others so strictly bound vnto: for let them tell me vponOne minister not to meddle in another mans charge. what Scripture this is grounded: Let no one minister medle in any cure saue his owne, but as he is appoynted by common consent of the nexte conference, or Councels Prouinciall or Nationall, or further (if it may fall out so) generall of all Churches reformed▪
                      Or this: That the ministers must be equall, and that some must be gouerned by all, and not all by some? Or that, The Pastor or teacher in euery congregation ought to be the Principall of the consistorie of their congregation? Or that, Many parishes may be ioyned in one, and haue one Pastor, and yet that it is vnlawful for one Pastor to haue many Parishes? Or that, In the meane whyle tyll preachers encrease to furnish the places vnfurnished, vpon conference among the learned, some discrete man be appoynted to make some entyer prayer. &c.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Passed ouer in silence.
                  
               
               
                  A vievve of the seconde Admonition.
                  
                     Or that it is euill so ofte to repeate, Glory be to the father. &c. Lorde haue mercy vponRepetition of prayer is not euill. vs. &c. Or the Lords prayer: for the text whiche they alleage for the same, Math. 6. is wickedly wrested, and corruptly alleaged: for the wordes of Christ be not (as they translate them) when you pray▪ vse not vayne repetitions, but vvhen you pray, vse not muche babling: whereby not the ofte repetition of good prayers, but vayne babling in prayers, that is, many wordes without fayth, and the inwarde affection of the mynde, is forbidden. Paule. 1. Thes. 5. sayth, Pray continually, And Christ Matth. 6. sayth, Pray on this maner, Our father, &c. So that of necessitie we must oftentimes repeate the Lords prayer, if we wyll beleeue Christ and his Apostle Paule. But Lorde what straunge doctrine is this, to call Glory be to the father. &c. Lorde haue mercy vpon vs. &c. Our father. &c. Popishe? Surely these men (as I suppose) be not well in their wits.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 176. Sect. 3.
                     For the repetition of Gloria patri. &c. I haue spoken sufficiently before: but what spirite is it that calleth this translation of the worde 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         (vse not vayne repetitions) a wycked wresting of S. Mathewes place in his sixt chapter? what rasor is this that cueteth so sharpe? Knoweth he agaynst whome, and agaynst the excellent learning, and singular pietie of howe many

he 
                           〈1 line〉
                        eaketh? For this is the translation of those learned and godly men, which translated the Byble. which is commonly called the Geneua Byble: and is this a wicked wresting? Admitte it were not translated exactly, to the worde of the Euangelist: is it therefore a wresting, and a wicked wresting? 
                           〈◊〉
                         hat (I will not say wicked) but false conclusion or doctrine can be grounded of this tr
                           〈1 line〉
                        nslation? And they that translate it thus, haue not onely the authoritie of the Lexicons to confirme their translation, w
                           〈1 line〉
                        ch shewe that this worde was taken vp in reproche of a foolishe Poet called Battus, which vsed to repeate one thing many times: but they haue also the circumstance of the place to warrant it. For the reason which our 
                           〈1 line〉
                        auiour Christ vseth to draw men from this faul
                           〈1 line〉
                        , leadeth to this translation, and can not stande with that sense which M. Doctor setteth downe. For howe hang these togither: you shall not bable many words without fayth. &c. bicause your heauenly father knoweth what you haue neede of before you aske? It is vnlike first, that our sauiour Christ would speake thus (bable not many wordes without 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ayth. &c.) when as rather he would haue forbidden them to speake any one worde without fayth. &c. For if he shoulde speake thus, he should seeme to haue allowed a prayer without fayth, so that it were not conceyued in many words. And agayne, if (as M. Doctor sayth) this had beene the proposition, which our sauiour Christ diswaded from, that they should not bable many words without fayth. &c. he woulde neuer h
                           〈1 line〉
                        ue added this reason (for your heauēly father knoweth. &c.) for neyther is he father vnto any such. And he would rather haue sayde as S. James in the first chap. sayth, that they shoulde be sure to receyue nothing, bicause they aske not in fayth. Nowe as this reason can not stande with M. Doctors interpretation: so doth it well ag
                           〈1 line〉
                        ee with the translation of the Geneua Byble. For what could be more fitly sayde to driue the disciples from this vayne repetition, than to say that the heauenly father knoweth. &c. and that it is not with the Lorde as it is with men, that muste haue a thing oftentimes spoken, or euer they can vnderstande it? Furthermore what a reason is 
                           〈1 line〉
                        his: we must repeate ye Lords prayer oftentimes, therfore we must repeate it oftentimes in hal
                           〈1 line〉
                        e an houre, and one in the necke of an other? And if S. Paules place to the Thes. (pray continually) bee referred vnto the saying of the Lords prayer (as M. Doctor woulde beare vs in hande) then it is not lawfull for vs to vse any other words, than those which our sauiour Christ vsed. But I could neuer yet learne that those words binde vs of necessit
                           〈1 line〉
                        e any more vnto the repe
                           〈1 line〉
                        tion of the Lordes prayer worde for worde, than vnto the repetition of any other godly prayer in the scripture. And I would be lothe to saye that it were simply necessarie, to vse that iust number of wordes, and neyther more nor lesse any time, muche lesse oftentimes in so smal a space. For our sauiour Christ doth not there giue a pre
                           〈1 line〉
                        cript forme of 
                           〈1 line〉
                        rayer whervnto he vindeth vs: but giueth vs a rule, and squire to frame all our prayers by, as I haue before declared. I know it is necessarie to pray, and to pray often. I kn
                           〈1 line〉
                        we 
                           〈1 line〉
                        lso that in so fewe words it is impossible for any man to frame so pithy a prayer: And I confesse that the Church doth well in concluding their prayers with the Lords prayer: but I stand vpon this, that there is no necessitie layde vpon vs to vse these very words, and no more, and especially that the place of S. P
                           〈1 line〉
                        le to the Thessalomans, dothe least of all proue it. As for M. Doctors outcries he hath so often worne our eares with them, and that without cause, that I thinke by this tunc no man regardeth them.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I doe not say that so to translate the place is a wicked wresting or corrupte alleaging of it: but this I say, that that place is wicke
                              〈1 line〉
                           ly wrested, and corruptly alleaged
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               inter
                              
                                 〈1 line〉
                              reted. Beza.
                            by the Adm
                              〈1 line〉
                           nition, to improue the oft rep
                              〈1 line〉
                           titien of the Lords prayer. Neyther doe I thinke that translation to be so apt, as the other is. M. Beza in his notes vpon this place of S. Mat. sayth thus: Ne sit is loquaces 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , be not full of wordes. Vulg. Nolite multum loqui, doe not bable muche. Erasmus. Ne 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 itis multiloqui, id est,
                            
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           
                              quo id
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 m declaratur. Longae tamen preces hîc non damnātur, sed quae vanae sunt, inanes & super
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 titiosae. Longa enim non est oratio in qua nihil redundat: centra vero breuis esse non potest, quae non proficiscitur ex 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 nimo pio & fideli: Be not bablers or full of words, that is 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           wherby the same thing is signified: yet are not long prayers heere condemned, but those that are vayne, fond, & superstitious. For it is not a long prayer, wherin nothing is to much: on the other side it can not be short which proceedeth not out of a godly & faithfull mind.
                        
                        And that this is the true interpretation of this worde 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            it appearethErasmus. by that which followeth in the same place, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           for they thinke to be heard for their muche babling. Upon the whiche words Erasmus giueth this note: Hîc non est 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           sed proprio vsus est verbo 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , veluti exponens quid dixerit 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           : Heere is not the worde 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , but he vseth the proper worde 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , as it were expounding, what he mente by 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . You sée therfore that the one word expeūdeth the other, which is the surest way of interpreting. M. Caluine vpō the same place sayth thus: 
                              Porro eorū stultitiā reprehendit
                              Caluine. 
                              Chris
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 us, qui vt Deū persuadea
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 t & exorent, multum verborum profundunt. Furthermore Christ reprehendeth their folly which do spende many words, that they may persuade andNou
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  gl
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ssa. entreate God. And noua glossa ordinaria dothe interprete the worde in lyke maner.

                           
                              Ferunt Bat tum quendam fuisse in
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ptum Poetā, qui multis & vanis ad nauseam vs
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  repetitis verbis
                              Batt
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 s a ba
                                    〈1 line〉
                                  
                                 
                                    〈◊◊〉
                                 . 
                              poemata sua conscripserit, ad hoc vnum int
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ntus vt multus esset in verbis: vnde sumptum sit verbum Battologizare, pro inaniter esse multiloquum. It is reported that there was a certayne fooly she Poete called Battus, which wrote his verses with many and vayne repeting of wordes, euen vnto the lothing of any man, being only bent vnto this one thing, that he might haue many wordes: of whom this worde Battologizare was taken, for him that is full of vayne wordes. By al which authorities & interpretations of these learned mē, Christ doth not speake against the oft repetition of the Lords prayer or any other godly prayers, but against vaine babling in praiers, & multiplying of wordes without faith, whether it be by oft repeating or multiplying of them. And therfore also saith M. Martyr, Quare at
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 ēdendum
                              
                                 Martyr in 1. Sam. 1. Babling in prayer what it is. 
                              est multiloquium tum adhiberi non cum diu precamur, sed cum citra fidem & spiritum verbamultiplicamus: wherfore it is to be marked, that then is there much babling, not whē we pray long, but when we multiply wordes without faith and spirite. Neither is there any wryter that doth otherwise interprete this place, not euen those that translate it vayne repetitions.
                        
                        And the reasons wherby you would ouerthrow this sense be words only & not reasons:Long o
                                 〈1 line〉
                              yer 
                                 〈1 line〉
                              r repetitions net 
                                 〈◊〉
                              , but babli
                                 〈1 line〉
                               of worde
                                 〈1 line〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               our fayt
                                 〈1 line〉
                              . Math. 26.
                            for who can thinke yt Christ doth here condēne long prayers or many wordes, or the repetition of godly praiers (himselfe continuing in prayers a whole night in the mountaine, & oftentimes repeating one & the same prayer, not long before he suffered his passion Math. 26 and willing vs to pray continually, & not to be weary?) But that only he forbiddeth many words without faith, whether it be as I said by multiplying or by repeating: but what should we dally where the wordes of Christ be playne
                              〈1 line〉
                            for he saith, 
                              Verum orantes ne sitis multiloqui ficut Ethneci: Putant enim fore vt ob multiloquiū suum
                              Luke. 18. 
                              exaudiantur, Ne igitur efficiamini similes 
                                    〈1 line〉
                                 storum, nouit enim pater vester. &c. But when ye pray vse not much babling as the Heathen do, for they thinke that they are heard for their much babling: be ye not therfore like vnto thē: for your father knoweth wherof you haue needeMath. 6. before you aske of him. The wordes be manifest, all interpreters agrée vpon t
                              〈1 line〉
                           ē: and therfore this your dallying is but a prophanation of them.
                        If we repeate the Lordes prayer twenty times in halfe an houre, so it be done inChriste vseth repetition of ye same prayer. Math. 26. vers. 44.
                            faith & zeale, it is not this multilo quium or vayne repetitions that Chris
                              〈1 line〉
                           e speaketh of in this place. Christ himself as I haue said before, repeated thrice one prayer in the same wordes as it is euident Math. 26. which he would not ha
                              〈1 line〉
                           e do
                              〈1 line〉
                           e if ye faithful & zealous repetition of prayers, had bin this much babling or vayne repetitiōs, wher of he speaketh in this. 6. of Math. I do not say that the place of S. Paule. 1. Thes. 5. is to be vnderstanded only of the Lordes prayer, but this is my saying, that for asmuch as we are cōmaunded to praye continually by S. Paule in that place, & th
                              〈1 line〉
                            Lord hath sayd when ye praye, pray on this manner, Our father which art in heauen. &c. Therfore the oft repetition of this prayer being in faith & zeale, can not bée accounted vayne repetition or much babling. I know it is lawfull to vse other godly prayers, besides it, neither haue you euer heard me vtter one worde to the contrary: I know likewise that it is not only a prayer to be vsed, but also a rule to be followed in framing all our other prayers by, whatsoeuer. And yet a prayer it is, and a necessary prayer to be vsed, as the very wordes of Christ do declare.
                     
                  
               
               
                  A vievve of the second Admonition.
                  These & a number of other phansies they haue in this booke which they can not grounde vpon any scriptures, but by wringing and wresting of them: and in deede their seeking is, to haue all things framed according to their fansies, that they may be accompted planters and platformers of churches.
                  I omitte this that the author boasteth, that he and many others will set thē selues against vs, as the professed enimies of the churche of Christ: For the matter is not great, neither shall they in that point dea
                        〈1 line〉
                     e an
                        〈1 line〉
                      otherwyse with vs, than the Anabaptistes, 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     ther H
                        〈1 line〉
                     e likes haue dealte with other Churches.

This shalbe sufficiēt for an answere to y• booke, bicause all other matters of substance are by me answered before in the former cōfutatiō.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Nothing answered, neither is this proclamation of defense solued.
                  
               
            
            
               A briefe ansvvere to certaine Pamphlets spread abroad of late.
               I haue of late receiued three litle Pamphlets, the first as it were a preface to the other two, the second entituled, An exhortation to the Bishops, to deale brotherly with their brethren: The thirde, An exhortation to the Bishops and their clergie to answere a litle booke that came foorth the last Parliament, and to other brethren to iudge of it by Gods worde, vntil they see it answered, and not be carried away with any respect of men.
               
               The preface cōsisteth of these pointes especially: first by diuers exā
                  ples it is there declared, that the wicked and vngodly of this world, could neuer away with suche as would reproue them for their manifest sinnes and vngodlines.
               Secondly, that this is the cause why these twoo treatises whiche were lately written and imprinted in the laste Parliament time. &c. wer of so many misliked, and the authors therof so cruelly entreated and streightly imprisoned &c.
               Thirdly, it raileth on the bishops and such as be in authoritie, comparing them to false prophets, and to Phariseis. &c. Last of all it cō
                  cindeth with threatening, that if they go forwarde in their synnes, their doings shalbe with more bitternes of wordes, and plainenesse of speache throwen into their faces.
               The first is nedelesse, for who knoweth not that from time to time it hath bin the manner of such as were desperatly wicked, not to suffer their sinnes openly to be reproued. The second is false, vncharitable, & slaunderous, for the cause why the bookes be not estemed (especially of the wise & learned) is the vntrue doctrine conteined in them, mainteined with vntrue and v
                     〈1 line〉
                  apt allegations of the scriptures, and enterlaced with opprobrious termes and railing speaches tending to the disquietnes of the church, and ouerthrow of true religiō. The authors therof to be imprisoned, not for telling any mā of his sinnes, but for writing libels against this whole church of England, against the booke of common praer, against the ministery, against ye sacraments, finally against the whole forme and gouernmēt of the church by the whole consent of this Realme established, and according to the rule of Gods word. And with what face can you say that they be imprisoned for telling men of their sinnes? where euer reade you or heard you, that any of the Prophets or Apostles tolde men of their sinnes by libels? SurelyLibelling is no true way of reforming. that kinde of dealing is not for the Apostles of Christe, but for the ministers of Sathan.
               
                  T C. Pag. 177. Sect. 1.
                  
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     here he saith the authors of the Admomtion are not punished, or their booke misliked, for that it telleth of the faults in the church. or of the sinnes of men, but for yt it mainteineth false doctrine, & for that they preferred a libel: for the doctrine, it appeareth by that which is said, what it is. And if he would define what a libel were▪ it were easy to answere vnto the other point. If he meane bicause it was preferred without any name vnto it, how will he answere Forsoo
                           〈1 line〉
                        h, 
                           〈◊〉
                         you make 
                           〈1 line〉
                         wicked comparison. to the example of S. Iohn in ye Apocalips, who reprehend
                        〈1 line〉
                     ng the ministers o
                        〈1 line〉
                      diuers churches▪ did not A manifest vntruth. put to his name vnto his book. And to the writer of the Epistle vnto the Hebrewes▪ which was a singular instrument, and did not subscribe his epistle, wherin notwithstāding he sharply rebuketh diuers faults amongst thē.

And yet S. Iohn nor the writer to the Hebrues were not the ministers of Satan. And if he call it a libell, bycause it vseth some sharper speaches, surely all men see that his booke deserueth then to be called a Satyr, hauing for tart words, bitter, and for one, twenty. But in what respect soeuer he calleth it a libell, he accuseth not so much the authours of the Admonition for preferring of it, as diuers of the honorable house of Parliament, which did allow it.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     The comparison is very vnequall and odious, that you make betwixte the holy bookes of the Scripture, indited by the spirit of God, and reputed and taken as portions of the canonicall scriptures, wherein only we haue to séeke the doctrine of saluation: and these rayling, rude, vncharitable, and vnlearned Admonitions. And yet in the one of them, that is in the Reuelation you are fouly ouershot, for the name ofIohn setteth his name to the Apocalips both in the beginning & end. the author of that booke is expressed thrée times in the firste chapter, and that with such circumstances that it cannot well be doubted who the author was, though you would cauill about the multiplicitie of the name. Likewise his name is expressed in the latter chapter of the booke: wherefore you were not well aduised when you set it downe that S. Iohn in the Apocalips did not put his name to his booke. He saithe in the. 1. cap. in the first verse, Seruo suo Iohanni, and in the. 4. verse Ioannes. 7. ecclesijs quae sunt in Asia, and a little after. Ego Ioannes frater vester. &c. and in the last chap. Ego Ioannes qui audiui & vidi haec. The epistle to the Hebrues hath no opprobrious and slanderous words in it, neither doth the author thereof séeke to defame or deface any body, as the authors of the Admonition do.
                     If my booke be comparable to eyther of the Admonitions in sharpe and vncharitable speaches, proue it vnto me by comparing them togither, and surely I will like the worse both of my boke and of my self: and confesse that I haue offended. Although I might excuse my selfe in saying that I haue done it in the defense of the truth, and vendicating this Church of England from such vntollerable slanders, as they burthen it with.
                     If any of the honorable house of Parliament did consent to the publishing of it in that manner and forme that it was published (which I am sure they did not, as you vndutifully and vntruly charge them) I will not excuse them: and yet they cannot be said to be either the authors or the publishers of it: neither can their allowing of it, excuse it from being a libell, being not orderly in Parliament propounded, but disorderedly (I might say seditiously,) spread abroade in corners to the defamation of thys whole state and Church of England, not to any reformation.
                     But to satisfye your desire that would so gladly know what a libell is, I will tellA libell what it is. you in few words. An infamous libell is that, that is written in verse, or in prose, to yt infamy & slander of any man, to y• which the author dare not set his name. This is an infamous libel, & it most aptly agréeth to y• booke called an Admonition to ye Parliamēt: So that by this definition your obiectiō also of ye booke of ye Apocalips, & of the epistle to the Hebrues is soone answered: for al those bookes are not libells which are published without the authours name, but those whiche are published to the infamy or slander of others, to the which the authors dare not set their names.
                  
               
               
                  An ansvvere to certaine Pamphlets.
                  The third commeth of the same spirit that the secōd doth, that is,The libellers fitly compared to the Pharisies. of the spirit of arrogancie and malice: for it compareth godly, wise, zelous & learned bishops to idolatrous Priestes, & to Pharisies: but indeede the conditions & qualities of the Phariseis do most aptly agree with ye authors of these Libels, & their adherēts: for the Pharisies did al that they did, to be seene of men, & sought the commēdationDescription of a Pharisie. of the common people, as appeareth Math. 6. &. 23. & so do they: The Pharisies when they fasted disfigured their faces, & these walking in the streates, hang downe their heads, looke austerely, and in company sigh muche, and seldome, or neuer laugh: the Pharisies

strayned out a gnat, and swallowed downe a camell. And these men think it an heynous offence to weare a cap or a surplisse, but in slaundering and backbyting their brethren, in rayling on them by libels, in contemning of superiors, and discrediting such as be in authoritie: to be short, in disquieting the Churche and state, they haue no conscience. The Phariseis separated themselues from the common sort of men, as more holy, and contemned the poore Publicanes as sinners: And therefore some learned interpreters thinke, that they be called 
                        Pharisaei, quasi segregati, quòd vitae sanctimonia, à vulgi moribus & vita separati essent, non aliter
                        Fost
                              〈1 line〉
                           rus in dictionar. hebraico. 
                        at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            monachi, quos Chartusianos vocant. They be called Phariseis as separated and deuided from the commō sort in holynes of life, much like vnto the Monkes, which be called Carthusians. And Iosephus saith that they were called Phariseis, bycause they seemed to be more holy than other, and moreLib. 1 cap. 2. de bello iudaico. Lib. antiquit. Tom. 2. lib. 18. cap. 2. Tom. 2. lib. 17. cap. 3. cunningly to expound the law. Also he saythe thys to be one propertie of theirs, that whatsoeuer their owne reason perswadeth them, Id sequuntur pertinaciter, that they stubbornly follow. Agayne he sayth that they be 
                        astutum hominum genus, arrogans, & interdum Regibus quo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            infestum, &c. A subtile kynde of men, arrogant, and sometimes enimies to kings and rulers: These men separate themselues also from the congregation, and will communicate with vs neither in prayers, hearing the word nor sacraments: they contemne and despise all those that be not of their sect, as polluted, and not worthy to be saluted, or kept company with: and therefore some of them meeting their old acquaintance, being godly preachers, haue not only refused to salute them, but spit in their faces, wishing the plague of God to light vpon them, and saying that they were damned, and that God had taken his spirit from them, and all this, bycause they did weare a cappe: wherefore when they talke of Phariseis, they plucke themselues by the noses. But Lord, what a straunge time is this, when such as they be, dare thus boldly publish libells against their superiours for mainteining and executing good and godly lawes.
                  The conclusion of this preface is a stoute, presumptuous and malapert threatning, in my opinion, not to be suffered: But howsoeuer your pen and tongue walketh, yet I pray you holde your handes, or else. &c.
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 177. Sect. 1. 2.
                     Whereas M. Doctor compareth vs with the Phariseys, and saythe we do all to be seene of men, and that we hold downe our heads in the streates, and straine at a gn
                           〈1 line〉
                        t swallowing downe a Camell, bycause they are in all mens knowledge, I will leaue it to them to iudge of the truthe of those things. Where he saith we seldome or neuer laugh, it is not therefore that we thinke that it is not lawfull to laugh, but that the considerations of the calamities of other churches, and of the ruines of ours, with the heauie iudgements of the Lord which hang ouer vs, ought to turne our laughing into weeping, besides that a man may laugh although he shew not his teeth. And so IeromeIerome ad Marcell▪
                         in effect answereth in an epistle which he wrote, where vpon occasion that certaine vsed the same accusation that M. Doctor doth, he saith, bycause we do not laugh with open mouth, therefore we are counted sadde.
                     And where he saith we separate our selues from all congregations, and are ennimies to prince, and that we would seeme to be holyer thā other, these and such like slaunders are answered before. And if there be any that refuse to salute godly preachers, or spit in any mans face, or wish the plague of God to light vpon them, or say that they be damned, we defend not, nor allow of any such behauioure. And it is vnreasonable that the fault of one, should be imputed to so many, and to those which do as much mislike of it as M. Doctor himselfe. And what needed M. Doctor to bid the authors of these exhortations to hold their hands, where do they in a worde offer to strike? Belike hys tongue is his owne, and therefore he speaketh whatsoeuer he listeth.
                     
                        
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I shewe how much more aptely the qualities and conditions of the Phariseys agrée to you and to your sect, than they can doe to suche as the authors of those pamplets call phariseys.
                        I know you can both laugh, iest, and give, when you are among your selues, and so coulde the Phariseys doo: but I speake of youre behauior in open places, and before suche as do not so well know you. It is vnlyke that you mourne for the ruines or calamities of any Churches, séeing that you séeke with might and mayne the confusion of this, by stirring vp schismes and contentions in it. That which I speake of separating your selues from the congregation. &c. is well knowne to be true, in a number of you: and the contemptuous behauiour of some of you (pretending moste zeale) towardes some of vs, argueth what spirite you are of, and what your zeale is, euen that that Zuinglius doth charge the Anabaptists with, when he sayth, Ira est non spiritus quo se venditant.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The ansvvere to certaine Pamphlets. &c.
                  In this portion entituled An exhortation to the Bishops to deale brotherly with their brethren: ther is no great matter conteined worthie of answering, only the author doth excuse himselfe, for taking vpon him that exhortation, & moueth the Bishops to deale brotherly with the authors of the Admonition. First, bicause they be their 
                        〈1 line〉
                     rethren: secondly bicause they ought first to haue discouered vnto the world by the word of God, howe truely or falsely they haue written. Thyrdely, bycause they do but disclose the disorders of our Churche of England, and humbly desyre a reformation of the same, according to the rule of Gods worde. &c. Fourthly, that Papists lye abroade in their dioces vntouched. &c. Fiftly, that many lewde light bookes, and balades flye abroade printed, not onely withoute reprehension, but Cum priuilegio.
                  
                  Likewise in ye same booke the author seemeth to iustifie the Admonitiō, & to condemne the lordship and authoritie of Bishops, ascribing thervnto the stay & hinderance of their pretenced reformation: charging them after a sorte with mangling the Scriptures of God, and with snaring the godly with such lawes as were purposely made for the wicked. These be the principall contentes of that booke.
                  The first reason, that is, That they be their brethren, might as wel be alleagedBretheren may be punished. for the impunitie of Anabaptists, Arrians, and such like, who pretend the sinceritie of gods word, and would be counted brethren: yea it might as well be alleaged for many other malefactours, who be also brethren, and yet must not therfore escape vnpunished for their offences. Shall not the Prince and the magistrate execute lawes vpon suche as breake them, bicause they be their brethren in Chryst? Beware of such doctrine, and let not affection in priuate mens causes carie you headlong into publike errors. But I thinke you are in this pointe deceiued, for howsoeuer we accompte them our brethren: yet they accompt not vs their brethren, neyther will they acknowledge vs so to be, as some of them both in open speache and manifest signes haue declared. And therfore when the Bishops deale with them, they deale with suche as disdayn to be called their brethren.
                  
                     T. C. Page. 177. Sect. 3.
                     After M. Doctor confuteth his owne shadow, for the exhortatiō doth not require that the name

of a brother should deliuer the authors of the Admonition from punishment, if they deserued it, but desi
                           〈1 line〉
                        eth that it might worke some moderation of the rigoure of it, and compassion to minister to their necessities in prison. He sayeth that the authors of the Admonition, take not them for theyr brethren, yes verily, although vnbrotherly handled, and for fathers too, and so both loue them, and reuerence them, vntill (which we hope will not be) they shall manyfestly for the vpholdi
                           〈1 line〉
                        g of their owne kingdome and profite, refuse to haue Christe to reigne ouer vs, in whome this fatherhoode and brotherhoode doth consist.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        Let the readers iudge whether it be one of their reasons or no: let them also consider that which I haue before alledged out of the second Admonition, pag. 35. & then tell me whether they take vs for brethren, or no.
                        Can you so well please your selues in your own platforme, yt except we admit it, we refuse Christ to reigne ouer vs, I trust he hath reigned ouer vs hitherto, and shall doo to the end, though your platforme be sunke to the bottome of the sea.
                     
                  
               
               
                  An ansvvere to certaine Pamphlets.
                  To their second reason I answer, that I thinke they haue bin talked with, and heard what they haue to say for them selues, but their hautie mindes and good opinion conceyued of themselues, will not suffer them to see their errours. In this reason you alledge nothyng for them, but that which may also be alledged for the Papists, or any other sect of heretikes. But it is an old saying, Turpe est doctori &c. How hapneth it that they themselues haue first defamed, not the Bishops only, but also this whole Church of England with publike libells, before they haue vsed brotherly and priuate conference? This is to espie a moate in an other mannes eye. &c.
                  How true the thirde reason is, may appeare in my answere to their Admonition, but how true soeuer it were, yet their disordered disclosyng, by vnlawful meanes, (that is, by libelling) deserueth as much punishment as hitherto they haue had: for the truth nedeth no such vngodlie meanes of disclosyng.
                  If Papists goe abroade vnpunished, when by lawe they maye be touched, surely it is a greate faulte, and can not bee excused, and I praye God it maye bee better looked to. But thys is no good and sufficient reason for the impunitie of other: Bicause some Papistes be not punished, shal therfore no disordered persons be punished? Or bicause some in authoritie winke at some Papists, shall therfore no lawes be executed towardes any offenders? Surely touchyng malice agaynst the forme and state of this oure Churche, I see no greate difference betwixt them and the Papists, and I think verily they both conspire together. The same answere I make to youre first reason: shall no booke be suppressed bicause some be not? It is a faulte I confesse, to suffer lewde Ballades and Bookes touchyngBallets. manners. But it were a greater faulte to suffer bookes and Libells, disturbing the peace of the Churche, and defacing true religion.
                  Concerning the titles and offices of Bishops, I haue spoken sufficiently before.
                  In manglyng and wrestyng of the Scriptures, none offende so muche as doe the authors of the Admonition, who in that point are comparable to the Papistes, as may be seene by the learned and diligent Reader.
                  
                     If they whom they terme godly do willingly offende against such lawes as were made for the wicked, they are to be punished according to the lawes, neyther are they to be spared bicause they pretendeGodlinesse bre
                           〈1 line〉
                        keth no lawe. godlynesse: for there is no godlinesse in breaking of lawes.
                  The thirde scroule, called, (An Exhortation to the Bishoppes and to theyr Cleargie to answere a little booke. &c.) is satisfyed (I trus
                        〈1 line〉
                     e) for I haue (as it is there required) answered the short and peeuishe Pamphlet (as they tearme it) I haue disclosed their double and corrupt dealing, theyr wringing of the Scriptures to serue their turne, and haue declared the true sense & meaning of thē: I haue not bumbast
                        〈1 line〉
                     d it with rethorike, but in plain & simple maner vttered my iudgement, according to
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                         uncient fathers contemned o
                           〈1 line〉
                         
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                        ned men. the true meaning and sense of the Scriptures: notwithstanding I haue in sundrie pointes declared the vse of the Church of Christ in tymes past, and do vse the testimonie of auncient Councels and learned fathers, whiche these vnlearned men vnlearnedly contemne, a thing not heard of in any age or Churche, nor allowed of any learned man, but onely of certaine heretikes, and especially Anabaptists. To be short, I haue not answered the booke by peeces, but wholy. Howbeit I must desyre them to pardon me, for not making more speede with my answere: their friuolous quotations so troubled me, and my other businesse, that I could no sooner make an ende of it. In all the rest of that deryding Pamphlet, there is nothing of any moment,Augustine recor
                           〈1 line〉
                        ed vpon the abu
                           〈1 line〉
                        tsary. worth the answering. Therefore as they alledge this portion of a sentence taken out of S. Augustine in his Epistle ad Vinc
                           〈1 line〉
                        n. Si terrerentur & non docerentur improba quasi dominatio videretur, If they shoulde be feared and not taught it might seme a vvicked gouernance: so I con
                        〈1 line〉
                     lude with the other part of the same sentence: Si docerentur, & non terrerentur, vetustate consuetudinis 
                           〈1 line〉
                        bdurarentur, & ad capescendam viam salutis pigrius mouerentur: If they should be taught and not feared, in time they vvoulde vvaxestubburne, and bethe hardlier moued to imbracethe vvay of saluation.
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 177. Sect. vlt.
                     I know not whether they haue bene conferred with or no, but I thinke the first reason which they had to perswade them, was that they should go to Newgate▪ which is that which the Exhortation cō
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        layneth of after, that they are first punished before they be taught. And in this beh
                           〈1 line〉
                        lfe M. Doctor hath no cause to complaine as he doth. For if he list he may learne or euer he go to prison.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        If they were so sent to that place, it was a méete reward for such disorderly dealing, for ignorance may not excuse Libellers, if they libell but against a priuate man, much lesse shoulde it excuse them, slaundering in that maner this whole Church and realme. I doubt not but that I shall learne to know my selfe, & to do mydutie whilest I am out of prison, so that I shall not iustly for lacke of dutie and honestie deserue it.
                     
                  
                  
                     T. C. Pag. 178. Lin. 2.
                     And as for the truth of the cause, and wresting and mangling of the Scriptures, in most places where they are sayde to mangle and wrest, and how he hath answered the r
                           〈1 line〉
                        quest of the Exhortation, which is, to confute the Admonition by the Scriptures, and how truly, 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ptly, and learnedly, M. Doctor hath behaued himself, in citing of the old Councels, and fathers: I leaue it to be esteemed, partly of that which I haue sayde, and partly by the deeper consideration of those, which bycause they can better iudge, may see further into M. Doctors faults-and rapfodyes than I can Although the truth is, that I haue bicause I would not make a long booke, by heaping of one reprehension vpon an other, contented my selfe rather to trip, as it were, and to passe ouer with a light

foote, the heades and summes of things, than to number the faults, which are almost as many as there are sentences in this booke, more I am sure than there are pages.
                     
                        Io. Whitgifte.
                        I haue confuted both them and you, according to the giftes and grace that God hath gyuen mée, with suche authorityes both of Scriptures and other learned Auth ours, as is fitte to be vsed in the decyding of suche controuersies. And I am well assured that you haue not omitted the least blot in my booke: and for the most part you haue feyned (agaynst your owne knowledge) those to be whiche are not. I refuse no mans iudgement of my dealing with the olde Councels and fathers, that is learned and will speake without affection what he thinketh. Your hyperbolicall conclusion or figure of lying, where with you close vp your booke, I am well vsed vnto, and therefore it doth nothing trouble me, but remayneth as a certaine note of the spirite that possesseth you, which is the spirite of vntruth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  THus haue I, (according to that talent that God hath committed vnto me) endeuoured my selfe to defende the state of this Church of England, and the orders and rites therein by publyke authoritie established, agaynst the slaunderous libelles of certaine vnquiet persons, and this vncharitable replie of T. C. If eyther I haue omitted any thing, that might haue béene vttered (as I haue omitted many things) or not so fully answered euery poynt, that all men thereby may be satisfied, namely such as will be satisfied with reason, I doubt not but that there be a great number of singular learning and knowledge which will fulfill my want. The which I do desire them most heartily to do, euen for the loue that they haue to the peace of the Church: & not to suffer so common and weightie a cause, to rest onely vpon one mans shoulder, so farre inferiour to so many of them in all respects. The contrarie part ceasse not to lay theyr heades togither, and to make it all theyr cases, which would more euidently appeare, if their might were according to their will. Therefore séeing that we like and allowe of the state, let vs not suffer it to be defaced vniustly, and without either learning or truth. And if it shall please the contrarie part to answere this my defense, then do I require no other thing of them, than the selfe same, which the Author of the Replie hath required of me, and the which I haue accordingly performed, that is, that they set downe my wordes, and answere me wholy: which vnlesse they do, they shal not onely with all wise men greatly dis
                        〈1 line〉
                     redite themselues, and shewe the lacke of truth to be on their side: but also ease me of some paynes: for I purpose not to answere Pamphlets, nor to spend the time in confuting friuolous Libels. The Lorde graunt that my labours may worke that effect that I desire: that is, peace in the Church, and true obedience in the heartes of the Subiects.
                  Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ An examination of the places cited in the end of the Replie touching matters in controuersie.
               
                  T. C.
                  ACcording to my promise made in my boke, I haue here set down the iudgemēt of the later writers, concerning these matters in controuersie betwene vs. VVherin bicause I loue not to translate out of other mens workes whereby I might make mine to grow: I haue kept this moderation, that I neither set downe all the writers, nor all their places that I coulde, nor yet of euery singular matter: But the chiefest writers, and either of the chiefest points, or else of those, wherein they are alledged against vs by M. Doctor, and one only place of eache (as farre as I coulde iudge and chose out) most directe to that wherefore I haue alledged it. For otherwise if I would haue spoken of all the pointes, and of the iudgement of all the writers, and gathered all the places that I coulde, they would haue ben sufficient matter of an other boke as bigge or rather bigger than this. I must also admonishe the Reader, that I haue forborne in certeine of these titles to sette downe the iudgements of M Beza. M. Bullinger and M. Gualter: bycause they are comprehended in the confession of the Churches. And thus partly vpō those sentences which I haue alledged in this booke, and partly vpon these testimonies here set down: I leaue to the consideration of all men, howe truely and iustly it is sayd, that the learned writers of thesetimes (one or two only excepted) are against vs.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Surely it had bene more commendable in mine opinion, if you had sette downe the verie wordes of the Authors themselues, rather than your own collections 
                           〈1 line〉
                        pon them: for so shoulde their iudgements more plainely haue appear
                           〈1 line〉
                        , whereas now you frame them as they may best serue for your purpose. It is no shame for a man to translate out of other mens workes, especially vsing their testimonies: but it cannot be voyde of great reproch, for any man so to be addicted to his owne persua
                           〈1 line〉
                        on, that he should so lightly regarde other mens opinions.
                     I doubt not but that the Reader will conceiue by these authorities that you haue here collected as chiefe, principall, and moste euident for the confirmation of your assertions, vpon what slender pillers your building standeth. For truely (so farre as I can gather) most of these places make little for your purpose, and none of them inforce any such necessitie as you séeme to vrge, as it will fall out in the examination of them.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  
                     1 That there ought nowe to be the same regiment of the Churche, which was in the Apostles time.
                     The confession of the Heluetian, Tygurin, Berne, Geneua, Polonia, Hungarie, and Scotlande with others, in the 18. chapter speaking of the equalitie of Ministers saith, that no mā may iustly forbid to returne to the olde constitution of the Churche of God, and to recei
                           〈1 line〉
                        e it before the custome of man.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     The confession in that place, speaketh not one word of hauing Seniors in euery Parish: neither yet of any other Seniors than those that be Ministers of the word and Sacramentes, for the whole chapter intreateth of such.
                     Moreouer it sayth not that we ought to returne to that old gouernment, but that we maye returne: so that it is from your purpose, and maketh more against you than with you. For the question is not whyther we maye returne to that 
                           〈1 line〉
                         ynde of gouernment or no, if it seeme good to the Christian Magistrate to whome God hath now committed the gouernment of the Church, but whether the Christian Magistrate ought of necessitie to receiue that kynde of gouernment, and no other: which this confession doth no where affirme.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Caluine in his Institutions. 4. booke. 3. chapter, and. 8. section, speaking of the auncients which did assist the Pastors in euery Church, sayth that experience teacheth that that order

was not for one age, and that this office of gouernment is necessarie to all ages.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Caluine in that place sheweth what hath bene, and what maye be in the Churche, but he doth not make that kynde of gouernment so necessarie that it can not be altered. His meaning is, that that kinde of gouernment is necessarie for all ages, bycause in euery age the Churche in one place or other is in persecution: but he no where saythe (as I remember) this kynde of gouernment to be necessarie in all states of the Churche, nay he affirmeth the directe contrarie in the same booke the seuenth chapter, and. 15. section. Where he speaking of the gouernment of the Churche, sayth thus: Scimus autem politiam pro varietate temporum, recipere, imò exigere varias mutationes. Wee knowe that the gouernment of the Churche (according to the diuersitie of times) dothe receyue, yea, require or exacte diuers alterations.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  And in the. 12. chapter and first section of the same booke, saythe as much of Excommunication and other Ecclesiasticall censures.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Caluine sheweth in that place, howe necessarie discipline is in the Churche, whych is not denyed: he speaketh not in that section of any thyng nowe in controuersie.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Peter Martyr vpon the thirde to the Romaines, teacheth that although the common wealth chaunge hir gouernment, yet the Church alwayes keepeth hirs stil.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Let the Reader peruse that place, and he shall perceiue howe cunning you are in counterfeiting. For M. Martyr speaketh there onely of the lawes of God whiche be immutable, and sheweth that therein the Churche of God doth differ from a common wealth, bycause the common wealth doth often chaunge hir lawes, but the Churche doth not so, and he meaneth such lawes as be of the essence, and being of the Church, & are of fayth and of saluation. He speaketh also of the inwarde and essentiall forme of the Church, not of the external and accidental forme of it, whych is now in question, and of the spiritual gouernment, not of the externall gouernment. Certaine it is, that no law of God (not being personall or temporall) is to be altered. But I require to haue that law sette down, which establisheth this forme of gouernment for the whiche you nowe contende.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Bucer in his firste booke of the kingdome of Christe the. 15. chapter, lamenteth that there were found amongst those which are counted of the forwardest Christians, which woulde not haue the same discipline vsed nowe, that was in the times of the Apostles, obiecting the differences of times, and of men.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     There is nothing in that chapter that maketh any thing wyth you, or against me: for who denyeth, but that the discipline that Christe hath appoynted ought to be mainteined and kept in his Church: our question is of the manner of executing it, of the persons, and of certaine other circumstances, whereof M. Bucer in that chapter speaketh not one worde: and that the Reader may vnderstande howe you seeke to delude him, I will recite the wordes of M. Bucer in that chapter, wherein he comprehendeth al that which is spoken in the same chapter touching this matter. 
                           Out of all these testimonies of the holy Scripture concerning Christes kingdome, they that beleeue the worde of God shall easily vnderstande, that what soeuer Christe the Lorde bath commaunded vs and appoynted, the same to bring a sure and great helpe to our saluation, if it be so obserued as be bath
                           
                           commaunded and appointed it: and that in all ages howsoeuer men and times doe varie: neyther can wee wittginly for any cause intermitte or neglecte any of them, but we muste therewith refuse and despise Christe himselfe, and his whole kingdome.
                         All which I graunt: and they touch not any thing nowe in controuersie. Surely these be but slender testimonies to proue that there ought nowe to be the same regiment of the church, whiche was in the Apostles times, if you speake of the externall regiment, which only is now in question.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  
                     2 That one minister ought not to haue any dominion ouer an other
                     The foresaide Heluetian confession. &c. in the seuententh chapter saythe, that Christe did most seuerely prohibite vnto his Apostles, and their successors primacie, and dominion, and in the eightenth chapter saith, that equall power, and function, is giuen vnto all the ministers of of the Church, and that from the beginning no one preferred himselfe to an other, sauing only that for order, some one did call them togither, propound the matters that were to be consulted of, and gathered the voyces. &c.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     The wordes of the confession in the. 17. chapter be these: truely Christe is present with his Churche, and is a lyuing head, who straightly forbad his Apostles, and their successors, to chalenge the primacie or supremacie in the Church. This the confession speaketh of such primacie & supremacie, as the Byshop of Rome doth chalenge ouer the whole Church, for in that place it onely speaketh of the Popes vsurped authoritie, and not one worde of that superioritie among Ministers which is now in controuersie.
                     That which the confession affirmeth in the eightenth chapter maketh nothing against any superioritie allowed in this Churche of Englande, for we acknowledge that there is one equall power and function of al Ministers, but yet superioritie also to be among them for order sake, and the same doth the Confession acknowledge in plaine and manifest woords, euen in this place by you alledged: whereby also that distinction is verifyed whiche you séeme so greatly to mislyke, to witte, that there is an equalitie of all Ministers of Gods worde quoad ministerium, touching the ministerie,
                         but degrées and superioritie among them, quoad ordinem & politiam, touching order and gouernment.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Musculus in his common places, in the chapter of the offices of the ministers of the worde saith, that in the Apostolike Church, the ministers of the worde were none aboue another, nor subiecte to any head, or president, and mislyketh the setting vp of any one in higher degree than another: And further he saith vpon the seconde chapter of the seconde Epistle to the Thessalonians, that the honor of a Bishop, being taken from the rest of the ministers, and giuē to one, was the first step to the papacie, howsoeuer in other places he speaketh otherwise.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Musculus in those wordes of his common places, speaketh of superioritie quoad officium & potestatem, touching office and power,
                         (for these wordes dothe he vse) he speaketh not of superioritie touching order and pollicie, whiche is nowe in question. The same power is in all ministers of the worde of bynding, losing, and administring the Sacraments, but not of gouerning in the externall pollicie of the Church. Moreouer Musculus in that place speaketh chiefly of the vsurped power of the Byshop of Rome, and of that authoritie which his Byshoppes doe chaleng and clai
                           〈1 line〉
                        e, from him, wherefore that place maye not be wrested against the lawfull iurisdictiō and superioritie that is nowe vsed in this Church of Englande.
                     Upon the seconde chapter of thée seconde Epistle to the Thessalonians, he onely sheweth how the Pope came to such excessiue authoritie. No man doubteth but that such things as were well instituted and vpon iust considerations, may by proces of

tyme abused: but doth it therfore followe, that they may not be restored to their right vse agayne? A man might then much more strongly reason agaynst your equalitie, which by sufficient tryall (as by Ierome in sundrie places it maye appeare) is proued to haue bene, and to be the cause of schismes, sectes, contentions, seditions, tumultes, murders, confusion of Churches and common weales. &c. Nothing is so well instituted but it may be abused.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  
                     3 That the election of Ministers, perteyneth not to one man.
                     The foresayde Heluetian confession, &c. in the eightenth chapter sayth, that the ministers ought to be chosen of the Churche, or by those which are lawfully deputed of the Churche, and afterwarde ordeyned with publike prayers.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     This maketh againste you: for the confession alloweth that election of Ministers which is made by those that are appoynted to that office in the Churche: (for these be the wordes of the Confession) but our Byshops are appointed to that office in this Church, therefore the Confession alloweth Byshops to elect Ministers. The wordes that followe, that they should be ordeyned with publike prayers, is obserued in our Church.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Caluine in his fourth booke of Institutions. 3. chapter. 15. section, sheweth that the Church did choose, and that the Apostles did moderate the election, aud confuteth them whyche vpon the places of Titus and Timothie woulde proue, that the election belongeth to one man.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     To this place of M. Caluine I haue sufficiently answered in the thirde treatise of election of Ministers, chap. 7. the. 1. diuision.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  
                     4 That there ought newe to be Elders to gouerne the Church wyth the Pastors, and Deacons, to prouide for the poore.
                     Touching Elders, the iudgement of M. Caluine hath beene before declared in the fyrste of these propositions.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     And in the same place haue I answered, that whych is there by you alledged out of M. Caluine.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Beza in his booke of Diuorces page. 161. sayth, that the Eldership of the Church ought to be where there is a Christian magistrate.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Beza doth not say in that place, that the Eldership of the Churche ought to be where there is a Christian Magistrate, but that it may be: and that it hath bene, which he onely speaketh and proueth not. And yet if he meane that Presbyterie whereof the Canons speake (by him only in generalitie named) then is it no other than we haue at this daye in this Church of Englande, in Cathedrall Churches and Colleges, for in the Canons presbyterium signifieth nothing else, but a Colledge or company of Priestes and Ministers of the worde and Sacraments, as I haue further declared in the. 17. Tract. where I haue also shewed, that M. Beza his opinion is that the gouernment of the Church maye admitte alteration, according to the diuersities of times, place, and persons. cap. vlt.
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Touching Deacons, M. Caluine. 4. booke. 3. chapter. 9. section, after that he had discribed what Deacons the Churches had in the Apostles tymes, saythe that we, after their example ought to haue the lyke.
                  
                     
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Caluines words be these: En quales habuerit diaconos Apostolica ecclesia, quales ad eius exemplum habere nos conueniat. Beholde what Deacons the Apostolicall churche had, euen suche as it is conuenient we should haue, according to that example.
                         Hee dothe not saye that we ought to haue them, but that it is conuenient to haue th
                           〈1 line〉
                        : he doth not make them necessary but conuenient: and he must be vnderstanded to 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ke of that Churche whereof he had experience, not of this Churche wherein he was 
                           〈◊〉
                         a straunger. Of Deacons, and that their office was not only to prouide for the poore, but to preache also, and to baptise, I haue proued Tract. 19. & Tract. 14.
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Beza in the. 5. chap. and. 23. section of his Confessiōs sheweth that the office of the distribution of the goodes of the churche is an ordinarie function in a Churche lawefully constituted, which office in the. 30. he calleth the Deaconship.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     In neither of these doth M. Beza so tie prouiding for the poore to Deacons that they must by them be prouided for, and by no other: hée onely sheweth what was done in this case in the Apostles tyme, and in the tymes immediatly following: but there is neyther Scripture nor any learned wryter that teacheth that the poore may be by no other prouided for, than by Deacons. You proue that which no man denieth, and speake not one worde of the matter in question, that is, whether of necessitie the poore must be prouided for by Deacons and not otherwyse.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Peter Martyr vpon the. 11. to the Romaynes, speaking of the Elders, whiche did assiste the Pastor in euery Churche, and of the Deacons, lamenteth that this order is so fallen out of the Churche, that the names of these functions do scarce remayne.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     That which Peter Martyr speaketh in that place, is spoken generally of all that the Apostle had before wrytten touching the publike ministers of the Churche, and therfore you doe vniustly restrayne it only to Elders and Deacons. It maye euidentlye appeare that M. Martyr maketh there a comparison betwixt the gouerranent of the Churche of Christe in the Apostles tyme, & the gouernment of the Popes Church in his tyme, as his wordes following declare, for thus he addeth immediatly. In steade of these, they haue brought in Taperbearers, Acoluthes, and Subdeaco
                              〈1 line〉
                            which with their light and stagelike gestures, serue at their superstitious altar. So that you can not gather of this place that your Seigniorie is perpetuall, and must of necessitie for euer remayne in the Churche.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Bucer in his first booke of the kyngdome of Christ, for the auncients of the Churche sayeth, that the number of the Elders of euery Churche ought to be encreased according to the multitude of the people, and in the. 14. chapter of the same booke sayeth that this order of Deaconship was religiously kept in the Churche vntill it was dryuen out by Antichriste.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     It had bene well to haue noted the chapter out of the which you gather that first saying of M. Bucer, howebeit, the matter is not great, for the question is not whether the number of the Elders of euery Churche ought to be encreased according to the number of the
                        
                        people, or no, in such places where this kynde of gouernment is admitted: but whether this kynde of gouernment muste of necessitie in all Churches and at all tymes be put in practise. I doe not remember that M. Bu
                           〈1 line〉
                        er any where affirmeth that. In déede in the fifth chapter of the firste booke (speakyng of these Seniors,) he sayeth: Tales sanè possunt cum administris doctrinae & Sacramentorum Christi disciplinam exercere. &c. Such may exercise the diseipline of Christe with the ministers of the worde and Sacramentes. &c.
                         He sayeth they may doe it, not that they ought to do it.
                     That whiche M. Bucer speaketh of the Deaconshippe in the 14. chapter, is not denied, but hee nowhere sayeth that the poore muste of necessitie hée prouided for by Deacons, and by none other: and hée teacheth in the same chapter, that mo things apperteyned to the office of the Deacon than to prouide for the poore: as namely to assiste the ministers in the administration of the Sacramentes and exercising of discipline.
                     What sufficient proofes these bée to induce that necessitie of the kynde of gouernment so greatly vrged by you, let the learned Reader iudge.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  
                     5 That excommunication pertayneth not to any one man in the Churche.
                     M. Caluine in his Institutions. 4. booke, and 11. Chapter, and. 6. Section, teacheth that excommunication porteyneth not to one man, and that it was to wicked a facte that one man taking the authoritie which was common to other, to hymselfe alone, opened a waye to tyrannie, tooke from the Churche hir right, and abrogated the Church Senate, ordeined by the spirite of Christe. And in the. 12 chapter and. 7. Section, he sayeth further that it ought not to be done without the knowledge and approbation of the Churche.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Wée graunte that no one man ought to take that vnto hym selfe which doth not apperteyne vnto him: but I haue proued Tract. 18. that excommunication perteineth to Byshops, and that this Church of England hath consented there vnto: wherefore M. Ca
                           〈1 line〉
                        uine speaketh against that excommunication whiche the Pope violently and tyrannically vsurpeth, and not against this whiche our Bishoppes in this Churche of Englande, both by the lawes of God and consent of the Churche exercise. I speake of the thing it selfe and not of the abuse.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Beza in his confessions 5. chapter. 43. Section, sayeth, that this power of excommunicating is giuen to no one man, except it please God to worke extraordinarily.
                  Peter Martyr vpon the firste to the Corinthes and fifth chapter, sayeth that it is very daungerous, to permitte so waighty a matter as excommunication to the discretion and wil of any one man. And therefore, both that tyrannie might be auoyded, and this censure execeuted with greater fruite and grauitie, that the order whiche the Apostles there vseth is still to be obserued.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     To M. Beza and M. Martyr, I answere as I dyd to M. Caluine: and yet M. Martyr séemeth to expounde hym selfe in the same place where hée speakyng against the committing of this authoritie of excommunicating to the Pope or to one Bishop, and refelling this saying of the Papistes, Episcopum esse totam ecclesiā virtualiter, when as they be rather tora ecclesia vitialiter, as he there affirmeth, he addeth by and by, de malis haec intelligas & tyrannicè agentibus: Vnderstande this of euill Dishops and such as deale tyrannically:
                         whereby he declareth that he speaketh agaynst the

committing of this discipline to euill Bishops and such as vse it tyrannically.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Bucer of the kingdome of Christ. in the. 1. book and. 9. chapter sayth, that Saint Paule accuseth the Corinthians, for that the whole Church, did not cast out of their companie the incestuous person.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     The question is not whether the whole Church may haue to doe in excommunication or no, but whither the consent therof is al tymes therein to be required. What the meaning of the Apostle is in that place to the Corinth. I haue declared. Tract. 15.
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  
                     6 That Chauncellours, Commissaries, Officials. &c. vsurpe authoritie in the Church which belongeth not to them.
                     M. Caluine in his Institutions. 4. booke. 11. chap. 7. Sect. speaketh agaynst the office of Officials, and alledgeth diuers reasons agaynst them, as that they exercise that part of the Bishops charge, and that they handle matters whiche perteyne not to the spirituall iurisdiction.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifie.
                     M. Caluin in that place alledgeth no reasons at al against those offices, only he sayth that they exercise that part of the Bishops charge, and that they handle matters which perteyne not to the spirituall iurisdiction, (this I say) he speaketh, but he doth not proue it. In the rest of that Section, he intreateth of the abuses of such officers, wherein I doe not dissent from him.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Beza in hs booke of Diuorces, prouing that the iudiciall deciding of matrimoniall causes apperteyneth vnto the ciuill magistrate, sayth that Officials, Proctors, end Promoters and in a worde all the swinish filth, now of long time hath wasted the Church.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I vnderstande not by what reasons M. Beza in that place proueth that the iudiciall deciding of matrimoniall causes apperteyneth to the ciuill Magistrate. Howbeeit., Officials &c. in such cases deale not in this Church of Englande without the consent and authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate. It is not good dealing to applie those things which M. Beza and other speake of such offices abused vnder the Pope., to the same offices nowe reformed vnder a Christian Prince that professeth the Gospell: But thus you dazell the peoples eyes.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Peter Martyr vpon the. 13. Chap. to the Romaines, speaking against the ciuill iurisdiction of Bishops, doth by the same reason condemne it in their Deputies the Officials.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Peter Martyr speaketh not agaynst the office, but agaynst certaine abuses in the officers: this is not simple dealing to transferre that to the office, that is spoken of the abuse of the office.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  
                     7 That the Ministers of the worde ought not to exercise any 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ill offices and iurisdiction.
                     M. Caluin in his institutions. 4. booke. 11. chap. 9. Sect. bringeth diuers reasons to proue that Bishops may neyther vs
                           〈1 line〉
                        rpe, nor take 
                           〈◊〉
                         giuen them, eyther the right of the sworde, or the knowledge of ciuill causes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     The reasons that M. Caluine vseth there, be neyther many, nor greatly strong. I haue answered them fullie. Tract. 23. and yet M. Caluine speaketh onely of that princely power, which the Romishe Bishops clayme, not as committed vnto them by the Prince and and ciuill Magistrate, but due vnto them by the worde of God, from the which chalenge I haue shewed in the foresayde treatise, howe farre our Bishops are.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Beza in his Confessions Chap. 5. Sect. 32. sayth that the Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction is to be distinguished from the ciuill, and that although the Bishoppes in the tymes of christian Emperours were troubled with the hearing of ciuill causes, yet they did not that by any iudiciall power, which they exercised, but by a friendly intreatie of the parties, whiche were at discorde: and sayth notwithstanding, that herein the Emperours did giue to much to the ambition of certaine Bishops, wherevpon by little and by little afterwarde all things were confounded. And in the. 42. Section sayth that those corporall punishments whiche the Apostles exercised were peculiar and extraordinarie.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Beza his bare worde is no sufficient proofe agaynst so many other testimonies and reasons as are to the contrarie, and I haue sufficiently shewed Tract. 23. cap. 3. Diuis. vlt. that Bishops in tymes past did not onely heare ciuill causes, but also iudicially determine the same. Touching the corporall punishments which the Apostles exercised, M. Beza in his booke de Haereticis a magistratu puniendis, doth make them so ordinarie that he vseth them as sufficient arguments to proue his purpose, and sayth plainly that the Apostles did exercise these punishments, not by the right of the Ecclesiasticall ministerie, but by the right of the ciuill Magistracie. as I haue declared Tract. 23. Cap. 3. Diuis. 12.
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Peter Martyr vpon the. 13. to the Romanes, speaking of this meetings of both Ecclesiasticall, and ciuill iurisdiction in one man, sayth that when both the ciuill, and Ecclesiasticall functions do so meete, that one hynder the other, so that he which exerciseth the one cannot minister the other.
                  
                     Io. Whitegifte.
                     M. Martyr speaketh of an absolute iurisdiction ciuill, such as the Pope claymeth, and not of this which is practised by the Bishops in the Church of England, whereof he had experience in the dayes of King Edwarde euen in this realme, and the which he also then allowed.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Bucer vpon the. 5. of Matthew, sayth, that there is no man so wise, and holy, which is able to exercise both the ciuill, and the Ecclesiasticall power, and that therefore he whiche will exercise the one, must leaue the other.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     I answere as I did to M. Martyr, for he also allowed that ciuill iurisdiction that the Bishops in England did exercise in the time of King Edwarde.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  
                     8 That the Sacraments ought not to be priuately administred, nor by women.
                     The foresayd confession: C. 20. holdeth that baptisme ought not to be ministred by women or midwyues, to the which also may be ioyned the Liturgie of the English Church at Geneua, which condemneth the ministring of eyther of the Sacraments in priuate houses, or by women.
                  
                  
                     I
                           〈1 line〉
                        . Whitgifte.
                     These be néedlesse proofes, & yet are there learned mē of the cōtrary iudgemēt. 
                           〈1 line〉
                        ow beit, no man sayth that women may baptise ordinarily, or that the Sacramonts may

be administred in priuate places, otherwise than vpon vrgent occasion: and in that respecte no learned man dothe condemne the ministring of the Sacramentes in priuate places.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Peter Martyr vpon the. 11. chapter of the. 1. Epistle to the Corinthes, in describing the corruptions of the Lordes Supper, noteth this to be one, that the Churche did not communicate altogither, which corruption as it was in diuers places in tymes past, so he complayneth that it is nowe.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Martyr in that place speaketh agaynste priuate Masses, and the complainte that he maketh, is concerning them, wherein we fully agrée with him: neyther doe we like or allowe of suche as withdrawe themselues from the Lordes table when the Supper is celebrated. You neuer loue to rehearse the authors wordes (bycause they make not for you) but gather collections of your owne, contrarie to the meaning of the author, as you do in this place, which the Reader shall easily perceiue, if it wil please him to reade M. Martyr himself, in that place by you quoted. And surely it is too great iniurie, to wreste that to the order of celebrating the Communion allowed off in this Church of Englande, which he or any man else speaketh agaynst pryuate Masses, but such are your deepe and profounde collections.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Bucer in his first booke of the kingdome of Christ, and. 7. chapter proueth out of the 10. to the Corinthes, that the whole Churche shoulde receiue the Supper of the Lorde togyther, and that the vse of the Church of God in this behalfe, ought with great and diligent endeuour to be restored vnto the Churches, and that it is a contempt of the mysteries not to be partakers when they are called.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Bucer speaketh nothing in that place (touching this question) where vnto I agrée not: he woulde haue the Communion ministred in the publike congregation, & who denyeth that? except it be vpon occasion of sicknesse. &c as I haue before declared: he woulde haue all or the moste parte that be present to communicate, and who defendeth the contrarie? and yet if they will not, the rest may not be secluded: his whole drift is to reproue such as will not communicate, and not to prohibite the distribution of the Supper to those that be willing, be they moe, or be they fewer, so that there be a competent number, that it may be a Communion.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Beza against VVestphalus, sheweth that it is not decent, that baptisme be ministred but in the Church, and that at standing houres, and by the ministers, and further, that vpō no necessitie (as it is called) it ought to be ministred in priuate houses. And that if it might be ministred in priuate houses, yet not otherwise than by Ministers.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     You vntruely report M. Beza his wordes: he onely sheweth in that place what the order of the Church is, where he remaineth, he doth not prescribe any certaine rule for all Churches, neyther is it méete that he shoulde, in such cases. He so speaketh of baptizing in priuate houses, that he doth not simplie condemne it. But what soeuer his iudgement is in that poynt, his mynd is not (I am sure) to bynde all other Churches to the same, which thinke and teach as soundly of this Sacrament, as he doth, or can do, though they agrée not with him in all circumstances.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  M. Caluin in his Institutions. 4. booke chapter. 15. sect. 20. 21. proueth that baptisme ought not to be ministred by priuate men, or by any women.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Only ministers of the Church are ye ordinarie ministers of baptisme, neither may any other chalenge that function vnto thēselues ordinarily, but yet if vpon occasion

a priuate person do baptise, the baptisme is good and lawfull, euen as the circumcision was true circumcision that was ministred by Sephora. As I haue proued. 
                           Tract. 9. cap. 5.
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                         The iudgement of those late writers touching ceremonies and apparell, whose secrete Epistles M. Doctor alledgeth, appeareth by these places following, cited out of their works printed, and published by themselues. Wherof also some are alledged by the answerer to the examiner, where are diuers other places to this purpose, wherevnto I referre the Reader.
                     M. Bucer vpon the. 18. of Mathewe, saith, that they say nothing which do alwayes obiect, that greater things must be vrged, than the reformation of ceremonies, thereby defending the reliques of Antichrist, for as much as ceremonies are testimonies of Religion: And that as there is no agreement betweene Christe and Belial, so those whiche are sincere Christians, can abide nothing of Antichrist.
                  
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Bucer sayth truely: for the reformation of ceremonies is to be sought and not to be neglected, neyther can sincere Christians abyde any thing of Antichriste, as it is Antichristes: but what is all this to the purpose? is there no reformation of ceremonies in this Church of Englande, from the whiche all Antichristian ceremonies are abandoned, and those that remaine purged from al opinion of Antichristianitie? And that M. Bucer ment nothing lesse than the ceremonies nowe reteined in this Church of Englande (as we vse them) it maye euidently appeare by that whiche I haue alledged out of him. 
                           Tract. 7. cap. 5. the. 5. diuision. and chap. 7. diuision. 4.
                     
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Peter Martyr vpon the. 10. chap. of the second boke of the Kings saith, that the Lutherans must take heede, least whilest they cutte off many Popishe errors, they followe Iehu by reteining also many Popish things. For they defende still the reall presence in the bread of the Supper, and Images, and Vestiments. &c. and saith that religion must be wholly reformed to the quick.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Martyr nameth the Popishe things which the Lutherans obserue, to be the reall presence, images, all the Popish apparell which they vsed in their Masse, (for so doth he meane) which this Church hath refused. What his opinion is of this apparell, that we reteine, I haue declared 
                           tract. 7. chap. 5. the. 4. diuision.
                         where he of purpose speaketh concerning the same. God be thanked, Religion is wholly reformed, euen to the quicke in this Churche.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Bullinger in his Decades. 5. Booke, and ninth Sermon saythe, that our Sauiour Christe and the Apostles vsed their accustomed apparell in the Supper, and that although in tymes paste the Ministers put on a kynde of cloake vpon their common apparell, yet that was done neyther by the example of Chryste, nor of his Apostles, but by the tradition of man, and that in the ende, after the example of the Priestes apparell in the olde lawe, it was caste vpon the Ministers at the ministration of the Supper. But (sayth hee) we haue learned long agoe not onely that all Leuiticall ceremonies are abrogated, but also that they ought to be brought agayne into the Churche of no man. And therfore seeing we are in the light of the Gospell, and not vnder the shadowe of the lawe, we do worthily reiecte, that Massing Leuiticall apparell.
                  
                     
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     Neyther do we reteine the massing Leuiticall apparell, but that apparell onely which Bullinger himselfe alloweth of in diuers Epistles written of purpose, touching these matters, as I haue expressed, 
                           Tract. 7. Chapter. 5. the. 6. Diuision. &c.
                  
               
               
                  T. C.
                  Gualter vpon the. 21. of the Actes among others, bringeth this for one reason, to improue Paules shauing of his head, for that the Gospel had beene preached twentie yeares: and that therefore the infirmitie of the Iewes ought not to haue bene borne with. And after he saith, that that teacheth howe muche the superstitious Maisters of ceremonies hurte the Gospell, which nourishe the weaknesse of fayth by the long keping of ceremonies, and by their long bearing, hinder the doings of those ministers, which are more feruent.
                  
                     Io. Whitgifte.
                     M. Gualter in these wordes sayth nothing against any poynt of this Churche: he speaketh truely and nothing to your purpose. M. Gualter hath sufficiently shewed his opinion in these matters, not onely in written Epistles, but in printed bookes, as in his Epistle before his commentaries vpō the first to the Corinthians.
                     Surely, there is no suche weight in these authorities for your purpose, that you can take any great aduauntage of them: indéede your cause in my opinion hath won small credite by alledging of them.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Humfrey Toy, dvvelling in Paules Churchyard at the signe of the Helmet.
            
               ANNO. 1574.
         
      
   