
      
         
            
            
            A
GODLIE
Sermon preached
the xxj. day of Iune,
1586. at Pensehurst in Kent, at the
buriall of the late Right honourable
Sir HENRIE SIDNEY Knight
of the noble order of the Garter, Lord
President of Wales, and of her
Maiesties most honourable
priuie Councell,
            By Thomas White professor
in Diuinitie.
            
               AT LONDON
Printed by Henrie Midleton.
M.D.LXXXVI.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               HAuing gotten the
copie of this godly
Sermon into my
handes, which containeth
so excellent
matter for al estates, especially to
beate down the pride of flesh with
the consideration of their mortalitie,
& to rayse vp the poore and
distressed seruaunts of God, in regard
of their glory after this life:
I thought it my duety in consciēce
to make it common to the church.
Wherefore so reade and remember
the thinges that are written
therein, that thou maiest feare the
Lord al thy daies, & reape thy life
with ioy, in the resurrection of the
righteous.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A SERMON PREACHED
the xxi. day of Iune 1586. at Pensehurst
in Kent, at the buriall of the late
right Honorable S. Henry Sidney knight,
of the noble order of the Garter, Lord President
of Wales, and of her Maiesties
most Honorable Priuie
Counsell,
            By T. W. Professor in Diuinity.
            
               1. Iohn. 3.
               
                  2. DEerely beloued: Now are we the sons
of God, but yet it doth not appeare
what wee shall bee. And wee knowe that
when hee shall appeare, wee shall be like
him, for wee shall see him as hee is:
                  3. And euery man that hath this hope purgeth
himselfe, euen as hee is pure.
               
            
            
               THis scripture (right Honorable)
doth naturally
diuide it selfe into three
principall partes. The
first is an Euangelicall 
proposition of the Apostle
Deerely beloued: Nowe
are wee the sonnes of
God. The second is an Anticipation or preuenting 
of an obiection. But yet it doth not

appeare what wee shalbe.] The third is an
exhortation vpon the premises. Hee that
hath this hope in him purgeth himselfe, euen
as hee is pure.
            
            The proposition, or assertion, is worthy
to be considered and thought vpon: nay, to
bee wondred and maruayled at, which at
this daie is admirable to the Aungells, and
Spirituall powers them selues, 1. Pet. 1. 12.
excepte wee shalbe found vngratefull vnto
God, and that that should bee respected of
Angels, and not of men, which pertayneth
to men, and not to Angels, Namely to bee
the sonnes of God. By nature there is but
one onely sonne of God, Iesus Christ, by
creation many, euen all the Myllions of
Angels, good and bad, Iob. 1. And by redemption
not a fewe, but an infinite number
of men, euen the sonnes of Adam, as
many as are elected, Gal. 3. And for a certaine
péece or spice of the glory and maiesty
of God, shyning in the gouernment of the
world, the kinges and magistrates of the
earth are called gods, as sonnes of God:
Psalm. 82. So that albeit in creation Adam
be inferior vnto Angels, yet in the vnspeakable
worke of our redemption, he is superior:

for the sonne of God did take our nature,
and not theirs, Heb. 2. 16. and made
men the sonnes of God, and not Angels: he
often appeared in their forme, but neuer
tooke their substance, so that they all lie
vnder the iudgement as many as fell, and
are reserued in chaynes, vnto the darknes
of death, 2. Pet. 2. 42. And of many rebellious
spirites not one shalbe saued: but of all
the race of Adam not one was despised of
him that died for all, though not all, but
many doe become the sonnes of God: as
more at large it might be cleared by the scriptures.
            The proposition is indefinite, equiualent
to an vniuersall, you are the sonnes of God,
for you are all the sonnes of God, as it is expressed
else where, Gal. 3. 26. For there is
neither Jewe nor Gretian, bonde nor free,
male nor female, there is no respect of persons
in Christ: and all the children of Adam
are the sonnes of Abraham if they beleeue,
younge or olde, riche or poore, wise or simple.
The which although the Lord him
selfe doe say and that very oft in scriptures,
nay albeit for our faith sake hée sometimes
doe sweare that by two immutable things

wherin it is impossible that God should lie,
wée might receaue strong consolation, Heb.
6. 18. Yet notwithstanding it is, and hath
bene alwaies a Paradox vnto vs, vntill the
spirit doe bring his testimony to it, in our
hearts crying Abba father, as it is Rom. 8.
It is no maruaile therefore if one, a most
learned Rabby of the Jewes, a ruler, Nichodemus,
so long as he remained naturall
in him selfe, did not onely wonder and doubt
of this principle of religion, but plainely
doate, when hée sayd, How can a man bee
borne againe which is olde? can hee enter
into his mothers wombe againe, and be
borne? Iohn. 3. 4.Obiect. For thus the braine of
man might reason. Whatsoeuer is borne of
flesh is flesh: and to repeate the birth is
impossible in nature, and further then the
naturall course of thinges the heart of man
can neither reach, nor conceaue, and therefore
as ouercome in this care, hée standeth
still: howe can it bee? nay, he is armed on
the contrary side with many reasons and
respectes. Sprange wée not all of Adam?
came not hée out of the earth? went hée not
into the earth againe? and is not this the
way of all flesh? how say you then, wée are

the sonnes of God?Solutiō. I answere that this
Generation is not after fleshe and bloude,
nor of the will of man, but of God, Iohn. 1.
That there came an Adam after Adam,
which was before Adam, who came from
God, and God was with him, and hée was
God, euen our Emanuell, God with vs,
who himselfe was made man, and the son
of man, that wée might be made the sonnes
of God. For as many as receaued him, that
is, that belieued on his name, he gaue them
power to bee the sonnes of God, Iohn. 12.
Wherefore call no man father vppon the
earth, saith Christ, for one is your father in
heauen, Mat. 23. A father, not for sunne,
and raine and no further, but wée are heires
and ioynt heires with Christ of his kingdome,
Rom. 8. In déede with the wicked
God dealeth as Abraham did with ye sonnesGen. 25. 6.
of his Contubins, hée geueth them certaine
giftes, and sendeth them away. But he that
shall inherite is Isaak, the Childe of promise,
with whom wée are heires annexed of
the same blessing: and the excellency of
this thing passeth ye poore measure of mans
capacitie, whether you respect the cause,
(Gods merries:) or the effect thereof, (mans

saluation) especially if you fall into the consideration
of the greatnes of ye price, which
can no more bee valued than God him selfe,
for he gaue himselfe which is God: & albeit
Iudas plaid the traitor kindly to sell him for
30. siluerlinges, yet Peter maketh him inestimable
& therefore doth reiect both siluer
& golde as base and corrupt Mettal. You are
redeemed (saith hée) not with siluer or gold
but with the precious bloude of Christ, as
of a lambe vndefiled, and without spotte,
1. pet. 1. All the worlde is not worthy to
serue for one counter in this reckoning: for
all the treasures thereof are but meere corruptiō.
And men & Angels must geue place
to the sonne of God, and let him alone with
this matter for euer who hath opened all
the Treasures of his goodnes, euen the
fountaines of his loue, and hath powred
out the bowels of his mercy. Wherefore,
if either the great price a man payeth doe
cause great loue of the thinges so bought,
or the grieuous paine a woman suffreth in
thē Throes and pangues of her Trauaile
doe procure a perpetuall minde and memory
of her Issue and will not possibly admit
forgetfulnes of the same for euer, Isay. 49.

Then there is no cause at all of any doubt
in Christ whose loue cannot goe backe, him
selfe being risen from the dead and ascended
into heauen who stucke fast vnto vs in
all the agonies and anguish of his death, &
though hée turned his head, yet hée chaunged
not his heart: but drancke the draught
of death and damnation for the time. Justly
therefore might Iohn ye apostle terme the
christians here (deerely beloued) at which
loue him selfe séemeth to stande astonied in
the first verse of this chapter, and therefore
by way of admiration hée laboureth to expresse
it. (Beholde what loue the father
hath shewed on vs, that wée shoulde bée called
the sonnes of God.) Wherefore séeing
God him selfe hath sayd it, and shewed vs
all his secret counsell in it, (for otherwise
Christ so borne and buried, so rising and
raigning shoulde haue bene but happy for
him selfe, and not at all for vs) except God
had so ordained him to bee a mediator for
vs and set him out to bee a propitiation for
our sinnes, Rom. 3. Nay, séeing the Lorde
hath sworne it as you haue heard, let vs
geue glory vnto God and belieue and liue,
let vs belieue not hystorically, which is prophane,

but after the spirit. For as an heauenly
knowledge of earthly thinges by the
meanes of faith doth help a man to heauen,
so an earthly knowledge of heauēly things
bée it neuer so excellent, yet through ye flesh
it doth but send a man to hell: And because
the Apostle doth so vrge the instance of the
present time, directly pressing this worde:
(Now) now are wee the sonnes of God, Let
vs not dreame that wee were his sonnes
before wée did belieue, as if it were of nature:
or that wée shall become his sonnes
after wée haue belieued, as if it were not of
grace: but let vs firmely hold with the apostle
that wée are nowe the sonnes of God,
euen when we doe belieue. You were darknes,
but you are now light in the Lorde,
Ephe. 5. 8. Prooue your selues therefore
whether you bee in the faith, sayth the apostle,
2. Cor. 13. 5. You shall easely finde
whether you haue faith or noe, except you
will deceaue your selues. And it fareth not
with faith as with the eies of ye body, which
the further off it seeth, the brighter and better
it is; but true faith, except it be the naked
name, or shrine of faith, the greater it
is, the neerer it findeth and beholdeth the

Lord, not aboue in the cloudes, but beneath
in our hearts, whose Temple wee are, that
is, God dwelleth in vs by faith, 1. Cor. 3.
            
               The second part.
               Here followeth the answering of an obiection,
in these wordes, But yet it doth not
appeare what wee shalbe, &c.
               
               It is most sure that God doth know who
be his, albeit men may easely deceaue them
selues with an opinion of faith. For superstition
séemeth to bee true Religion, and
Hypocrisie is very like to christian profession,
and there is a faith which is maruelous
forwarde and feruent for the time, but proueth
but temporary in the ende. Wherefore
it standeth vs vpon to cast off all Hypocrisie
and double dealing with God, and to looke
soundly to our selues, for Cocle cannot bée
discerned from Corne in the blade, & Chaffe
ariseth of the same seede, groweth in the
same field, and by the same meanes is nourished
with the Wheat: many are glorious
nowe, but yet it appeareth not what they
shalbe. This doctrine is true, and were exceeding
good for our cunning counterfaites

in Religion which roabe themselues with
the out side thereof for the time, but robbe
God of his honour, which professe the gospell,
but in peace doe plague and persecute
the sainctes, which are afrayd of nothinge
more than of an extraordinary measure of
the light, they are nowe Gods sonnes: for
so they wilbe called: but yet it doth not appeere
what they shalbe when hee commeth
which hath his phanne in his hande: who
can seuer the shéepe from the goates: who
called as déepe dessemblers as them selues,
Hypocrites and painted Sepulchers, let the
pollicies of men yéeld them what alowance
they list they get none of God nor of his
Christ with whom whosoeuer is not wholly
with, hee is directly against, and such indifferent
midlesised men ye scripture knoweth
none.
               But these wordes goe another way and
cary another sense, it doth not yet appeare,
it is a concession or a graunting to the aduersary
so much: that whatsoeuer appeareth
in this life, or can appeare, it is but
poore and miserable, & too vile and base for ye
sonnes of God in their estate, whether you
respect our breath or life or death, for vnto

all and euery one there is but one and the
same comming in, and going out. Betwene
the riche and poore you can finde no difference,
nay wise and foolishe are all one in
this thing, and that which is most of all.
There is no oddes betwene a man and a
beast, if you respect the body, Eccle. 3. For
man being in honour may well be compared
to the beaste that perisheth,Psal. 49. 1
                        •
                     . wherefore
you may not iudge by sight, but by faith,
not after the externall thinges which are
present, but after those thinges which are
prepared and to come. For as sense onely
apprehendeth the thinges present, and memory
the thinges that are past, so faith beholdeth
thinges that are to come, and spirituall
wisedome considereth all thinges: and
knoweth that albeit the kinges daughter
bee neuer so richly clad, as in a vesture of
gold, yet al her beauty is within. 4. 5. Psal.
               
               
                  Isay doth properly play the Harold when
he maketh corruption the coate of all men:
All fleshe is grasse,] Esay 40. And least hée
should seeme to doe iniury vnto great men,
hee doth geue it with a difference, And all
the glorie of it is as the flowre of the field,
To whom Solomon the kinge consenteth

who termeth the totall summe of all things
vanity of vanities. All thinges vnder the
Moone (say the Philosophers) are mutable,
but the prophet telleth vs that euery thing
vnder the Sunne is corruptible and vaine.
I will not now speake of the infinite necessities
of the poore, with the which hee being
daily pinched and pressed, cannot choose but
he weary of his life: (for it is most euident)
neither can I conueniently discourse of the
godly, whose condition is not better, but rather
worse than the rest. For how so euer it
goeth they are certayne of bitternesse in
this life, if they hée euill, God wilbe vpon
them, if they bee good the euill will both
hate, and hunt, and persecute them: they
are sure to bée exposed to the tyrants of the
time, the proude persons of the worlde, and
to all the sonnes of the Deuill. If any spéede
well in this life, by all likelyhoode it is the
Rich, for they are the men of this worlde,
the day and time is theirs, they rule and
strike the stroke, they liue and take their
pleasure as they list, and therefore is the
world set in their heartes, for where the
treasure is there the heart will bee.Mat. 6. 21. But
yet notwithstanding, if a man shall duely

waigh the continuall vexations of spirit,
the sodaine reciprocations and chaungings
as often as of the Moone, the ircksomnes of
pleasures themselues, together with the
vncertainty and shortnes of their breath,
which is as it were a hooke of God set in
the nostrells of all the sonnes of men to
restraine them with all, he will soone gene
his consent, that the states and starres of
this worlde are miserable for all their riches,
if not the more miserable, which is
most certaine. For the greatest part of riche
men, they are miserable, because whatsoeuer
they enioy, it is but as a dreame, & but
as a shadowe whatsoeuer they followe after,
it is all vncertayne & vnconstant: yea,
as the Ship doth swiftly trace the Seas, ye
Birde with quicke winge doth fly in the
Skies, or as an Arrowe shot strongly at a
marke, so hasteth and passeth pleasure fast
away, and riches with Eagles winges doe
often take the morning flight. Wée see that
great rentes, and reuenewes doe not alwaies
keepe vs company in our life, and in
death they are sure to depart: they are but
as the Aples of Sodom, which if you touch
them they turne to dust, or as the Goord of

                  Ionas which withered in a moment: neither
doe they redéeme the life from ye graue.Psal. 49.
They cannot, wisedome is not able to do it,
because time as a tiraunt casteth all downe
and laieth all a longe, yea being the appointed
line and measure of euery thing, it weareth
out the very heauens as a garment,
and being swift in all other thinges it is
both swift & short in the life of man. Wherfore
the prophet saith our life is but a span
long, 49. Psalm.
               
               You haue heard the difference that Isay
gaue betweene the grasse & the flower. The
flower is more orient, but not more permanent:
yea, sooner fadeth the flower than the
grasse, and though in corruption there be no
difference, yet to corruption there is greater
spéede in the one than in the other: as ye
Sunne, the eye of the worlde can testifie.
And as soone, as soddayne, as often, and as
miserably dieth the Riche and honourable
person as the poore and naked soule, which
thing this presēt spectacle can demonstrate.
The reason is, because all the grace and
glory of the fleshe, it is but as the grasse or
flower of the field, I haue said you are Gods
but you shall die like men, Psalm. 82. 6.

Wherefore if a man coulde possibly bee as
glorious as ye sunne: yea, though he were ye
crowned king, or second to the king his son,
or as one of the Princes fellowes, so that
for his excellency and beauty he might well
bee compared to that glittering Image in
the Prophet Dan. 2, 31. whose head was of
golde, his breast and armes of siluer, his
belly and thyghes of brasse, and legges of
Iron: yet his féete are alwaies parted with
brickle clay. This is the foote of all fleshe:
claye, and this is their only way into the
earth, in the which way wée are all caried
with continuall motion. And as all the Riuers
doe runne into the Sea from whence
they sprange, so by a decree hasteth Adam
into the earth from whence hee came, and
stayeth no where, from the byrth vnto the
graue. For as we all increase wée doe decrease,
and in vaine doth a man expect his
death to come, a great part whereof is past
to him that hath liued many or any yeares.
Singular therefore is the Metaphor of the
flower to florish out the nature of the great
ones of the earth, who in scripture are vnder
these termes otherwise commended to
them selues, as by vapoures, shaddowes

blastes of winde, bladders of water, & not
onely vanitye, but vanitie of vanities, so
quickly in the turninge of a hande, nay in
the twinckling of an eye commeth man to
naught. And as the great worlde in the closing
vp and conclusion of nature, shall at
once euen in a moment receaue a chaunge,
so in an instant Adam ye litle worlde falleth
and commeth to his end, for too day a man, &
too morrow none: nay, now a king, and now
a piece of clay. Wherefore, if the dayes of
man vppon earth were as the dayes of an
Duke, if his height were as one of the Cedars
of Lybanus, so ye his excellency might
mount vp to the heauens, & his heade reach
vnto the cloudes, if hée were alwaies as
gréene and fresh as the Lawrell, or fat as ye
Olyue: if all ye daies of his yeares were euery
one as longe as the day of Iosuah when
the sunne stoode still in the middest of Heauen,Iosua 10. 13
yet it must bee night at last. Our fathers
lyued longe, yet sawe the graue at
length: many of them continued nine hundred
and odde yeres, but none, no not Methusaleth
reached out the thousande yeare.
Gen. 5.
               The poore man laboureth for his liuinge,

and the riche man for his life, and whose cō
                  dition
is better iudge you: for both are resolued
quickly into ashes, and doe loose their
bones, euen the pillers of their bodies in the
dust. Nowe, if the greatest parte of our life
past may iustly séeme vnto man to bee but
yesterday (so soone it is spent and gone) why
shall not the least parte remaining appeare
but as too morowe, especially séeing it may
be consumed this very day or houre. For besides
the shortnes of our spirites, the vncertainety
is woonderfull, when there are a
thousand waies and meanes to geue a man
his ende, and to cutte the corde or thred,
the very line of life. But men are for the
most part carelesse and secure in life, and too
too timorous & fearefull in their death, and
so Adam is alwaies in extremes, & therefore
after the prouerbe many had rather
choose to bee lyuing dogges than to be dead
Lyons.Eccle. 9. I doe not speake this as if it were
not lawfull to feare that which Christ himselfe
hath feared. And if a beaste made for
the slaughter doth yet abhorre to dye, howe
much more shall man doe it vpon whom
this euill cōdition came after he was made
to liue:Rom. 8. but spirituall fortitude doth alwaies

become a christian man both in his life and
death.
               As I trust I may both freely and faithfully
speake vnto you of this late right Honorable
person, to the laying vp of whose bodie
in the treasury of the earth, you are
this day assembled, who doe yet liue and
florish in the worlde in great wisedome, honour,
and dignity. That hee was a stemme
of a noble house, which himselfe hath honored
with many and principall vertues, but
especially with faithfull seruice alwaies to
his king, vnto whom both younge, and olde,
hee was euer in great trust, either in warre
a valiant Captaine, or in Peace a worthy
Counsellor, besides many honourable Embassages.
As in the time of king Edwarde
that swéete and fragrant flower (who was
cut downe in his springe, and died in his
armes) hee was sent into Fraunce & since
her Maiesties most excellent raigne, both
into Fraunce and Scotland diuers times,
being of the most noble order of the Garter,
and of her Highnes right honourable priuy
Counsell, foure times Lord Justice, & three
times Lord Deputy in the Irish parts, and
also Lord chiefe President of the Countrey

of Wales, in which place he gouerned with
great honor 26. yeres, & being visited of God
in a good age of 57. yeres he deceased in Worcester.
What should I stand to play the Orator
or the painter in this place, I know it
is not looked for at my handes, but yet to tel
the trueth it shall geue glory vnto God. And
séeing hée hath sowed the fruite of his wisdome
in peace, it shall yéelde vnto himselfe a
worthy Fame, and to his Seede a certaine
print or marke of their fathers steps, who
was a treasure of the common wealth and
a common good of his countrey. And surely
the land hath lost a mightie man, and as it
were a starre is fallen which sometimes
shined in his place, but nowe beholde he lieth
in the dust: and so doeth the righteous
person, and no man regardeth the euils that
are to come, Isay 57.
               If the wisedome of a man do make his
face to shine, and if without light the sonne
be nothing worth, surely his name deserues
with vs a pillar of gold which had and held
so many offices & so great: nay which bare
them so long, and weilded them so wel, who
truely as a candle consumed himselfe in yelding
light to other men: Besides his special

gift of affabilitie to poore and simple men
the very grace of all his greatnes. It is no
hard matter for a man to be humble in low
estate, but to be lowly in greatnes is not a
common gift: and if pride her selfe be often
forced to dissemble humilitie, because lowlinesse
maketh a simple man to be highly
commended, how much more doeth it excell,
when it shall in deede appeare in persons of
value & renoune? Wherfore if any man wil
builde his house high, let him lay his foundation
very lowe, forenuie shootes at high
marks and pride goeth before a fal. But the
greatest praise that I cā giue, or he receiue,
either in this world, or in the world to come,
is of his constant perseuerance in that faith
which he had long professed, and of his patience
and ioy in his last end. Of al which being
credibly certified, I doubt not in Gods
behalfe to pronounce him moste happy. And
here I intended to haue spoken in fewe
wordes to his noble issue, but it shal nowe
suffice that I pray for him, that hee which
must succeed him in his family, may if it be
possible excéede him in his vertues, or at the
least imitate them, that God may gyrd him
with his fathers gyrdle, & fasten the naile

of his tent in a sure place, that he may be
the glorie of his fathers house, and a father
to many inhabitants of Iuda, which ye Lord
promised to Eliachim his seruant whom he
made steward vnto king Ezekias, because he
loued well the faithfull, Isay 22.
               And because there can not be a readier
way to cut the throte of the cōmon wealth,
than by exalting of the wicked and vnworthy,
the Lord blesse our Magistrates, and
rulers with true religion, wisedome, fortitude
and humilitie, and all wayes free our
countrey from tyrantes and proud persons,
who as Nymrods doe but wound by oppression
the poore people, and neuer heale them
by counsel. And as this day especially requireth
let vs beséech the Lorde to maintaine
our peace at home and his warres abroade,
together with the excellent and honorable
persons imployed that wayes, that all the
enemy Papists may knowe that there is a
God of Israel which is able to giue the victorie
to his own name, when they are broken
and confounded. But I haue dwelt
too long on these things, I wil returne and
make maruelous haste in the rest.
               In the meane time the Question remaineth

strong all the honour in the worlde,Obiect.
notwithstanding, how mortall men inuironed
with a thousand euils, closed vp and concluded
with so many kinds of miseries, may
be saide to be the sonnes of God: especially
considering howe they are sodenly taken away
by death, as if they had not béene, or
as if they should neuer be againe.
               The Apostle answereth effectually,Solutiō. It appeareth
not what we shal be. For we might
as well except against Christe with the
Jewes, waying his birth in a maunger, his
life loaden with miseries of all sortes, his
death most accursed, that he was not ye sonne
of God: but in his resurrection hée begun to
appeare, and more clearely hee shewed himselfe
in his ascension but in his second comming,
it shalbe most manifest vnto all the
world.Phil. 3. Colos. 5. 3 And when he which is our glorie
shal appeare, thē we shal also appeare with
him in glorie. A thing that is hid cannot
be seene, our life is hid with Christ in God,
and therfore he saith it doth not appeare, &c.
Foure thinges I must needes obserue vnto
you by the occasion of the words following,
the first is, how that all the excellencie of
the sonnes of God lieth in these words (We

shalbe like vnto him,) which in truth excéedeth
all declaration, and therefore after certaine
similitudes of a crown and kingdome,
wherby the Scriptures do speake vnto our
capacitie, they conclude the glorie to be
such, as no eye hath seene, no eare hath
heard, and no heart can conceaue, 1. Cor. 2.
9. For we must not thinke that onely vulgar
and common persons, but the kings and
princes of the earth shal feele in themselues
an admirable brightnesse when they shall
taste of this glorie in such sort that they shal
confesse that they were nothing before. For
if Salomon the most glorious king that euer
was, yet in all his Royaltie was not
like a lillie of the fielde, what shal we iudge
of them that shall be like vnto the Sonne
of God.
               And when he saith (like:) he maketh vs
not equall and fellowelike, for in all things
Christ the head of Angelles must haue the
preheminence, because he is the Sonne: and
if the Saintes shal differ from themselues
in glorie, which séemeth by the similitude
of the starres vsed in the same cause, 1. Cor.
15. howe much more shall the naturall
sonne of God excell in glorie, because he is

the head? And if the beautie of the militant
Church restored, is said to be such, as if the
Moone should shine as the Sunne, and the
Sunne should excéede himself seuen times,
Isay 30. 26. how much more shall it be in
the Church Triumphant in the heauenly
Jerusalem, where Christ himselfe is the
light and glorie of all the saints? The forme
of which citie, and the riches excéeding all
golde or precious stone is yet by such things
described as it could, Reue. 21.
               And here the resurrection is moste euidently
affirmed and assured, albeit that order
aske the head before the other parts, and
we know that Christes is first and past: So
surely shall they that are Christes be next
at his comming, and then commeth the
iudgement: it shalbe sodaine in a moment
but in a wonderful order. If any doubt hereof,
because it is to come, as a foole he is
reproued by the naturall euidence of a séede
dying and quickening againe, whereby the
resurrection is more than shadowed out vnto
our faith, 1. Cor. 15. It shalbe with the
same bodie, and the same skin, and with the
same eyes and no other shall I sée my Redéemer
faith the moste patient Iob. 19. 27.

that is, the substance of the body remaining
the same, the qualitie shalbe cleane altered,
which is no monstrous paradox, as that of
Poperie:The Papists grosse error of transubstantiation. (the accidents remaining the substance
being taken away) which in reason
is absurd, & most monstrous against nature
her selfe. The glorious chaunge is noted, 1.
Cor. 15. for mortalitie immortalitie, for
corruption incorruptiō and glorie &c. There
is nothing that can more comfort vs in or
against death, than the resurrection from
the dead by the hope whereof our bones doe
liue in the graue, and our flesh doth rest because
he shal not leaue our soules in hell nor
suffer his holy ones to see corruption, Psal.
16. In the olde time this matter was plainly
signified by the translation of Henoch
and Elias, but nowe it is more fully sealed
and assured by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ, whose resurrection and ascension is
ours in as much as he is ours appointed to
be our head, and we his body.
               The second is that though the time when
all this shalbe, be not here nor else where
particularly assigned in the Scriptures, yet
it is most certaine When hee shall appeare.
The day is dated and most certainly determined

with God, but otherwise vnknowen
to men and Angelles, nay hidden from the
eyes of the Sonne of man him selfe in as
much as he is man. They are therefore the
more bolde or blinde coniecturers, who doe
thrust them selues most fearefully into the
secretes of God, & dare appoint a day which
he hath kept alone vnto himself.Demer. Act. 1. Faith thorough
hope doth expect the very instant, but
yet knoweth not the day, and therefore
thorough patience doth quiet her selfe, and
resteth within vs no lesse vntil the time,
than the Coarse doeth tarrie in the graue.
Christ did rise the third day, perhaps to day
or to morowe the dead shal arise, but when
soeuer it shalbe, it shalbe as to morowe to
all that are a sléepe in the earth, albeit they
haue lyen in the dust fiue thousande yéeres
before, because there is no time to them,
and both the bodies of the good and bad fare
all alike in the graue, but yet there is a difference
of their soules now, and shall be of
their bodies then, when the voyce of God
shall rayse them out of the pitte, neither
shall it be necessarie for the soules that are
separated from the bodies to spend time in
returning from heauen, or hell againe,

when as the Scriptures do teach vs, that in
the twinckling of an eie and in the least and
last moment, not without wonderfull and
fearefull miracle, both the resurrection and
the iudgement by the power of God shal be
begun and finished.
               The third thing is,Heb. 6. the certaintie of our
saluation, and as it were the anker holde in
this that he saith, We know we shalbe like
vnto him, which maketh mightely against
the Papistes, who do holde that for a chiefe
point of their faith, which we knowe to be
a great infirmitie of our fleshe, that is, to
doubt or to distrust, and they call it presumption
to say we knowe, which yet is the doctrine
of God that cannot presume.
               The certaintie of faith is greater than of
any sense, because of the promise, from the
which faith may no more be parted than
the house may be separated from his foundation
and stand. And the reason that causeth
all the faithful to be so bold? is because
that that which might alter the case, cannot
fall in the nature of God, with whome
is no chaunge,Iames. 
                        •
                     . nor shadow of chaunge, neyther
in will, nor power, both which are as
firme and constant as himselfe: and therefore

he that will distrust the Lorde, let him
beléeue nothing. In this pickle they stand,
or rather in this puddle they sinke, who
wickedly trust vnto their workes, and foolishly
beléeue that there are thrée sortes of
places for resorte of soules after death:
namely, Heauen, Hell, and Purgatorie,
and to which of these the soule doeth passe,
Poperie cannot tel, which is a warme comfort
to a soule departing. As if a man were
cast into the Sea and comming to the land
were returned backe againe, perhaps he
might sinke and perhaps he might swimme.
But we thanke the Lorde and his Christe
we are better dealt with all than so. We
know we shall liue if we beléeue, because he
hath said it, and we know that they that do
not beléeue are so sure of death as that they
are iudged already, Iohn. 3. 18. Wherfore in
the meane season, hope serueth to nourishe
our faith and patience to possesse our soules
which were but séely and simple meanes to
relieue the heart, if that faith were not
out of al doubt in the promise of the word.
Last of all is the reason to confirme vs in
the expectation of our glorie, For we shal see
him as he is, which words do send vs vnto

Christ as he now sitteth at the right hande
of God his father, and as he shall most gloriously
appeare in the cloudes, with all his
Angelles, armed with fire and power for reuenge.
He is now ascended from the Center
of the earth, vnto the very heigth of heauen.
We must not therefore basely thinke
of Christ, as apish Papistes dreame, because
he is full glorified in himselfe. He was born
in a manger, he did liue poorely vpon earth,
hee died miserably on the crosse, hee was
crowned, but with thornes, mocked, and
scorned in all the anxietie of his soule, and
in the anguish of his death he was forced to
yéelde forth strong cries in the dayes of his
flesh, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
mee.
                  Mat. 27. 46. It was so because it became
Christ so to suffer, but nowe it is nothing so
but otherwise, and, we shall see him as he is,
and not as he was. We shal sée him, but not
as Peter and the rest, when he appeared
glorified on the mount Tabor but partly,
and after a sort, Matt. 19. whose brightnesse
yet the Apostles could not beare, though
it were not long, nor fully reuealed vnto
them: but we shal beholde him, as the onely
Emperour sitting in the throne of heauen,

with all his hoste of Saintes, and spiritual
powers, not by faith as nowe, but truely by
sight: not in the mirror of his worde, but
in the presence of himselfe.
               So the wicked shall see him when he
commeth,Obiec. for al flesh shal beholde him, Mat.
29. 30. It is true. But this thing shalbe
their death a thousand times,Solut. that they
shal sée him, in whome they haue not beléeued,
nay him whom they haue pearced Ioh.
19. Zach. 12. They shall sée him as Adam
heard the voyce of God in Paradize, and
ran away Gen. 3. If no mortall wight can
beare or abide the glorie of an Angell, but
he must tremble and feare, melt and fall in
sunder for the brightnesse: how much greater
horror and confusion shalbe to the sinnefull
creature, when the Creator is in presence,
and ready to enter his indgement?
But mercie shall worke in that day toward
all beléeuers, according to the couenant, and
we shall be chaunged into his glorie after
an image, when we shall behold him as he
is, 2. Cor. 3. 18. These things ought to kéepe
our faith and hope aliue in the promise, and
against all temptations to make vs moste
patient: for if we be afflicted, we are more

sutable vnto Christe. We must kéepe the
possession of our selues, and of our soules by
patience, not by insensibilitie, but by suffring
after Christ, & by Hope we must correct
and cut off all preposterous humors
and affections of the fleshe, which doe but
wound our faith, and cast a man into many
perplexities remedilesse, if he promis to him
selfe any other thing, or do looke for it otherwise,
or sooner, or later than God hath ordeined
in his word. It is lawfull for a man to
burne in desire, and for this cause speaketh
the Apostle to stirre vs vp: and celeritie in
desire séemeth alwaies to be delaie, but the
qualitie of faith through hope, is to be contented
with the opportunitie of God, called
the Lordes leasure, knowing for a suretie
that she shall once sée him as he is.
            
            
               The third part.
               And he which hath this hope in him, purgeth
him selfe euen as he is pure.
               These words concerne ye exhortation, that
we should labor to be holy as he is holy Leu.
19. 2. for albeit the promises of God do passe

most fréely frō himself, yet there are alwais
certaine couenantes & conditions required,
as faithfulnesse and obedience to the word.
So Abraham our Father with whome the
contract was first made, and as it were left
in his hand for vs, is commaunded to walke
vprightly before the Lorde, Gen. 17. 1.
               And so albeit we are saued fréely, yet it is
by faith, and not by euery starting faith,
but if we doe continue to the end, Matt. 10.
And because there is no other way to make
our calling sure, than by adding vertue to
our faith, therefore true faith is alwayes
fruitefull, neuer idle nor wearie of good
workes: for albeit they be no cause, yet
they are the way to heauen, for by these
meanes an entring into the euerlasting
kingdome shall be ministred aboundantly
vnto vs, 2. Pet. 1. 11. Saint Iames reasoneth
thus, No workes and no faith, and Saint
Iohn in this place thus, No purging of our
selues, and no hope, all one in conclusion. He
that mindeth not sanctification shall neuer
sée the Lorde, Hebr. 12. 14. but the pure in
heart are blessed, for they shal see God, saith
Christ, Matt. 5. 8. Neither let the deuill insinuate
himselfe to make vs thinke Gods

grace the lesse, or our state the worse, for
these conditions, (as he delt with Adam our
father about the trée forbidden:) for our saluation
standeth most sure in Christe, & the
he
                     •
                  uens haue no sounder foundation, the
whole matter being firmely past by worde,
and othe from God: nay, beeing fully done
and finished by the life and death of Christe.
Wherefore if Adam in Paradize, and the
Angels in heauen, euen in their creation
did stand vpon their obedience, which when
they forsooke they fell: howe much more
should man in his redemption content himselfe
with the couenants of God, especially
séeing they are such as doe not hinder, but
further him in the faith & life of Christ?
               And albeit such perfection is required,Obiect. as
séemeth & is impossible vnto mā, To be pure
as he is pure, in whose sight the Angels are
not without spot:Solutiō. yet we must cōsider, that
he dealeth not with vs as by the rigor of the
law, (though he might iustly iudge vs for all
our transgressions and wants therin) but he
setteth vp himselfe as a marke of perfection
to aime & contend vnto, as Philip. 3. 14. And
because we can neuer come néere vnto perfectiō
in this life, and yet we ought to presse

hard, and to followe after it, what else doth
the Apostle meane by these words, but that
there should be in vs a continuall indeuour
to procéede from vertue to vertue, and neuer
to desist, vntill we come into the brightnesse
of his presence?
               And as this place giueth no allowance to
mens workes after the Romish rate, who
may aswel think to clense durt with dung,
as to purge sinne with their desert: (for if
we trust to merit then we must dispaire) so
it answereth thē as Calumnious enimies,
which so shamefully béelye the doctrine of
faith, to be against good works, where as nothing
is more oft, or vsual in scriptures, thā
after faith workes. It is the course that all
the Apostles take, as it were the line they
al draw in. The fountains do not more naturally
break forth and issue into streames,
than the holy Scriptures doe plentifully
powre out themselues into this kinde of exhortation.
Wherefore, if they could hit vpon
it, they should sée themselues lyers. For it
is meritte of workes and not good workes

                     〈◊〉
                   disclaime. And herein as we are wise

                     •••
                  aue the law which is impossible to saue
vs, because of sin, so are we found faithfull

vnto God when we sticke vnto his ordināce,
and will not séeme to saue our soules otherwise
than he hath appointed in his worde,
(which is by faith onely.) But I haue béene
ouer long and tedious, & séeing this part is
an exhortation, with an exhortation I will
conclude it: That séeing to sin, and do wickedly
hath béen the way, both of men & Angels,
but to arise and repent pertaineth only
to Christians, the saued of God: and séeing
we may not as stockes and stones suffer the
spirite of Christ which is in vs, to passe thorough
vs insensibly without all effect of holinesse,
as water runneth through his pype,
but our continual diligence and indeuour is
required: let vs craue the continuance & increase
of Gods grace, & spirit, in our hearts,
yt therby séeing the infirmity of our liues, we
may be able to purge our selues, our bodies,
& soules, euē as he is pure: and that we vse
not the spring to purge the body, & think the
fall good enough for the soule, after the olde
maner, making Winter-worke of our saluation,
lest we be preuēted in an houre: that
we consume not the strength of our dayes
vpon our selues, the worlde, and the deuill,
and bring to God our bleared eyes, & palsey

handes, which was forbidden to be offred in
the Law, Mala. 1. (except we shall thinke it
a sacrifice good enough for the Gospell,) but
that taking, nay redéeming the time, because
the dayes are euill, we may shake off
presumption, and preuent desperation our
deadly enimies, and so disapoint the Deuil.
And albeit we cannot winne heauen by our
merits, who are the sonnes of him that lost
paradize by his works, the entrance whereof
an Angell of anger did alwayes kéepe against
him with a brandeshing sword:Gen. 3. 14. yet
séeing we are all the sonnes of God by faith,
& heires annexed with Christ of eternal life
through the spirit, let vs contend thither by
continual righteousnes, & holinesse of life, as
by ye way, & let vs neuer faint, or giue ouer,
vntil we come to that place, where only we
shalbe perfect, and without spot, and where
we shall sée him as he is, that is moste glorious:
To whom with the Father, and the
holie Ghost, thrée persons, and one eternal, &
euecliuing God, be all honor, glorie, praise,
and power, both now, and euermore, Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            Errata.
            In the third page of A in the third verse of the text,
adde in him. In the 14 page of A the last line, breath
for birth. In the 15. 22. line adde saying. Ibid. line 23.
And for Yet. In B. pag. 7. line 18. person for perish. In B.
13. line 26, When for That.
            
            
         
      
   