
      
         
            
            
            A
DISCOVERIE
of Brownisme:
OR,
A briefe declaration of some of the
errors and abhominations daily
practised and increased among the English
company of the seperation remayning
for the present at Amsterdam in
Holland.
            A wicked man deceiueth his neighbour, and leadeth
him into a way that is not good.
Pro. 16. 29.
            
            By Thomas White.
            
            
               LONDON
Printed by E. A. for Nathaniell Fosbroke and
are to be solde at his Shop at the West end
of Paules. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               TWo extremities (dangerous)
there are which in these dayes
bringe no small detriment or
annoyance to the Church of
God. The one Atheistical prophanes, which
is fearful; and the other hipocritical contention,
which is abhominable. And these howsoeuer
they seeme to differ the one from
the other, yet the one is strengthned and
hardned by the other, and this with a mutuall
reciprocation:
            Against both these, the holy Ghost applies
a soueraigne remedie: Heb. 13. 14. Followe
after peace and holines, without which no man
cā see God. And Luk: 1.. 14. 15. That we being
deliuered from our enemies, might serue him
in holines and righteousnes (to auoyde prophanes)
before his face (to flye hypocrisie)
all our dayes.
            
            
               
Of the latter of these, or rather of both,
(for the former oft times proceedeth from
the latter, howsoeuer for a while enuy palliateth
it selfe vnder the name of zeale as both
are signified by one Greeke word) I haue giuen
an instance in this treatise following in
that congregatiō,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                which God hath made as
a spectacle for others to beware of rash, heady,
and contentious courses.
            This haue I done (all other peaceable
meanes being before vsed) for the discharging
of mine owne duety both to God and
his Churches, the staying of others, who
would neuer be so affected to them as they
are, if they knew their fearefull estate.
            If eyther for the breuity or rudenes of the
stile it satisfie thee not: for the former I cō
               fesse
that I haue rather endeauoured to
point at things briefely, then by dilating to
fill vp large volumes, of purpose omitting
many the vilest thinges, partly for offending
chaste eares, partly for sparing them, vnlesse
further occasion be ministred by thēselues.
And as for the rudenes of the stile, either by

superfluous repetitions, or redundant speeches,
let the inconuenience both of time &
place something excuse me, being but newly
arriued, neyther enioying health, nor help
of bookes in the penning therof; my minde
also many waies distracted about other businesses.
The time to come may bring foorth
some further thing more answerable to
thine expectation: In the meane time
accept this in the best part. And
the Lord giue thee vnderstanding
in all thinges.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A
BRIEFE DISCOVERYE,
of some of the errors and abhominations,
dailye practised and increased, amongst the
English Companye of the seperation,
remaining for the present at
Amsterdam in
Holland.
            
               IT may seeme strange, that
any, who pretend (aboue all
other) sinceritie in Religion,
and there-vpon forsake their
owne natiue Country, should
yet notwithstāding, be found
to abound aboue others with
all kinde of debate, malice, adulteries, cousonages,
and such other like enormities: And that so much
the more in the dayes of their banishment and extreame
pouertie, which outward affliction, doth
euen humble the wicked: And yet so farre from repentance,
that when they are shewed and admonished
of their euill dealinges, they seeke to couer,

hide, cloake, reproach and reuile their admonishers
of better counsaile; which for mine owne part I
could haue borne in silence, committing it to him
that iudgeth iustly the sonnes of men: yet least others
be deceaued by thē, as some of vs haue beene,
and should be drawn by them through their painted
colour of holinesse to partake with their abhominations
and vnfruitefull workes of darkenes, &
to runne with them to that fearefull extreamitie in
cōdemning al other churches & men: I thought it
my duetie according as my leasure (which is small,
& my abilitie which is lesse, would permit) vpō experience
to giue warning to others of their leaders
euil dealing, wherby their people are deuoured.
            And, although I knowe I shall object my selfe
heerein but to the reproach of virulent and venemous
tongues, yet shall I be content to beare it,
that others may reape benefit thereby. Neither
doe I this, any way to discourage the true vpright
hearted, but rather that all that call vpon the name
of the Lord, may learne to cast frō them the cloake
of hypocrisie, and the leauen of contention
and maliciousnes, and so not in showe, but in deed
departe from jniquitie, least they reape the fruites
thereof as these haue done.
            I haue already written to their leader M. Fr.
Iohnson, of his (with the rest of their elders) falshood,
shiftings, and other contraryties: as also laying to
their charge, partaking in and with their church in
these blasphemous doctrines.
            
               
1, That they held it lawfull for a man to liue with
her that is not his wife, rather then to reueale himselfe,
which first denyes the prophecy of Christ; secondly
destroyes the nature of repentance, and
thirdly is a fundamētal error cōtrary to these scriptures.
Math. 3. 2. 8. Rom 3. 8. & 6. 1. Heb. 6.
            2. That there are qualities in God not essentiall, &
that loue in God is not of his being, but that the selfe
same loue that is in god, that is also in vs, which ouerturnes
the nature of God, and the simplenes of his
being, and is a ground of famulisme, and a blasphemous
Doctrine contrary to these scriptures. Ex. 3.
14. Es. 43, 25. 1. Iohn. 4. 8.
            To this he promised answere and performed it
not, though he tooke no small paines by falsifying
to discourage the witnesses, but was content to let
it lye vpon him vnanswered, so becomming by his
own confessiō a dūbe Minister.Page. 147. Last answ. to M. Iac.
                Now therfore I see
no further cause of writing to him, but will turne
to the Christian Reader; giuing him a taste of their
dealing, both in writing and practise, profession &
conuersation, and yet laying that to their charge
wherof due proofe can bee made, as the Reader
shall well perceiue by my proofes, & their answers
iudging indifferently.
            They indeede are the men,Answere to M. H.
                that accuse others of
simplicitie, absurdity, inconstancy in turning their
coates, of being hearers and not doers of the word,
of retayning open offenders & so becomming cages
of euery vncleane bird, of being neither willing

nor able to iustifie their estate, and this not alone of
their country-men but against those Churches also
with whome they liue.Answer to M. Iun. let:
            
            1. But what if themselues haue. 1. betrayed their
owne cause in writing. 2 Giuen the blacke letter
of condēnation not alone to the churches of Christ
that eyther are, or haue beene since the Apostles
daies, but also to thēselues, & their practise by their
describing of a visible Church?
            3. Doc practise that amongst themselues which
they condemne utterly in others, & haue amongst
themselues open and notorious cousners, and such
other like offendors?
            4. Haue giuen themselues ouer to Sathan, and
brought the curse on their owne heads by wicked
and vngodly excommunications.As in the True descript: of a visible Ch: Are they then
the holy assembly of Saints marching in such a heauenly
order after the Lamb, whether soeuer hee goeth,
whereunto no vncleane thing entreth, nor remaineth?
whether these accusations bee true or no, let the sequele
declare.
            And first that Master Fr. Ih. hath vtterly disproued
the maine drift of all his booke, and so betrayed
his owne cause, As Christ alleaged against the
Pharises,Mat. 12. 27 the example of their owne Children, that
they might be their iudges: so may I his owne writings
against himselfe, that they may be his iudge,
which thus I shew.
            The drift of His booke is by the description of a
true church,Last answ: to M. la.
                to discouer the false. This discription

as oft elsewhere, so also he hath, Page 196. last answer
to M. Iac: viz.
            
            
               That a true visible Church of Christ, is a company of
faithfull people, called out by the word of God, and seperated
from the world, and the false waies thereof, gathered
and ioyned together in fellowship of the Gospell,
by a voluntary profession of the faith and obedience of
Christ. And his meaning of this discription doth
further appeare by cōparing it with the third false
Doctrine alleadged by him, Page 158. of the same
booke, as also with the 17. Art: of ther confession,
where hee expoundes it, by seperating his Church
from vanitye, Idolatrie, dissolute life, and all false
workes of darkenes.
            This discription so propounded and expounded,Last answ: to. M. Iac:
               
he thus ouerthroweth, page 47. of the same booke
before cited, where he affirmeth, that the Israelites
in Egipt were Gods Church, prooues it by Exod. 4.
22. 23. euen then, while they sinned with the Idols of
Egipt, alleadging Ezek. 20. If they committed Idolatrie
with the Idols of Egipt, how were they then
a company of faithfull people seperated from all
false wayes? If he say this their sinne was not their
generall estate,Answ: to M. H. page 49. as he answers in an other case to M.
H. Page 49. The place quoted by himselfe out of
Ezek. 20. shewes the contrary, affirming none of
them to haue for saken the Idols of Egipt. If he say this
their sin was not of obstinacie, the same scripture
sheweth that they were admōished, v. 7. yet they rebelled
against him. v. 8. And as for the nature of their

jdolatry it was heathenish; will he then say that Idolaters
in their generall estate, with heathenish
jdolatrie, rebelling after admonition, are such a
faithfull people seperate frō all false waies, as he describes
a true Church to be? If not, how were they
Gods Church?
            To vse Tullies words,Cic. orat: P. Qu.
                
               testimonium tuum quod in
aliena releue est, hoc contrate graue. &c. Thine owne
testimony which in an other case is of small
weight, this against thy selfe is of much moment.
            And heere he must remēber that he describeth
not a true Church, what it ought to be, but what it
is if it bee a true Church as the drift of that place,
where this description is set down declares, As that,
            
               1. It is for the clearing the question betwene them.Last answ: to M. Ia: Page. 196.
               
               2. For the discerning of the true church frō the false.
               3. Bids M. Iac compare their best asemblies with this
description. &c. Otherwise his aduersary might
haue answered, that though the Churches of Englād
agreed not with that descriptiō, yet might they
haue beene true Churches notwithstanding; and
he had writtē nothing to any purpose against him.
            
            Moreouer in the answere to the preface of the
same booke,Last answ: to M. Ia.
                Sect. 6. M. Fr. Ih. thus speakes: Any
Church though truely constituted, if they will rather abide
in error then obey the voice of Christ, are not
true churches. And yet the Iewes in Egipt rebelling
after admonition, are Gods church by his account:
how well these thinges hang together let the Reader
judge. In like māner M. Ih. denies not. page 87.

of the booke before cited, that the Iewes in Christs
time, yea and after his death, were true Churches,
which had despised admonition before: Lu. 7. 30.
Math. 23. 37. yet this which M. Iohns. acknowledges,
M. H. Barrow calles blasphemy: so well
they agree together.Refut. of Giff.
            
            Is it possible so to ouerthrow the maine drift of
his owne writings, and perceiue it not? Or is it not
veryfied which the wise man speaketh?
                  Pro. 12. 13 Answ: to the pref. Sect. 1. 
               The euill
man is snared by the wickednes of his owne lippes. And
yet this booke he saith he did not make alone, but
consulted with others heerein, and namely with
Maister Ains-worth, a man that hath turned his
coate as oft as euer D. B. if not oftner, whome hee
tearmes approoued in Christ: and Daniel Studly an
elder of ther Church, a man, (not alone for his filthinesse
wlth his wiues Daughter,As namely in Iudith Holder and others. but also for supporting
of manifest & shamefull vncleannes and
cousning amongst them in others) fitter for the
stewes thē to be an elder in any christiā society. No
better is his dealing in condemning the Dutch &
French Churches, for despising their admonition,
and yet acknowledge the Iewes in Christ time, to
be a true church,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . dispising more admouition, and
that of greater sinnes then euer they admonished
the Elders of these Churches of: hée that wauereth
in his owne testimony, how shall his witnesse be receiued?
but he is not alone content to confute M.
Ih. viz: himselfe, except he doe also by his description
cut off from being true churches in their account,

all the churches of Christ that euer haue bin
since the Apostles daies: 2. now are, yea and 3. thē
               selues
which thus I pooue.
            If no church that hath beene since the Apostles
daies or now is that we reade of, be seperate from al
false waies in their accompt, then by his description
and in their account must they be no true churches,
but the former is true: therefore the latter.
            The proposition is vndeniable from his owne
description.
            The Assumption is as certaine, as will appeare,
in that they account the very using of the Lords
Prayer as a Prayer, to be a false way, which was vsed
from the Apostles age,Tertul: lib. de orat: as Tertullian saith: Premissa
legitima & ordinaria oratione, ius est super struendi
extrinsecus petitiones. &c. The lawfull and
ordinary prayer (speaking of the Lordes prayer) being
premised, &c.
            
            2. For the Churches that now are, their dealing
with the Dutch and French Churches declare it
sufficiently: & howsoeuer they seeme to put difference
betweene those churches in the Low Countries
whome they haue admonished, and those that
they haue not; yet to put the matter out of doubt,
let him tell us if they account it not Apostacy for
one of them, so much as once to heare the word
preached in any congregation Dutch or French in
all the Lowe Countries besides▪ Or if he can, let
him name any one church on the face of the earth
now, that holdeth not false wayes, yea euen in their

constitution in their account: Neyther shall he shift
off the matter with his distinction of faultye and
false worshippe, for when hee hath put downe the
difference, whereby he distinguisheth the one from
the other, which yet he hath not done to my remē
               brance,
then wil I shew him that there is no church
that he can mentiō besides themselues, that holdes
not onely faulty, but false waies also in their account,
and that in their constitution.
            Are not they then the blasphemers of the Christians
and their churches? Or is not this to robbe
Christ of his honour? Or may not that saying. Pro.
11. 12. bee veryfied of themselues: Bazleregnehu
chasar leb. He that despiseth his neighbour is a foole.
            
            3. But heerein others may pardon them, for they
are as fauourable to others as to themselues, for except
themselues be agreeable to their owne description,
after wounding others, they haue turned the
point of their weapon into their owne bowels: that
they are not seperate from all open offenders, and
all false wayes appeares.
            1. In that they retaine amongst them open offendors:
to giue instance, one Castle was noted amongst
themselues publikely in their meeting for
cousnage, and that by one of their elders, and indeede
knowne notoriously so to bee, which if M.
Ih. doubts of, he may aske his elder Sta: Mercer,
their Deacon: Tho. Bishop: W. Knowling, Robert
Iackson &c. And yet would M. Ih. with h
                  •
               s teacher
M. A. and the rest of their elders, defend that hee

ought not to bee publiquely dealt withall for it,
because it was not orderly made publique:Mr. P. I. L. W. N. and others.
                and
this before many witnesses: neyther did that Castle
shew any repentance in like sorte of this sinne.
            Besides him was not R B.
               Robert Bayly. (after other moste horrible
adultery) publikelye accused in their meeting
for creeping in at a windowe to come to bed to an
other mans wife in her husbands absence, yet was
this man neuer publiquely dealt withall,H. C. vntill this
day for it, that I can learne. Or if these instances
serue not their turne, what will they say to their Elder,
Daniel Studley? (who together with his filthines
afore mentioned, in supporting vncleanes in a woman
a member of their church) did also refuse to
pray with his owne wife a member likewise of the
same Church, and yet will shew no repentance for
thus doing, though he hath beene dealt withall for
it; yea and worse carryage then this, of which his
wife hath often and doth continually complaine,
which though he be not ashamed to commit, yet I
am ashamed to mencyon. I am sure M. Ih. cannot
pretend ignorance heerein, for hee hath beene
tolde oft of his euill dealing though hee durst not,
or would not redresse it. Or if these yet bee not enough,
you shall haue more (if neede be) as Iudith
Holder, Canady, Iaacob Iohnson &c. How are they thē
seperate from all open offenders? or are they not
defiled by cōmunicating with such? Or shall I say
fitte members for such a fellowshippe? If they say
this is not in their constitutiō; I answere yes euen in

the constitution they holde false waies, which thus
I prooue.
            1. In their constitution they holde. First that the
Lords prayer is not to be vsed as a Praye, rcontrary
to christs expresse cōmaundment, which is neyther
against reason nor proportion of faith. Secōdly,
contrary to the tenor of the words, hauing the
forme of a prayer in all things, as Our Father, giue
vs, and amen annexed in the end, which shewes
that they arepetitions not positions or rules which
are set downe in another forme. Math. 77. 21. 22.
1. Ioh. 5. 14. Thirdly, contrary to the vse of al christians,
that wee reade of, as before out of Tertullian
and others may be alleadged:
            2. They hold also that it is not lawfull for the
innocent partyes, to retaine the offēder, as the wife
her husbād, or the husband his wife, if either party
haue committed adultery, no though the innocēt
party vpon the others repentance, forgiuing the others
sinne, be desirous still to liue with the other
party in the marriage couenant as before, but haue
excōmunicated the parties innocent for so doing,
as namely H. C. & one Homes his wife, vpon this, diuers
of them accused themselues of adulterye, that
so they might be ridde of their wiues, as namely
one W. Holder and Tho: Canady.
            
            3. They haue altered many thinges which they
held in their constitution, as among other, that it
was not lawful for Apostates to beare office, then must
they confesse that they did hold false waies in their

constitution, and so by consequent, then were no,
true Churches.
            4 But what would it profit them to be free from
false waies in their constitution, if their practise bee
not according to their profession?
            This (to vse their owne wordes) makes their sin
the more greeuous.Answ: to M H:
                And sith their knowledge is
but in part aswell as their loue, are not they as well
as others subiect to erre in constitution as well as
practise? If M. Fr: Iohnson with his other helpers
should yet finde out a further shift, & say that their
meaning in their description afore mentioned, is,
that A true church must be seperate frō all false waies,
which they see, for the preuenting of them therein,
I answere:
            1. If they had ment onely such false waies, it had
beene needefull in the description to haue implyed
so much.
            2. Though they haue beene already pressed with
exceptions against this discription, yet haue they
no where as yet taken vp this starting hole that I
can perceiue.
            3. Yet if now they should, they haue stopped it thē
               selues,
Page. 107. 108. 127. of his last answere to
M. Iac. and in other places of their writings.
            4. Let them minde, whether enough hath not
beene shewed them for the clearing of these errors
in their constitution before cited.
            5. Whether they giue not their aduersaries aduantage
if they should thus answere:
            
               
Besides that there bee false waies, which though
they were held of ignorance, would disanul a company
so gathered, from being Gods Church notwithstanding.
            Thus haue they paued their way with snares, to
entrappe themselues. Had not the simple neede to
take heede how they take vp wares vpon
their credit? And haue they not abused
the world that publish in print,Page. 202, last answ: to Ia.
                
               that they neyther
receiue nor retaine any such as care not how they borrow
and make no conscience to pay againe? I doubt not
but their owne hearts know how false this is, in Io.
Nicholas and others.
            And heere it shall not be amisse to put downe a
briefe opposition betweene their true description of
a visible Church,
               Treatise so entituled. 
               and their practise: that so the Reader
may the better perceiue the difference between
their profession & practise, & this onelye in some
few knowne particulars, by this description. First
for the Pastor:
            1. The Pastor must bee indued with much patience:
but their Pastor with much impaciencye,
as hath appeared not alone in his dealing with M.
Ad: and his Brother G: I. and his threatning to forsake
his owne congregation when he was crossed
of his minde:
                  Of his booke entituled A discourse of certaine troubles and excom. &c. all which are discouered alreadye by
his brother: Page 126. 143. 144. and knowne to
be true by other witnesses, but also in other particulars
whereof some shall be after mencioned An
angry man stirreth vp strife and a furious man aboundeth

intransgression.
            
            2. The Pasto
                  •
                of the true Church must be louing
& cōpassionate, but their Pastor vnnatural & vnmerciful,
& that to his own father, yea for the time
which his Father was with his Brother G. I. hee
would not so much as once see him, or relieue his
necessitie,By M. S. though he were not yet excommunicated
frō thē This I heard iustified to his face before
many witnesses,Pro. 17. 21. & 20. 20. and he could not deny it: so true it
is, that he that begetteth a foole, begetteth himselfe sorrow,
as the wise man speaketh. For the teacher.
            1. The teacher of a true Church is sincere: their
teacher steined with Hypocrisie, as in his dealing
concerning G. I, M. Sl:
            
            2. The teacher of a true Church must bee vnreprooueable:1. Tim, 3.
but their teacher is spotted againe
and againe with Apostasie in their account as before
hath beene noted.
            3, The teacher of the true Church must take diligent
care to keepe the Church from errors: their
teacher hath beene a meanes to bring in, and defend
false Doctrines, as the latter of those two before
mencioned and others that may bee alleaged.
For the Elders:
            1. The Elders of a true Church must bee indued
with the spirit of God: their Elder Da: St: with the
spirit of vncleanes.
            2. The Elders of a true church must see the lawes
of God kept: their Elder would defend the transgressing
of them in himselfe and others.
            
               
3. The Elders of a true church doe gouerne their
owne houses orderly: but the Elders mencioned
most disorderly as else where is cited.
            4. The Elders aforesaid must bee louing: their
Elder D: St: cruell and tyranicall, in so much that
some of their owne mēbers haue complained,Before M. Powell and others. that
if they had a matter as cleare as the sunne against
him, yet durst they not deale with him for it.
            5. The elders of a true church, must be vnreprooueable:
but their Elder St: Mer: hath (as their teacher)
beene noted for Apostasie. For the Deacons:
            1. The Deacons of the true Church of Christ,
must haue a pure conscience & must not bee giuen
to filthy lucre. But their Deacon Christoph: Bow:
for his deceiuing of many poore, euē of their owne
companye, of halfe that which the Magistrates of
Narden had giuen them weekelye, was thereupon
(when it came to light) through widdow Colgates
meanes called Iudas the purse-bearer in Narden
for so doing: Not to speake of many such like
instances that by him may be giuen. And for the
Elders ioyntly:
            1. The church of Christ doe priuately admonish a
priuate sin of a holy & louing affection: but their
Elders could call, R: W: before thē in the first place,
for a priuate thing: & threatē her excōmunication
for that which after ward for shame they let fall.
            And for the peoples vncleanes, cousning, disgracing,
backe-biting, & vndermining one of another
amongst themselues, it is a thing so common and

well knowne of them at home and abroad, that
I neede not in this place to speake further of it,
heauen and earth can beare me witnesse against
thē in those things: oh that they would apply vnto
themselues and their practise that which the Prophet
Ieremie speakes! Will they steale, murther and
commit adulterie &c. And yet crie the temple of the
Lord, the temple of the Lord?
            
            
               Are these then this beautifull? yea moste wonderful
church, rauishing the sences to conceiue of it? are these
the Saints then marching in such a heauenly and gracious
aray, where euery stone hath his beauty, his burthen,
and his order, where no law is wrongfully wrested,
or wilfully neglected, no truth hid or peruerted?
or rather haue they not deluded many poore
soules, with such sweete wordes, who when they
haue seene their estate, and their expectations so
frustrated haue vsed these wordes: They neede
neuer seperate themselues,W.F, & E.H. if they liue thus: for any
Godly societie will quickely thrust them out from
them so practising as they doe
            Certainely this their description of a visible Church
is as cleare a testimony, and as pregnant a sentence
of condemnation against themselues and their
practise as may be possible.
            But yet that their hypocrisie may further appeare,
let me giue the reader a taste also of their dealing
in condemning others, euen in those things that
they would and doe practise themselues, & that in
these particulers.
            
               
1. They condemne others,Page. 157. for communicating
with open offenders and yet practise it themselues
as is before shewed.
            2. For making men to sweare to accuse themselues,
                  Page. 63 Iohn Landen.
yet M. Ih. practised the same to one I.L, and
it is moreouer a common practise among them,
both publikely and priuately, so to doe, yet would
their Elder Dan, Studly neuer so much as denye
the matter of incest with his wiues Daughter, for
the clearing of himselfe, though hee were requested
for the satisfying of weake Btetheren so to
doe.
            3. They condemne the Dutch churches,Answ: to Iun. letters page for baptising
the seede of those that are not members of
their church, and yet M. Iohnson with the rest could
offer to receiue M. Deuksberies childe to Baptisme,
and were offended at G: I:
               George Ioh. for witstanding it:
and yet he neyther was, nor would ioyne himselfe
as a member vnto them.
            4. In like manner doe they deale with the Dutch
churches of Amsterdam,
               Consisting of so greate a multitude for hauing but one church
in the Cittie. And yet M. Iohnson to vrge others
to ioyne to them: (which for diuers disorders amongst
them would not so doe) could alleadge
that there was no warrant for two seuerall churches
to be in one city in the scriptures.
            5. In the place aboue quoted, they giue the like
sentence against the Dutch and French Churches,
for deciding matters by the elders, without the body
of the church, and not suffring in this respect

the 18. of Mat rightly to be obserued amōgst them:
and yet their Elders, viz: M. Fr: Ih. and his fellowes,
could decide one T. Canadyes matter, who had accused
himselfe to be rid of his wife,Of adultery. and this without
their knowledge or consent: But the said Canady
not resting in the Elders determination,
brought it to their Church, alleadging that he had
iniury done to him,W. Holder. in that W, H could bee seperate
frō his wife on his owne accusation of himselfe of
adultery, & he could not. And further to iustify the
bringing of matters in the third place to their Elders
(for so they practise before the matter bee
brought to the whole church) they could alleadge
the very same reasons against M. P. that they had
before condemned in the Dutch. And for the 18,
of Mat. how it is made a matter of partialitie and
enuie, yea a cloake to couer filthines withal at eueuery
pinch amōgst them, would grieue ones heart
to consider.
            6. They condemne the Dutch & French aforesaid
for worshipping God in the Idoll Temples of
Antichrist, yet themselues suffer their poore to receiue
the almes of the Dutch, which is a Sacrifice,
Phil 4. 18. in the same place: and if they giue thāks
in receiuing their almes (as duety both to God &
man bindes them to doe) Then doe they likewise
worship God in the Idoll Temples: neyther will
it helpe them to say that it is not publique worship,
which if they could prooue, yet the commaū
               dement
Deut. 12. if it be moral, as they account it,

and must bee executed on these temples, then no
ciuill vse of them may be had at all; much lesse spirituall.
            7. They witnesse against the Dutch, for vsing
the censure of suspension: And yet themselues,
could suspend M. S many moneths together before
his excommunication, a man for learning &
giftes worthy of his preferment among the dutch,
and to good too be of their fellowship.
            They condemne in others nonresidency,Page. 65. Last answ: to H. I.
                And
yet their Deacon D. Br. could neere three quarters
of a yere be absent frō their church, saue that twise
or thrice, about his Maisters businesse, hee came
ouer from London to Amsterdam to buye and sell
wares. And this without any leaue of their church
at Amsterdam so to doe.Rom. 12. How did hee that hath an
Office waite on his Office?
            9. Lastly,M. Ih. &c. they passe the like sentence on the
Dutch, for becomming one body, with excommunicates,
when as they excommunicate their
owne members onely for hearing the word so
much as preached amongst the Dutch or French,
yet are they one body with an excommunicate
from the French church themselues. I might heere
also note their like dealing with the Dutch, for
their obseruation of certaine Holy daies: yet
doe theseM. Fr: Ih: and the rest. mē obserue these holy daies as much as
the Dutch, as well in shutting their shops, as also
hauing their publique meetings for worshippe on
these daies: Neyther haue they in so many yeares

space had time to debate and discusse this matter
among them,Of the last answ: to M Ia:
                as M. Ioh. Answered, Sect. 3. to the
Preface, fiue yeares agoe. But it would be long and
teadious to bring the manifolde examples that in
this kinde may be alleadged, but vntill further ananswere,
these may suffice. Now let me aske them,
Are these things euill in others and good in them?
or as the Poet speakes iustū non iustum non iustum-iustum
quod vobis labet:
               Plautus. or wil they say as Medea in
Ouid, video meliora probo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   deteriora sequor? But rather
wil they heare the Apostle Rom. 2, 1. 3. What
art thou that condemnest another and doest the
same? Or the prophet Ps. 50. 16, Why takest thou
my word in thy mouth & hatest to be reformed?
Or Christ himselfe, hypocrite first cast the beame
out of thine owne &c Mat. 7. 5. One would little
thinke that knew not their euill dealing that euer
they would snatch vp that to serue their owne
turne, which they condemne in others.
            And heere although I might declare their false
and impertinent allegation of Scripture, as if it
were no sinne to take the name of God in vaine &
make the Scripture serue their fancy; but because
this hath beene done already in part by G, I. in his
booke page 85, which yet lyeth on them vnanswered,
and vpon further occasion may be further
manifested: I will pastle by this, as also their false
accusations of whole Chuches, as will appeare
by comparing the 7.Neh. 6. 8. Pro. 24. 28. Confess: with Iun: let: page. 54 accusatiō, with the practice
of the Duch Churches, and come to the 4. thing

that I proposed, namely, to shewe how they haue
drawne the cursse of God on themselues by rash,
vniust and wicked excomunication.
            1 And heere I may speak of 27 or there abouts
euen one halfe of them, at that time, and that of
the elder sorte: which all within a very short
space were cast out for refusing to come being
sent for, to the meeting of the other part, although
they answered, that on the suddaine they
could not come at so short space and warning, for
diuers busines, but would come at any other time
which on both sides should bee thought conuenient,
And although one of thē 
               H. A. was distracted
in minde: but they spared none, & this excommunication
was confirmed by the Pastor M. Ih.
Howbeit, afterward was this excommunication
repealed with fasting and prayer, and acknowledged
to be rash and vniust, and all receiued in againe,
and they that withstood their receauing in,
were on the other side excommunicated.W. A. Notwithstanding,
after this againe, because their Pastor
was vrged to acknowledge his sinne by one of
thē, C. S. they were all turned out againe. Such dallying
with the Lords ordnances is fearefull.
            2. As also how they deliuered diuers to Sathan
for hearing the word preached in the Dutch
church, though some were encouraged by their
pastor and teacher so to doe, and promised to bee
borne out in it by themselues, as namely M. S. yet
after they brake, promise with him & cast him out.
            
               
3. Or what will they say to this? M. Iohnson
with diuers others of their leaders, put downe reasons
vnder their hands, that Apostates might:
not beare office from the Scriptures, and
so practised; yet after that M. Ainsworthes Apostasie
was discouered, to keepe him in office,
they altered their judgement and practise, and
those that would not be brought to their will,W. A.
they cast out likewise; although they would neuer
answere their owne reasons in writing, in like
sorte as they had set them downe: no nor suffer
their owne reasons to be read in their meeting, being
requested thereunto. Is not this to play Sathās
part to bring men to distruction, and not vse as
good meanes to recouer them out againe? M. Ad.
for lesse Apostasie was not suffered to beare an inferior
office among them.
            Besides,Williā Asplen. they haue cast out W. A. for recalling a
former Schisme; yet the said W. A. did & still doth
stand to that acknowledgement which was vnder
his hand, wherewith all they were satisfied. Of this
I with others haue written to them, but could get
no answere;Before his departing from them. yet that schisme was for not appealing
to the Dutch Churches: and if they doe appeale,
then hath M. Ih. with the rest refused vtterly
to be tryed by them.
            5. Others they haue likewise accursed, that being
the parties innocēt desired to liue with the parties
offendors, as man and wife together, as before
they did in the marriage couenāt, vpon forgiuenes

of their sin of adultery as already is mencioned in
H C. & one Homes his wife.Hen. Cooke.
            
            Another woman they excommunicated, because
the brought not her Childe to Baptisme to
them, when her husbād had forbid her in any case
so to doe, who had likewise reprooued diuers
grosse abuses amongst thē, and could receiue neyther
answere nor due repentance thereof frō them;
the woman alleaged that Tymothies mother was a
faithfull woman, and one that brought vp herson
in the feare of God from his Child-hood, yet did
she not circumcise him: and no other cause mencioned,
but that his Father was a Grecian. 1. Tim. 4.
6. 2. Tim. 1. 5. Act. 16, 3. whereunto shee could
get no answere. TheirAnd the onely Doctor in the world in their account. Doctor indeede said, that
Tymothies mother was dead, and so he might haue
said of Moses, and the Prophets too.
            Their Pastor Maister F. I. made doubt of that
Scripture, and staid her excommunication, as saying
he would not consent to it: yet after the womā
had a little vnfoulded his euill dealing, the same
Maister F. Ih. at the same time, could change his
note and say, if that none else would, yet would he
be the man that should excommunicate her. And
indeede asterward they so did, and all that would
not yeild to her excōmunicatiō, as namely Mistris
S. Widdowe Ch: and R. R. though the chiefe
The head skout. magistrate of the cittie forbid them so to doe. Diuers
other reasons were alleadged about this matter,
which we shal haue time to relate, after that we

haue seene their answere to this, if they will be at
leasure so to doe. Now may I not wish that they
had not verified the Orators saying? He that once
passeth the boundes of modesty, becommeth impudent
out of measure.
            
            Thus doe they abuse the holy ordinance of
God to satisfie their owne reuenging stomacks,Pol. virg: li: 4o. cap. 12
               non it a precipitanter in quenquam torquendum. Is
this the long suffering spirit of meekenes in recouering
and seeking the lost?
            Or doe they not knowe that the curse is not in
vaine, if it cleaues not to them to whome it is giuen
it lights on the giuer? Are not then their Bulls
of excommunications so many curses on their
owne pates? shall I say to vse their owne allegation
out of the Prophet,Ps. 109. 17. 18. 
               As he loued cursing so shall it
come vnto him, and as he loued not blessing, so shall it
be farre from him, and as hee cloathed himselfe with
cursing like a rayment, so shall it come into his bowells
like water, and like oyle into his bones? Surelye God
that will not holde him guiltles that taketh his
name in vaine,Ex. 20. 7. will neuer such profanation of his
name and ordinance to goe in vaine.
            And for some of them that are by these accursed
I know they haue learned Christ otherwise then
so, as to feare the cursse causeles. The Lord promised
to Abraham whose children they are, euen
manye which they haue cast out, that hee would
blesse them that blesse thee,
               Gen. 12. 3. 2. Sam. 16. 12. 
               and curse them that cursse
thee. &c. And let them say as Dauid of Shimei, It

may bee the Lord will doe us good for their cursing
this day, yea, let them acknowledge Gods goodnesse
towards them in drawing them out of their
Tents, as I doe his mercy towards me in keeping
me frō ioyning with thē, being yet sometimes addicted
too much vnto thē, before I perceiued their
fearefull estate. I could cite many other things yet
viler, as their Sauadge and cruell dealing to fatherlesse
Children: as namely Maister P. and Maister
B. his Children, and other such like.
            But I like not now to saile further in this Ocean,
but will content my selfe with the confession of
their owne members,W. Clerk. 
               W. C. I thought (said he) that
they had beene all Saints, but I haue found them all deuils,
and this before many witnesses: yet is this
man still a member amongst them. And for these
excommunicators the Lord giue them grace to
repent, that they may neuer haue their portion among
the cursed, to heare that fearefull sentence,
Goe ye cursed: which is the thing I wish them
from my heart. Amen.
            Since then they haue confuted their owne writings,
and giuen the black sentence of condemnation
to the other Churches of Christ that haue
beene, yea and themselues, by their description,
and practise that amongst themselues which they
condemne in others: let others take heede howe
they pertake in their sinnes, least also they taste of
their fond excommunications.
            And for the prophane (not to speake here of the

popish factiō drowned in superstitiō, whole fruites
are treachery) let them not heerby be hardned the
more in their sinne, & prophanes, but rather seeing
they that ftriue if they striue not lawfully, doe yet
misse of the marke they ayme at; what shall bee
the end of those that set not forward at all in the
waies of God? let them remember that the gate is
straite and the way narrow that leadeth to life,Math. 7. 13 &
the sewnes of those that finde it. And for the
Israel of God, The Lord giue them holynesse &
peace,Heb. 12. 14 without the which, they shall neuer see him
to their comfort.
            Hee that causeth the righteous to goe astray by an euill
way, shall fall into his owne pit. Pro. 28. 10.
            
               Thine in Christ,
Tho: White.
            
            
               Since I had finished this treatise, I heare that Tho:
Canady before mencioned, hath liued in Sodometry
with his Boy, as the Apostle speakes of the heathen,Rom. 1.
                  men with men wrought filthines, &c. and notwithstanding
his great wayling, is now cast out,
wherin it seemeth they haue forgotten their wonted
allegation:Mat. 18. 22 
                  If thy brother sinne against thee not alone
vntil seuen times, but seuenty times seauen, thou
shalt for giue him;
                  Luc. 17. 4. 
                  If hee returne againe and say it repenteth
me &c.
               
            
         
         
            
            Certaine briefe reasons proouing the
vse of the Lords prayer as a
Prayer.
            1. AN expresse commaundement neyther
contrary to nature, nor analogy of Faith,
and agreeable also to the drift and tenor
of the place, ought litterally to bee vnderstood and
obeyed.
            But this, Mat. 6. 9. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               &c. And Luc. 11. 2.

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                say our Father, &c. is such an expresse
commaundement &c. ergo It is also so
to be vnderstood and vsed.
            2. It Christ had taught onely to pray to this effect,
then had he taught nothing but that which
Iohns Disciples and al the faithful practised before:
for the Prayers of the Saints, as of Salomon, Nehemiah,
Daniel, were to that effect before.
            3. Whatsoeuer Scripture hath in euery respect
the forme of Prayer, that is not alone matter of
Doctrine, but hath beene vsed also as Prayer.
            But this Scripture Math. 6. 9. hath in euery respect

the forme of Prayer: as, Our Father, giue vs,
leade vs, and amen, annexed in the end: ergo. And indeed
how can they tell, which were Prayers and
which not, if not by their forme of Petition? wherby
they are distinguished from Doctrines, & rules
proposed in an other forme, as Mat. 7. 7. & 21. 22,
1. Ioh. 5. 14.
            4. In a duety to bee vsed of all, the holy Ghost is
plaine: but if those very words are not to bee vsed
as a Prayer, no christian for 1500. yeares & more,
did vnderstand our Lords meaning.
            But they say that the Apostles neuer vsed those
very wordes in prayer. I answere:
            1. An expresse commaundemēt is warrant sufficient
without example.
            2. There is no example in the whole booke of
Gen: of the obseruation of the Sabaoth for 2369.
yeares space after the institution of it. Gen. 2. Neither
to come nearer, is their any example of Baptising,
in the name of the Father, Sonne and holy
Ghost) yet is the commaundement of Christ sufficient
warrant so to doe. Compare Math. 28. 19.
with Act. 10. 28. & 19. 5.
            3. It is the Anabaptists reasoning against childrens
baptisme, asking for an example, whē otherwise
there is sufficient warrant so to doe, yet are
their Pretences as good or better then M: Iohnsons
in refusing obedience to our Lords commaundement
for want of an example.
            4. The Prayers mencioned in the new Testament,

are such as were poured foorth vpon speciall
occasion as Act. 4. 24. Ioh. 17.
            5. Let them shewe mee an example where euer
the Apostles prayed before their Sermons; if they
can.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Errata.
            IN the Preface the first line, leaue out (dangerous)
for Luc. 1. 14. 15. reade Luc. 1. 74. 75.
For H. C. read H Cooke. Page. 10-in the margent
For latter, (reade former.) Page 14, line 22.
         
      
   