
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     ❧wycklyffes
wycket: whyche he
made in Kyng Rycards daye
the second in the yere
of our lorde God
M.CCC.XCV.
                  
                     ¶Ihon the .vi. chapiter.
                     ¶I am the liuynge bread which came downe
from heauen: who so eteth of this brede shal lyue
for euer. And the brede that I wyl gyue
is my fleshe, whiche I wyll
gyue for the lyfe of the
worlde.⸫
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  ¶A verye brefe diffinition of these wordes. Hoc est corpus meum.
                  I Beseche ye brethren in the lorde Christ Iesu,
and for the loue of hys spirite to praye
with me, that we may be vessels to his laude
and praise what tyme so euer it pleaseth
hym to call vpon vs. Romanes .xv. Chapter.
                  For asmuche as our sauiour Iesus Christe
when that he walked here on earthe wyth the
prophethes whych were before hym, and the apostles
whych were presētly wyth hym, whom
also he lefte after hym, whose hertes were molyfyed
wyth the holy ghoste, & warned vs, and
gaue vs knowlege that there was two maner
of wayes, the one to lyfe, the other to death as
Christe sayeth,Mat. vii. Luke, xiii. Howe straighte and narowe is
the waye that leadethe to lyfe, and there be but
fewe that fyndeth it. But how large and brode
is the waye that leadethe to dampnation, and
there be manye that go into it. Therfore praye
we hertely to God that he of hys mere mercye
wyll so strengthen vs wyth the grace and stedfastnes
hys holy spirite, to make vs stronge in
spirituall lyuynge after the euangelicall Gospell
so that the worlde, no not the very infydeles
papistes and apostates can gather none occasion
to speake euyll, of vs, wherby we maye
entre into that strayte gate, as Christ our sauiour
and all that folowes hym haue done, that
is not in ydle lyuynge, but in dilygente labourynge,
yea in greate sufferaunce of persecutyon
euen to the death, and that we fynde the waye
of euerlastynge lyfe, as he hath promysed where
he sayeth.Mat. vii. He that seketh fyndeth, and that
axeth receyuethe, and to hym that knocketh it




shalbe openyde. Also Christe sayethe. If thy
sonne axe the breade wylte thou gyue hym a
stone,Luke. xi. or yf he axe the fyshe, wylte thou gyue
hym a serpent, yf ye whyche are euyll can gyue
good thynges to your chyldren how muche more
shall your heuenlye father gyue a good spirite
to them that axe it of hym. Saynt Iames
saythe.Iacob. i. If any man lacke wysedome let hym
axe it of god whyche gyueth to all men yf they
axe it in faythe, and vpbraydethe none, for he
that douteth is lyke to the waues of the see,
that is borne aboute wythe euerye blaste of
winde.Apoc. iii. Thinke not that suche shal receiue any
thynge of the Lorde. For a man double in soule
is vnstable in al hys wayes, as it is written
wherfore let vs praye to God that he kepe vs
in the houre of temptation that is comyng in
all the worlde.Dani. xi. For as our sauiour christ sayth
Whē ye see that abhomination of desolation
that is spoken of by the prophet Daniel standynge
in the holy place,mat xxiiii. as christ sayeth he that
redethe let hym vnderstonde. But for bycause
that euery man can not haue the boke of Daniell
to knowe what is prophesye is. Danyell
sayde towarde the laste dayes the Kyng of the
northe shall come, and the armes of hym shall
stonde, and shall defyle the sanctuarye, and he
shall take awaye the continuall sacrifyce, and
he shall gyue abhominatyon into desolatyon
and wycked men shall fynde a testamente gylfullye,
but ye that knowe youre god shall holde
and doo, and vntaughte men in the people
shall teache full manye men, and they shall fall
on the swearde and in flame, and into Captyuyte
manye dayes. And when they shall




downe they shalbe araysed by a lyttell helpe,
and full manye shalbe applyed to them gylfullye,
and of learned men shoulde fall to them
that they buylde together. And the chosen
shalbe together, and shalbe made whyte tyll
a tyme determyned. For yet another tyme
shalbe, and the kynge shall do by hys wyll, and
then he shalbe raysed and magnifyed at eche
god. And againste the god of goddes shall speake
greate thynges and he shalbe raysed tyll
the wrathfulnes before determyned is perfectylye
made, and he shall not inheryte the god of
his fathers, and he shalbe in the companyes of
wemen and he shall not chaunge anye thynge
of godes for he shall rayse agayne all thynges.
Forsoth he shall honour god of Mason̄ in his
place, and he shall worshipe a god whome hys
fathers knowe not, not wyth Golde, Siluer,
precyous stones, nor wythe precyoue thynges.
But he shall do make stronge the god of Mason
wyth thalyent or straunge god whyche he
knewe not, and he shall multyplye glorye,
and he shall gyue to hyme power in manye
thynges, and he shall departe the lawde at hys
wyll, hytherto be they the wordes of Danyell
who maye see a greater abhomynations then
to see the people to be ledde awaye from God
and they be taughte to worshyp for God that
thing that is not god nor sauiour of the world
For thoughe it be theyr God as it is wrytten
by a Prophete sayenge. The Lordes goynge
shall make lowe the God of the earthe, for
it is theyre Goddes that they beleue in them
whyche maye not make them saffe as it is
wrytten whereas sayncte Paule sayethe.
                  

                     
ye men of Athens I ꝑceyue that in all thynges.
I see you as vayne worshippers of Idols,Act. xvii. for
I passed by and sawe your mawmetes & foūde
an aulter in the whyche was written to te vnknowne
God. Therefore the thynge whyche
you know not ye worshyp as god. This thing
shewe I vnto you: God which made the world
and all thynges that be in it. Thys forsoth he
is Lorde of heauen and of earthe and he dwelleth
not in the temple made wyth handes, neyther
hath he nede of any thynge, for he geuethe
lyfe to all men and breathe euery where, and he
made of one all kyndes of men to inhabyte on
all the face of the earthe. Determyninge tymes
ordayned and termes of the dwellinge of them
to seke oute God. Yf peraduenture they
myghte fynde hym, althoughe he be not farre
from eche of you. And agayne he sayethe ye
shall not thynke that God lyuynge is not lyke
to golde, syluer, ether any grauen thynge,
or paynted by crafte, eyther taughte of man,
for God despisethe the tyme of the vnknowen
thynges. And he shewethe euery where that all
men shoulde doo penaunce, and herof the clerkes
of the lawe haue greate nede whyche haue
ben euer agaynste God the Lorde bothe in the
olde lawe and in the newe, to sley the Prophetes
that speke to them the worde of God,mat. xviii. ye see
that they spared not the sonne of God when
that the temporall iudge woulde haue delyuered
hym and so forthe of the Apostels and
martirs that hathe spoken truely the worde of
God to them, and they say it is heresy to speake
of the holye scripture in Englyshe, and so
they woulde condempne the holye ghoste that
gaue it in tonges to the apostles of Christe as




it is wrytten to speake the worde of God in al
languages that were ordayned of God vnder
heauen as it is wrytten.Act. ii. And the holye Gooste
descended vpon the Hethen as 
                        〈…〉
                      the
Apostles in Ierusalem as it 
                        〈…〉
                     ,Iohe
                           •
                        l. iii, Act. lxxxx. and
Christe were so mercyfull to sende the holy goste
to the Hethen mē, & he made them partakers
of hys blessed worde, why shoulde it then be
taken awaye frome vs in thys lande that be
Christen men. Consyder you whether it is not
all one to denye Christes wordes for Heresye
and Christe for an heretyke, for yf my worde
be a lye, then am I a lyer that speketh the worde.
Therfore yf my wordes be heresye then am
I an heretyke that speaketh the worde, therfor
it is all one to condempne the worde of God
in any language for Heresye and God for an
Heretyke that spake the worde, for he and hys
worde is all ane and they maye not be seperated,
and yf the worde of hym is the lyfe of the
worlde as it is wrytten.Mat. iiii. Not onely by brede lyueth
man, but in euery worde that cometh oute
of the mouth of god, and euery worde of God
is the lyfe of the soule of man, as sayth saynte
Iohn̄, that thou haue an oyntynge of the holy
gooste, and thou haue no nede of anye man but
teache thou in all thynges whych is his blessed
worde in whome is all wysedome and conninge,
and yet ye be always to lerne as well as we
Howe maye any Antechriste for dreade of god
take it awaye from vs that be christen mē and
thus to suffer the people to dye for hunger in
hererye and blaspheme of mānes lawe that corrupteth
and sleyth the soule, as pestilence sleth
the bodye, as Dauyd hereth wytnes where he
speaketh of the Cheyre of pestilence, and moste




of al they make vs beleue a false law that they
haue made vpon the secret hooste, for the most
falsest belef is taughte in it. For where fynde
ye that euer Christ or any of hys disciples or apostels 
taught any man to worshype it. For in
the masse crede it is sayde I beleue in one god
onlye oure lorde Iesu Christe the sonne of god
only begottē & borne of the father before al the
world, he is God / of God, lyght of lyght, very
god of very god, begottē & not made & of a substance
euē with the father by whom al thinges
be made & the psalme, Quicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vult there it is
sayde. God is the father, God is the sōne, God
is the holye Ghoste. Unmade is the father vnmade
is the sonne, and vnmade is the holy gost
and thou thē that art an earthely mā by what
reasō maist thou saye that thou makest thy maker.
whether maye the made thinge saye to the
maker, why hast thou made me thus? Or may
it turne againe & make hym that made it (God
forbyde). Now answerest thou that saiest euery
day that thou makest of bread the bodye of
the lorde fleshe & bloud of Iesu Christ god and
mā. Forsoth thou answerest greatly agaīst reason
by these wordes that Christe spake at hys
supper on Serethursday at night that Christ
toke bread & blessed it & brake it & gaue it to his
disciples & apostles,mat. xxvi. mark. xiiii & said, take ye, and eate ye,
this is my bodi which shalbe geuē for you And
also he takīg the cuppe & did thākes, & gaue to
thē & saide. drinke ye al hereof, thys is my blod
of the newe testamēt whiche shalbe shede oute
for many into the remissiō of synnes, as saythe
Luke. whan Iesu had takē bread, he gaue thā
                     kes
and brake it to them & sayde, take ye, eate
ye, thys is my bodye that shalbe geuen for you
do ye thys in the remembrance of me. Nowe




vnderstāde ye the wordes of our sauiour christ
as he spake them one after another as Christ
spake them. For he toke bread and blessed, and
yet what blessed he. The scripture sayeth not
that Christ toke bread and blessed it, or that he
blessed the bread which he hade taken.
                  Therfore it semeth more that he blessed his disciples
and apostels, whome he hade ordayned
witnesses of his passiō, and in them he left hys
blessed worde whiche is the bread of lyfe, as it
is written not onely in brede lyued man, but in
eurry worde that procedith out of the mouthe
of god.Mate. iiii. Also Christe saythe I am the breade of
lyfe that came downe from heuen,Ioh. vi. and Christe
saith often in Mathew, the wordes that I haue
spoken to you be spirite and lyfe. Therfore
it semeth more that he blessed his disciples, and
also hys apostels, in whome the breade of lyfe
was lefte more then in materiall breade, for the
materiall breade hath an ende, as it is wryttē
in the gospell of Mathew. xv.Mat. xv. that Christ saide
all thynges that a man eatethe goethe downe
into the wombe, and is sent downe into the
draughte awaye, and it hathe an ende of roottynge,
but the blessynge of Christe kept his discyples
and apostels bothe bodelye and gostely.
As it is writtē,Ioh. xiii. that none of them perished but
the sone of perditiō that the scriptures myght
be fulfylled, and often the scripture sayth that
Iesu toke breade and brake it and gaue it to
his disciples, and sayd, take ye, eate ye. This is
my bodye that shalbe geuen for you. But he
sayd not this bread is my body or that the bred
shulde be geuen for the lyfe of the worlde. For
Christ saith what and if ye shal se the sonne of
mā assēd vp,Iohn̄. vi. where as he was before. It is the
spirit yt quyckeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing




Also Christe saythe in the gospell, verely verely
I saye vnto you. Excepte the whet corne fal in
to the grounde and dye. It bydeth alone. but yf
it dye, it bryngethe forthe muche frute. Here
menne maye see by the wordes of Chryste that
it behoued that he dyed in the fleshe, and that
in hys deathe was made the frute of euerlastinge
lyfe for all them that beleue on hym, as it is
wrytten. For as by Adam all dye, euen so by
Christ shall al lyue & euery man in hys owne order,
for as one clerenes is in the sonne, another
in the mone, and a sterre in clerenes nothynge
in comparyson to the sonne. Euen so is the agayne
rysynge of the ded men, for we be sowē
in corrouption and shal ryse againe incorruptible,
we are sowen in infyrmyte and shall ryse
againe in vertue, we are sowen in natural bodyes,
and shall ryse agayne spirituall bodyes.
Then yf Christe shall chaunge thus our deadly
bodyes by death,Math. Marke. Luke. and god the father spared
not hys owne sonne as it is wrytten, but that
death shoulde reyne in hym as in vs, and that
he shoulde be translated into a spirituall body
the fyrste agayne rysynge of deade men. Then
howe saythe Hypocrites that take on them to
make oure Lordes bodye,Note here loo whether make
they the gloryfyed bodye ether make they agayne
the spirytuall bodye whyche is rysen
frome deathe to lyfe eyther make they the fleshely
bodye as it was before he suffred deathe
and yf they saye also that they make the spirytuall
bodye of Chryste it maye not be so,Math. xxviii. for
that thynge that Christe sayde and dyd he dyd
it as he was at supper before he suffered hys
passyon, as it is wrytten that the spirytuall bodye
of Chryste rose agayne from deathe to lyfe




Also he ascended vp into heuē and that he wyl
abyde there tyl he come to iudge the quicke and
the deade? and yf theysaye that they make
Christes bodye as it was before he had suffered
hys passion, then muste they nedes graunte
that Christe is to dye yet? for by all holy scriptures
he was promysed to dye, and that he gaue
lordshyppe of euerlastynge lyfe.
                  Furthermore yf they saye that Christe made
hys bodye of breade? wyth what wordes
made he it, not wyth these wordes (Hoc est corpus
meum) that is to saye in Englyshe, thys is
my bodye, for they be the wordes of gyuynge
and not of makynge whych he sayd after that
he brake the breade then departynge it amonge
his disciples and apostles. Therfore yf Christe
had made of that breade hys bodye, had made
it in hys blessynge or els in gyuynge of thankes
and not in the wordes of gyuynge for yf
Christe had spoken of the materiall bread that
he had in hys handes as when he sayde, (Hoc
est corpus meum) thys is my bodye and it
was made before, or els the worde had bene a lye,
for yf ye saye thys in my hande, and yf it
be not a hande then am I a lyer, therfore seke
it busely yf ye can fynde .ii. wordes of blessyng
or of gyuynge of thankes the whyche Chryste
dyd, & that the clerkes of the earthe knowethe
not, for yf ye myghte fynde or knowe it those
wordes, then should you waxe greate maysters
aboue Christe, and then ye myghte be gyuers
of hys substance, and as father and maker of
hym and that he shoulde worshyppe you, as it
is wryttē:Exod, xii. Thou shalte worshippe thy father &
mother, of suche as desyre suche worshyppe agaynst
goddes lawe, speaketh saynte Paule of




                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     



                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     



                     
the man of synne that enhaunsethe hym selfe
as he were God. And he is worshypped ouer
all thynges as God and sheweth hym selfe as
he were god,1, Tessa. ii where our charge be gylty in this
deme ye or they, that knowen mooste for they
saye that when ye haue sayde: Hoc est corpus
meum, that is to saye this is my body, the whiche
ye call the wordes of consecration or elles
of makynge, and when they be sayde ouer the
breade, ye saye that there is lefte no breade, but
it is the bodye of the Lorde, but truelye there is
nothynge but an hepe of accydentes as whytnes,
ruggednes, roundnes, sauery, touchynge,
and tastynge and suche other accidētes. Than
yf thon sayest that fleshe and bloode of Christe
that is to saye hys manhode is made more or
encreased be so muche as the mynystration of
breade and wyne is, the whyche ye mynystren,
yf ye saye it is so, then thou muste nedes consent
that, that thynge that is not God to daye
shalbe God to morowe, yea and that thynge
whyche is wythoute spirite of lyfe, but growethe
in the felde by kynde, shalbe God an other
tyme.Math. i. Luke. i. psal, clxix. And we all oughte to beleue that he was
wythoute begynnynge, and withoute endynge,
and in hys manhode begotten and not made,
for yf the manhode of Christe were encreased
euerye daye by so muche as the bread and wyne
draweth that ye mynistren, he shoulde waxe
more in one daye by carte lodes then he dyd in
xxxii. yeres when he was here in earthe. And yf
thou makest the body of our lord in those wordes:
Hoc est corpus meum, that is to say This
is my bodye. And yf thou mayste make the bodye
of the lorde in those wordes, Thys is my
body thou thy selfe must be the persō of Christ
or els there is a false God, for yf it is thy body




as thou sayeste, then it is the bodye of a false
knaue, or of a dronken man, or of a thefe, or of
a lecheroure or full of other synnes, and then
there is an vnclene bodye for any man to worshype
for god. For and Christe had made there
hys bodye of materiall bread in the sayde wordes,
as I knowe they be not the wordes of makynge,
what earthly man had power to do as
he dyd, for in all holy scripture from the beginnynge
of Genesis to the ende of the Apocalips
There be no wordes wrytten of the makynge
of Christes bodye, but there bene wrytten that
Christ was the sonne of the father, and that he
was conceyued of the holy ghoste, and that he
toke fleshe and blood of the virgin Mary, and
that he was deade, and that he rose agayne
from death on the thyrde daye, and that he ascended
to heauen very god and man, and that
we shulde beleue in all scripture that ben written
of hym and that he is to come to iudge the
quicke and the deade, and that the same Christ
Iesu kinge and sauiour,Hebr. i. was at the beginning
wyth the father and the holy ghoste, makynge
all thynges of nought, both heauen and earthe
and all thynges that bene in it worchynge by
worde of hys vertue, for he said, be it do, and it
was done, as whose workes neuer earthly mā
might cōprehende either make.Genesis. And yet ye wordes
of the makyng of these thinges by me written
in the beginnyng of gene. euē as god spake
thē & yf ye can not make the worke yt he made
& haue ye wordes by which he made it, how shal
he make hym that made the workes & you haue
no wordes of auctorite either power lefte you
on earthe by whiche ye shulde do thys, but as
ye haue fayned thys crafte of youre false errours,
whiche some of you vnderstand not, for




it is prophesyed Esaye .vi. and .xiii. chapiter of
Math. xiii. and Luke. viii. Marke. iiii. ye shall
haue eyes and se not, and eares and heare not,
and ye shall se prophesyes and ye shall not vnderstande
leste they were conuerted, for I hyde
them from the hertes of those people, theyr hertes
are greatlye fatted and this thinge is done
to you for the wyckednes of youre errours in
vnbeleue, therfore be you conueteed frome the
worste synne as it is wrytten, when Moyses
was in the hyll wyth God. Exod. xx the people
made a calfe and worshypped it as God. And
God spake to Moyses go, for the people haue
done the worste synne to make and worshippe
alyen goddes. But nowe I shall aske you a
word, answere you me, whether is the body of
the lorde made at once or at twise, is bothe the
fleshe and the bloode in the hoost of the breade
or elles is the fleshe made at one tyme and the
bloode made at other tyme, that is to saye the
wyne in the chalyce? yf thou wylt say it is full
and hole the manhode of Christe in the hooste
of breade bothe fleshe & bloode, skynne, heere,
and bones, then makest thou vs to worshyppe
a false god in the chalyce, whiche is vncōiured
when ye worshyp the breade, and yf ye saye the
fleshe is in the breade, and the blood in the wyne,
then thou must graūte, yf thy crafte be true
as it is not in dede, that the manhode of christ
is departed and that he is made twoe tymes:
for fyrste thou takest the hooste of bread other
a pece of bread and make it as ye saye, and the
innocent people worshyp yt. And then thou takest
to the, the chalyee and lykewyse marreste,
makest I wolde haue sayd, the blood in it, and
then worshyppen it also, and yf it be so as I




am sured, that the fleshe and bloode of Christe
ascended, then be ye false harlottes to god and
to vs, for when we shalbe housholde ye brynge
to vs the drye fleshe and let the blood be away
for ye gyue vs after the breade wyne and water,
and sometymes clene water vnblessed rather
coniured by the vertue of your craft, and
yet ye saye vnder the hoost of breade is the full
manhode of Christe, then by youre owne confession
muste it nedes be that we worshyppen
a fallse god in the chalyce whych is vncōiured
when we worshyppe the breade, and worshype
the one as the other, but where fynde ye that,
that euer Christ or any of hys disciples taught
any man to worshyp thys breade or wyne.
                  Therfore what shall we saye of the Apostles
that were so muche wyth Christ, and were called
by the goly goost, had they forget it to set it
in the crede whē they made it that is christē mē
                     nes
beleue, or els we might say that they knew
no suche God, for they beleue in no more goddes
but in hym that was at the begynnynge, &
made of nought all thynges. Hebr. the fyrst, ps.
xvi. visible & vnuisible whych lorde toke fleshe
and bloode beynge in the virgyn the same god
But ye haue manye false wayes to begyle the
innocente people and sleyghtes of the finde.
For ye say that in euery hoost either pece is the
hole māhode of Christe either full substance of
hym. For ye saye as a man maye take a glasse,
and breake the glasse into manye peces and in
euerye pece properly thou mayste see thy face &
thy face not parted. So ye saye the lordes bodye
is in eache hoost eyther pece and hys body
not parted. And thys is a foole subtyl question
to begyle an innocente foole, but wyll ye take




hede of thys subtyll question, howe a man may
take a glasse and beholde the verye lyckenes of
hys owne face and yet is it not hys face, but
the lyckenes of hys face, for and it were his very
face, thē he muste nedes haue two faces, one
on hys bodye and an other in the glasse. And yf
the glasse were broken in many places, so there
shulde be manye faces, more by the glasse then
by the body and eche man shall make as many
faces to them as they wolde, but as ye may see
the mynde or lykenes of youre face and is not
the verye face, but the fygure thereof. So the
breade is the fygure or mynde of Chrystes bodye
in earth, and therfore Christe sayde. As oft
as ye do thys thynge do it in mynde of me, Lu.
xxii. Also ye saye as a mā may light many candels
at one candell and the lyghte of that candle
neuer ye more nor neuer the lesse. So ye say
that the manhoode of Christe descendethe into
eche parte of euery hoost, and the manhood of
Christe neuer the more ne leste, where then becōmeth
your ministrations. For yf a mā lyghte
manye candels at one candle as longe as they
brenne there wylbe many candelles lighted and
as well, the laste candle as the fyrste, and so by
thys reason, yf ye shall fetche youre worde at
god, of god make god, there must nedes be manye
goddes and that is forbydden in the fyrste
cōmaūdemēt Exo. xx. And as for makyng more
either makynge lesse of Christes manhoode it
lyeth not in youre power to come there, nyghe,
neyther touche it, for it is ascended into heuen
in a spirituall bodye, Math. xxviii. whyche he
suffred not Mary Magdeleyne to touche, whē
her synnes were forgeuen to her. Therfore all
the sacramentes that he lefte here in earthe be




but myndes of the body of Chryst for a sacrament
is no more to say, but a sygne of mynde
of a thynge passed or a thyng to come, for whē
Iesu spake of the breade and sayde to his disciples
Luke the .xxii. as ye do thys thynge,Luk. xxii do it
in mynde of me, it was set for a mynd of good
thynges passed of Christes body, but when the
Aungel shewed to Iohn Apocalips .xvii.Apo. xvii the sacramentes
of the womā and of the beast that
bare her, it was set for a mynde of euyll thīges
to come, on the face of the death, & great stroyeng
of the people of god. And in the olde lawe
there were many fygures or myndes of thynges
to come. For the body of chryste and circū
                     cision
was demaunded vnto the lawe, and he
that kept not the lawe was slayne. And yet. S
Paule sayeth. Roma. ii. And neyther it is circumcisiō
that is openly in the fleshe but he that
is circumcised of herte in spirite,Roma. ii not the letter
whose perusynge is not of men, but of God.
Peter sayeth the .iii. chapiter.Peter. iii And so baptisme
of lyke forme maketh not vs safe, but the puttynge
awaye of fylthynes of the fleshe, and the
axynge of good conscience in god, by the again
rysynge of our Lorde Iesu Chryst from death
that we shulde be made heyres of euerlastynge
lyfe, he yeade into heauen, and Aungelles and
powers and vertues, bene made subiectes to
hym. And also the scryptures sayeth of Iohan
Baptyste, Mathewe the fyrst chapiter,Math. that he
preached in wyldernes and sayde: a stronger
then I shall come after me, and I am not worthy
to knele downe and vnlace hys shoe, and
yet Chryste layed that he was more then a prophete.Mat. xi.
Esay sayeth the .vi. Chapter. Mathewe
xi. howe maye ye say ye worthy to make his




body and yet your workes bereth wytnes yt ye
be no lesse thē prophetes,Math. xi. for yf ye dyd ye shulde
not teache the people to worshyp the sacramē
                     tes
or myndes of Chryste for Chryste hym self
whiche sacramentes or fygures ben lefull that
god taught them and lefte them vnto vs, as ye
sacryfices other myndes of the olde lawe was
full good as it is wrytten. They that kepe thē
shulde lyue in those,Rom. x. Paule Rom. x. and so the
breede that Chryste brake was lefte to vs for
mynde of thynges passed for the body of Chryste
that we shulde beleue he was a verye man
in kynde as we be as god in vertue, and that
hys manhood was sustayned in fode as ours
be, for saynt Paule sayeth he was very man,
and in habyte he was founde as man. And so
we muste beleue that he was very god and mā
togyther and that he styed vp very god & man
to heauen, and that he shalbe there tyl he come
to deme the world. And yt we maye not se hym
bodely beynge in this lyfe, as it is wryten pe. i.
For he sayeth, whom ye haue not ye loue, in to
whome ye nowe not seynge beleue. And Iohn
sayeth in the fyrst gospell, no mā sawe god no
but the onely begotten sonne that is in the bosome
of the father he hath tolde out. And Ioh
sayeth in his epystle the .iii. chap. Euery man yt
synneth seeth not hym neyther knowe hym, by
what reason then saye ye that be synners that
ye make god, truly this muste nedes be ye worst
synne, to saye that ye make god, and it is the
abhominacion of dyscomforte that is sayde in
Daniel the prophete standynge in the holy place,
he that readeth let hym vnderstande. Also
Luke sayeth .xxii. that Chryst toke the cuppe after
that he had supped & dyd thankes and sayd




This cuppe is the n
                        •
                     we testament in my blood
that shalbe shedde into the remission of synnes
for man, now what say ye, the cuppe which he
sayde is the new testament in my blode, was it
a materiall cuppe in which the wine was that
he gaue hys dysciples wyne of, or was it hys
moost, blessed bodye in which the blessed blood
was kept tyl it were shed out for the synnes of
them that shulde be made safe by his passyon,
nedes we must saye yt he spake of his holy bodye,
as he dyd whē he called hys passion eyther
suffrynge in bodye a cuppe when he prayed to
hys father or he wente to his passion. Math.
xxvi. And sayd yf it be possible yt this cup passe
frō me, but yf thou wylt yt I drynke it thy wyll
be done. He spake not here of the materiall cup
in which he had gyuē hys discyples drynke for
it troubled not him, but he praied for his great
suffraūce & bitter the which he suffred for oure
synnes & not for his. And yf he spake of his holy
body & passyon when he sayd. This cup is ye
newe testament in my blood, so he spake of his
holy bodye, when he sayd this is my body that
shalbe gyuē for you, & not of the material bread
whiche he had in his hande. Also in another
place he calleth his passyon a cuppe, Math. xx.
where the mother of zebedeus sonnes came to
hym, & axed of hym that her two sonnes when
he came to his kyngdome myght syt one of his
ryght syde & one at his left syde. And he answered
& sayd, woman thou wotest not what thou
axest, then he sayde to them, may ye drynke of
the cup that I shal drynke, & they sayd yea lord
And he sayd ye shall drynke of my cuppe, but to
syt on my ryght hande or lefte hande it is not
myne to gyue, but to the father it is proper but




in that that he sayde ye shall drynke of my cup,
he promysed them to suffre tribulacion of this
world as he dyd, by the which they shuld enter
into lyfe euerlastyng, & to be both on his ryght
hāde And thus ye may se yt chryste spake not of
the material cup neyther of hym self nor of his
apostles nether of material bred neyther of material
wine. Therfor let euery mā wisely wt meke
prayers & great study & also charyte read the
wordes of god & holy scryptures, but many of
you be lyke the mother of zebedeus sonnes, to
whom chryst sayd, thou wotest not what thou
axest. So many of you wote not what ye axe
or what ye do, for yf ye dyd, ye wolde not blaspheme
god as ye do, to set an aliē god ī sted of
the lyuynge god. Also Chryst sayeth Iohn. xv.
I am a very vyne / wherfore worshyppe ye not
the vyne for god, as ye do the breade. wherein
was Chryst a verye vyne / or where in was the
breade chrystes bodye, in fyguratyue speache,
whiche is hyd in the vnderstandyng of synners
Then yf Chryste became not a material either
an early vyne, neyther materiall vyne became
the bodye of Chryste. So neyther the bread materiall
breade was not chaunged from his substaunce
to the flesshe and blode of Chryste.
                  Haue ye not reade Iohn the .ii. when Chryste
came into the temple, they axed of hym what
token he wolde shewe, that they myghte beleue
hym. And he answered vnto them, caste downe
this temple and in thre dayes I shall rayre it a
gayne, which wordes were fulfylled in hys rysynge
agayne from deathe, but when he sayde
vndo this temple, in that, that he sayde this,
they were dyscende for they vnderstode it fleshlye,
& had went that he had spoken of the temple




of Ierusalem, for because he stode in it. And
hereof they accused hym at his passyon ful falsely
Math. xxvi. for he spake of the temple of
hys blessed bodye, which rose agayne in the .iii
daye. And ryght so Chryste syake of his holye
bodye when he sayde, thys is my bodye whiche
shalbe gyuen for you. Luke. xxii. which was geuen
to death, and into rysynge agayn to blesse
for all that shalbe saued by hī, but lyke as they
accused hym falsely of the temple of Ierusalē
Ryghte nowe a dayes they accusen falselye agaynste
Chryste and saye that Chryste spake
of the breade that he brake amonges his apostles,
for in that Chryste sayde thys, they
ben deceyued take it flesshly and turne it to the
materiall breade as the Iewes dyd to the temple,
& on this false vnderstandynge they make
abhominacion of dyscomfort that is sayde of
Daniel the prophete .xi. and Math. xxiiii, standynge
in the holy place, he that readeth let him
vnderstande. Nowe therfore praye we hertely
to God that this euyll tyme may be made
shorte, for the chosen men as he hath promysed
in hys blessed gospell Math. xxiiii. And the
large and brode waye that leadeth to perditiō
may be stopped, and the strayte and narowe
waye that leadethe to blesse maye be made open
by holy scryptures, that we maye knowe
which is ye wyll of god to serue hym in syckernes
and holynes in the dreade of
God that we may fynde by
hym a waye of blesse
euerlastynge.
                  So be it.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     ❧The testament
of maister wylliam
Tracie esquier, expounded by Wylliam
Tyndall. Wherin thou shalt perceyue with
what charite the chaunceller of worceter
Burned when he toke vp the deade carcas
and made asshes of it after
it was buried.
                  M.D.xxxv.
               
               
                  ¶To the reader.
                  THou shalt vnderstand moost dere reder
yt after Wyllyam Tyndall was so Iudaslie
betrayed by an Englysemā, a scoler
of Louaine, whose name is Philips
there were certayne thynges of his doyng foūd
whiche he had entēded to haue put forth to the
furtheraunce of godes worde amongest which
was this testamēt of mayster Tracie expoūded
by Wyllyam Tyndall which I haue caused to
be put in Pryute, to the intent that al the worlde
shulde see howe earnestlye the Cannonistes
& spirituall lawyers (which be the chefe rulers
vnder bysshops in euery dioces in somoch that
to euery cathedral church the deane chaūceller &
archdeken at cō
                     
                        ••
                     nlye doctours or bachelers
of lawe) do endeuer them selues iustly to iudge
and spirituallye to gyue sentence accordyng to
charitie vppon all the actes and dedes done of




theyr diosessanes, after the ensāple of the chaū
                     celer
of worceter, whiche after master Tracye
was buryed (of pure zeale and loue hardelye)
toke vp the deed carcas & burnt it wherfore he
dyd it, it shall euidentlye appere to the reder in
this litle treatyse, rede it therfore, I beseche the
and iudge the spirites of our spiritualte, &
pray that the spiryte of him yt raised vp
Chryst, may ones inhabite them, &
mollyfye theyr hartes, and so
illumyne them, that
they may
bothe
se and shewe true lyght, and no longer to
resyste God ner hys truth
Amen.
               
            
            
               
                  The Testament hit selfe.
                  ¶In the name of God Amen.
                  I wylliam Tracie of Codyngtō in the counte
of gloceter esquier, make my testament
& last wyl, as here after folowethe
¶Fyrst, and before al other thyng, I cō
                     myt
me vnto god, and to his mercye, trustynge
without any doute or mystrust, that by his grace
and the merytes of Iesus Chryste, and by
the vertue of his passyon & of his resurre
                        •
                     yō.
I haue & shal haue remissiō of my synnes, & resurrectiō
of bodye & soule, accordynge as it is
wrytē. Iob. xix. I beleue yt my redemerlyueth &
yt in ye last day I shal rise out of ye erth, & ī my
flesse shall se my sauiour, this my hope is layd
vp in my bosome.
                  

                     
And touchynge the wealth of my soule, the
fayth that I haue taken and rehersed, is suffyciēt
(as I suppose) wt out any other mans worke,
or workes, My grounde & my belefe is that
ther is but one god and one mediatour betwene
god & man, which is Iesus chryste So yt I
do excepte none in heauen nor in erth to be my
mediator betwene me and god, but only Iesus
chryst, all other be but peticyoners in receiuyng
of grace, but one able to gyue influence of grace,
And therfore wyll I bestowe no part of my
goodes for that intent yt any man shulde saye
or do, to healpe my soule for therin I trust onelye
to the promyse of god, he that beleueth and
is baptized shalbe saued, & he that beleueth not
shalbe damned, marke the last chapter.
                  And touchynge the buryeng of my body it auayleth
me not what be done therto, where in
saynt Austine de cura agēda pro mortuis saith
that they are rather the solace of, them that lyue
thā, weylthe or comforte of them that are departed,
& therfore I remyt it onelye to the dyscrecyon
of myne executors.
                  And touchynge the distribution of my tē
                     poral
goodes, my purpose is by ye grace of god
to bestow thē to be accepted, as frutes of faith
so yt I do not suppose yt my meryte be, bi good
bestowed of them, but my meryte is that faith
of Iesus Chryst onely, by whiche fayth suche
workes are good accordīg to ye wordes of our
lord, Math. xxv. I was hungry, & thou gaueste
me to eate, & it foloweth, yt ye haue done to the
least of my bretherne ye haue done to me. &c. & euer
we shulde consyder ye trew sentence that a
good work maketh not a good mā, but a good
man maketh a good worke, for fayth makethe




the man booth good and ryghtwyse for a ryghtwyse
mā lyueth by fayth. Rom. i. & what so
euer spryngeth not out of fayth, is synne, Romaynes.
xiiii.
                  And all my tēporal goodes that I haue not
geuynge, or delyuered, or not gyuen by wryting
of myne owne hande berynge the date of thys
present wrytynge I do leaue and gyue to margarete
my wyfe, & to rycharde my sonne which
I make myne executours,
                  
                     wytnes this myne owne
hande, the .x. daye of October, in the .xxii.
yere of the reygne of kyng Henry the .viii.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Tyndall.
                  Now let vs examyne the partes of this Testamēt
sentence by sentence. Fyrst to cōmit our
selues to god aboue all, is the first of all preceptes,
& the fyrst stone in the foundacion of oure
fayth, that is that we beleue and put our trust
in one god, one all true, one almyghty, all good
& all mercyfull, cleuyng fast to his truth: might
mercie, & goodnes, surely sertified & ful perswaded,
that he is our God, ye oures, and to vs all
true, without all falsshed & gyle and cā not fayle
in his promyses. And to vs almyghtye that
hys wyll can not be leat to fulfyll all the truth
that he hath promysed vs, And to vs al good &
all mercyfull what soeuer we haue done, and
howe so euer greuously we haue trespassed so
that we come to hym the way that he hath appoynted,
whiche waye is Iesus Chryst onelye / 
as we shall see foloyngly thys fyrst clause then
is the fyrst commanndement, or at the least the
fyrst sentence in the fyrst commaūdement and
the fyrste artycle of our crede.
                  

                     
And that thys trust & confidence in the mercy
of God is thorow Iesu Chryst, is the secōde
article of oure crede confirmed & testifyed thorowe
out al scrypture, That Chryst brīgeth vs
into thys grace. Paule proueth. Rom. v. sayng
Iustifyed by fayth we are at peace wyth God
thorow Iesus Chryst our Lord, by whom we
haue in ētring in vnto this grace in which we
stand, & Ephe iii, By whome sayeth Paule we
haue a blode entryng in, thorow the fayth yt is
in hym, & ī the secōd of ye sayd Epistle, By him
we haue an entryng in vnto the father, & a lytle
before in the same chapter, he is our peace.
And Iohan in the first chapter, Behold the Lā
                     be
of god whiche takethe awaye the synne of
the worlde, whiche synne was the busshe that
stoped the entrynge in, & kepte vs out, and the
swerde wherwith was kept the entryng vnto
the tre of lyfe from Adam & all his ofsprynge.
                  And that the second of the firste of Peter whiche
bare our synnes in his bodye, and by whose
stryppes we are made hole. By whome we
haue redemptyon thorowe his bloode euen the
forgyuenes of our synnes Collos. i. & Ephes. i.
And Roma. iiii, He was delyuered for our synnes
and rose agayne for our iustifyeng.
                  And concernynge the resurrectyō, it is an article
of our fayth: and proued there sufficiētlye
and that it shall be by the power of Chryste, is
also the open scrypture.
                  Iohn. vi. This is the wyll of my father which
sent me that I lose nothynge of al that he hath
geuen me, but that I rayse it vp agayne in the
last day. & agayne I am the resurrectiō Ihō. xi
That this lyue fayth is sufficiēt to iustificatiō



                     
with oute addynge to of anye more helpe, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
this wyse proued the ꝓmyser is god of whome
Paule sayth. Rom. viii. Yf god be on our syde
what matter maketh it who be agaynst vs he
is therto al good, al mercifull, at true & al myghte,
wherfore sufficiēt to be beleued by his othe,
more ouer Chryst in whom the promes is made
hath receyued all power in heuen and in earth
Mat. the laste.
                  He hath also a perpetuall presthode, & therfore
able perpetually to saue. Heb. vii.
                  And that there is but one mediator Chryste is
Paule. i. ad Timothe. ii. And by that woorde
vnderstande an attonemaker, a peace maker &
bringer in to grace & fauour, hauyng ful power
so to do. And that Chryst is so, is proued at the
full. It is wryttē Ihon. iii. The father loueth
the sonne, and hath gyuen all in to his hande.
                  And he that beleueth the sonne hathe euerlastynge
lyfe, & he that beleueth not the sonne shall
not se lyfe, but the wrath of god byndethe vpō
hym. All thinges are gyuē me of my father Luke.
x: And all whoso euer cal on the name of the
Lorde shalbe saued. Act. ii. Of his fulnes haue
we all receiued Ihon. i. There is no nother mā
in which we muste be saued. Actes. iiii. And agayne,
vnto his name beare al the prophetes recorde,
that by his name shall all that beleue in
him receaue remissiō Actes. x, In hym dwelleth
al the fulnes of god bodely. Coll. ii. Al what so
euer my father hath are myne, Io. xvi. what so
euer ye axe in my name. yt wyl I do for you Io
xiiii. One lord, one faith, one baptyme, one god
and father of all which is aboue all thorow al
& in you al Eph. iiii. Ther is but one whose seruant




I am, to do his wyll. But one yt shal paye
me my wages: there is but one to whom I am
bonde, ergo but one that hathe power ouer me
to damne or saue me, I wyll adde to this Paules
argument Galat. iii. God sware vnto Abraam
.cccc. yere before the lawe was geuen, that
we shulde be saued by Chryste: Ergo the lawe
geuen .cccc. yeres after canne not dysanull that
couenaunte, So dispute I Christ when he had
suffered his passyon, and was rysen agayne &
entred in to his glorye, was sufficient for hys
apostles, without anye other meane or helpe,
ergo the holynes of no saynte sence hath dimynisshed
ought of that his power. But that he
is as full sufficyent now, for the promes is as
deaply made in vs as them, Moreouer the tresure
of his mercye was layde vp in Chryst for
all that shulde beleue, yet the worlde was made
ergo nothynge that hath happened sence hath
chaūged the purpose of the in vnuariable god
                  Moreouer to exclude the blynde imagination
falsely called fayth, of them that gyue them
selues to vice with out resistence, affirminge, yt
they haue no power to do otherwyse, but that
God hath so made them, and therfore must saue
them, they not entendynge or purposyng to
mende theyr lyuynge, but synnynge with hole
consent and ful lust, he declareth what fayth he
meaneth. ii. maner of wayes: Fyrste by that he
sayth, who so euer beleueth & is baptised, shalbe
saued, By whiche wordes he declareth euydently,
that he meaneth that fayth, that is in ye
promes made vpō the apoyntmēt betwene god
and vs, that we shulde kepe his lawe to the vttermost
of our power, yt is he that beleueth in
Chryst for ye remissiō of synne, & is baptized to




do the wyl of Chryst, & to kepe his law, of loue
& to mortyfie the fleshe, that mā shalbe saued, &
so is the imaginaciō of these swyne yt wyll not
leaue wallowynge theym selues in euerye myre
& podell, cleane excluded, for God neuer made
ꝓmes but apō an appoyntmēt or couenant vnder
which who soeuer wyl not come can be no
partaker of the ꝓmes. True fayth in chryst gyueth
power to loue ye law of god: for it is writtē
Ihā ye fyrst, he gaue thē power to be ye sōnes
of god in that they beleue in his name Now to
be ye son of god, is to loue ryghteousnes, & hate
vnryghtwisnes & so to be lyke thy father. Hast
thou then no power to loue ye lawe? so hast yu
no fayth in Chrystes bloude. And Ro. iii. we set
vp or maynteyne the lawe thorowe fayth why
so for the preachynge of faythe ministrethe the
spirite, Galat, iii. & .ii. Cor. iii. & the spirite lowseth
the bandes of Sathā, & gyuethe power to
loue the lawe, and also to do it.
                  For sayth Paule. Rom. viii. yf the spirite of
him that raysed vp Iesus dwell in you, then
wyl he that reared vp Iesus quicken your mortall
bodyes by the meanes of his spirite dwelynge
in you.
                  A well wylt thou say, yf I must professe the
lawe and woorke, ergo fayth alone sauethe me
not. Be not deceyued with sophistrye, but withdrawe 
thyne eares from wordes and cōsider ye
thyng in thine hart. Faith iustifieth the yt is brī
                     geth
remissiō of all synnes, & setteth the in the
state of grace before al workes & getteth ye power
to worke yer yu coudest worke, but yf thou
wylt not go backe agayne, but continewe ī grace
& come to ye saluaciō & glorious resurrectiō
of christ yu must work & ioyne works to thy fayth
in wyll & dede




to, yf thou haue tyme & leasure, & as oft as
thou fallest set the on thy saythe agayne wythoute
healpe of workes. And all thoughe when
thou arte reconcyled and restored to grace workes
be requyred yet is not that reconsylynge
and grace the benefyte of the workes that folowe:
but cleane contrarye that forgeuenes of
the synnes and restorynge to fauoure deserue
the workes that folow. Though whē the kyng
(after that sentence of deethe is geuen vpon a
murtherar) hath pardoned hym, at the request
of some of hys frendes, woorkes be requyred
of hym that he hence forthe kepe the kynges lawes,
yf he wyll continue in hys graces fauour
in whyche he now standeth, yet the benefite of
hys lyfe procedeth not of the deseruinge of the
workes that folow, but of the kinges goodnes
and fauour of hys frendes, ye & that benefite &
gyft of his lyfe deserue the workes that folow
Though the father chastice the chylde, yet is ye
chylde no lesse bownd to obeye, & to do the wyl
of the father, yf when the father pardoneth it,
the workes that folow deserue the fauour, thā
must the worke that folowed the correction haue
deserued fauour also. And than was the father
vnrigtwyse to chastice hit. All what soeuer
thou art able to do, to please God wyth all
is thy dutye to doo, thoughe thou haddeste neuer
synned, yf it be the dutye how cā it than be
the deseruyng of the mercy & grace that wēt before?
Nowe that mercy, was ye benefite of god
thy father thorow ye deseruīg of the lord christ
which hath bowght ye wt ye prise of his bloud.
                  And agayne when he sayethe yt he purposeth
to bestow his good, to be accepted as frutes of
faith it is euident that he meaneth that liuinge




fayth whych professeth the law of god, & is the
mother of all good workes, ye & nursse therto.
                  Another cauillation whych they myght make
in the seconde parte, where he admitteth no
nother mediatour but Christ only, nor wyl geue
of his goodes, to bynd any man to any fained
obseruance for the healp of his soule, whē
he were hole in the kyngdome of Christ cleane
delyuered both body and soule from the dominion
of Satan (as the scripture testifiethe all
that dye in Christe to be) is this, they wyll say,
that he helde that none shuld pray for him saue
Christ, and that we be not bounde to pray one
for another, ner ought to desyre the prayers of
another man, that he excludeth, in that he saith
all other be but peticioners. By which wordes
he plainly cōfesseth that other may & ought for
to praye, and that we maye and oughte to desyre
other to pray, for vs: but meaneth that we
may not put oure trust and confidence in theyr
prayer, as though they gaue of thē selues that
whiche they desyre for vs in theyr peticions, &
so geue thē the thākes and ascribe to their mercies
that which is geuen vs in the name of our
master Christ, at the deseruinges of his bloud.
Christ is my lorde, and hath deserued and also
obtayned power to geue me al that can be desyred
for me. And all other desyre for me: that is
desyred in Christes name & geuē at the merytes
of hys bloude. All the honoure than, trust, cōfydence,
and thankes, perteyne to hym also.
                  Some wyll haplye saye, howe shulde I desyre
another to pray for me, & not trust to his praier

                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     ly euen as I desire my neyghbur to helpe
me at my nede, and yet trust not to hym, Christ
hath commanded vs to loue eche other. Nowe




I wyl go to desyre helpe, I put my trust in god
and complayne to god fyrst, and say, Loo father
I go to my brother, to axe helpe in thy name,
prepare the harte of hym ageynst I come yt
he may pitie me and helpe me for thy sake. &c.
Now yf my brother remembre his dutye & helpe
me, I receyue hit of god and gyue god the
thankes which moued the herte of my brother
and gaue my brother a corage to helpe me and
wherwith to do it, and so hath holp me by my
brother. And I loue my brother agane and say
Loo father, I went to my brother, in thy name
and he hath holpe me for thy sake: wherfore O
father be thou as mercyfull to hym at his nede
as he hath bene to me for thy sake, at my nede
Lo nowe as my brother dyd his dutye whā he
holpe me, so do I my duety whan I praye for
hym agayne: and as I myght not haue put my
trust and confydence in my brothers helpe, so
may he not in my prayers. I am sure that god
wyll helpe me by his promes, but am not sure
that my brother wyl helpe me, though it be his
dutye: so am I sure that god wyll heare me
whatsoeuer I axe in Christes name by his promes,
but am not suer that my brother wyl praye
for me, or that he hath a good hert to god.
                  No but the sayntes of heauen can not but
pray & be harde, no more can the sayntes in erth,
but praye and be hearde neyther. Moyses
Samuell, Dauid, Noye, Elyas, Elizeus, Esaias,
Daniell, and all the Prophetes prayed &
were hearde: yet was none of those wycked yt
wolde nat put theyr trust in god, accordyng to
theyr doctryne & preachynge partaker of theyr
prayers in the ende. And as damnable as it is
for the pore to trust in the ryches of the ryches




apon erth, so damnable is it also to leaue ye couenaunt
made in Christes bloude. and to truste
in the sayntes of heauen They that be in heauen
Knowe the elect that truste in Christes bloude
and professe the lawe of god and for thē
onely praye & these wycked Idolyters whiche
haue no truste in the couenante of god ner serue
god in the spirite ner in the gospell of Christes
bloude. but after their blynde Imaginacyon
chosynge thē euery man a sundrye sainct to
be theyr mediatour, to trust to, and to be saued
by theyr merites, do the saintes abhore and belye.
And theyr prayers and offerynges, ar to ye
saintes as acceptable and pleasant, as was ye
prayer and ye offerynge of Simon Magus to
Peter. Act. viii.
                  More ouer the saintes in theyr mooste combraunce
are most conforted and most able to cō
                     fort
other, as Paule testifieth .i Corin. In so
moch yt S. Steuē. & S. Iames prayed for thē yt
slewe them Saynt Martyne preached and cō
                     forted
his, desperate bretherne euen vnto the
laste breath, and lykewyse as stories make mē
                     tion)
did innumerable mo, ye and I haue knowen
of symple vnlerned persones and that of
some that were greate synners whiche at the
houre of death haue fallen flat of the bloude of
Christ, and geuen no rowme to other menns ether
prayers or preachinges: but haue as stronglye
trusted in Christes blode, as euer did Peter
or Paule, and haue therto preached it to other,
and exhorted other so myghtelye that an
angell of heuen coude not minde thē, who then
shulde resiste God that he myghte not geue the
same grace to master Tracye, whych was alerned
man, & better sene in the workes of Saīcte




Austen .xx. yere before he dyed thā euer I knew
doctoure in England, but that he must thā faīe
and shrincke, whē most neade is to be strong, &
feare the popes purgatorye and trust to ye prayer
of Pristes derely payd for I dare saye that
he prayed for ye pristes when he dyed, that god
wolde conuert a great meny of them, and if he
had knowen of any good man among them yt
had neded, he wolde haue geuen, and yf he had
knowen of any lacke of Pristes he wold haue
geuen to mayntayne moo: But now sence there
be moo then I nowe, & haue more thē euerye
man a sufficient lyuyng, how shuld he haue geuē
thē but to here their praiers of pure mistrust
in chrystes blod? if robbing of wydous houses
vnder pretence of longe prayers be dānable)
Matthe. xxiii. Then is it damnaple also for wydoowes
to suffer theym selues to be robbed by
the longe pattrynge of hypocrites, thorow my
truste in Christes bloude: ye & is it not damnable
to mayntene such abhominaciō? Nowe whan
this dānacion is spred ouer al, how cā we
geue thē that haue ynoughe alredy, or how can
they yt haue ynoughe alredy take more vnder ye
name of prayenge & not hardē the people more
in this damnable damnacion.
                  And cōcerning ye burienge of his bodye he allegeth
S. Austen, nether is ther any man (thynke
I (so mad to affyrme yt ye outward pompe of ye
body shuld helpe ye soule, More ouer what greatter
signe of infedilite is there, thē to care al ye
tyme of deth 
                        〈◊〉
                      what pōpe ye carkas shalbe caried
to ye graue
                        •
                      He denieth not but yt a christen
mā shuld be honorably buryed namelye for the
honour & hope of ye resuerectiō & therfore cōmitted
that care to his deare executours hys sone &




his wyfe, whiche he wyst wolde in that parte
do sufficient, and leue nothinge of the vse of ye
contre vndone, but the abuse.
                  And that bestowynge of a great parte of his
goodes which he yet leued, apon the pore, to be
thanckful for ye mercie receued, wt out bying &
sellynge wt God, yt is, wtout bynding those pore
vnto any other appoynted prayers thā god
hath bound vs alredy, one to praye for another
one to help another, as he hath helped vs, but
patientlye addynge for the blessynges that god
hath appointed vnto all manner good workes
trustynge faithfully to his promes, thankinge
as ye may se by his wordes, the bloude of Christe
for the reward promised to his workes and
not the goodnes of the workes as thoughe he
had done more then his dutie, or all that: And
assygned by wrytinge vnto whome another
parte shulde be distributed, and geuinge the
rest to his executours, that no stryfe shulde be,
whiche executours wher by ryght the heyres of
all that was lefte to thē: These thynges I saye
are signes euident not onely of a good Christē
man, but also of a perfecte Christen man, and
of suche a one as neded not to be agast and desperaet
for feare of the paynful paynes of purgatorye,
which who so fearith as they faine it
can not but vtterly abhorre deeth: seynge that
Christe is there no longer thy Lorde, after he
hath brought the thither, but art excluded from
his satisfaction, and muste satisfye for thy selfe
alone, and that with sufferinge payne onlye
or ellys taryenge the satisfienge of them that
shall neuer satisfie ynoughe for them selues or
gapinge for the popes pardons, which haue to
great dowers & dangers, what in the mynde &




entēt of the graunter, & what in the purchases,
yet they can be treuly obteyned with al due cyrcūstances,
& moch les certitude yt they haue any
autoryte at all Paule trusted to be dissolued
and to be wyth Chryst: Steuen desyred Chryst
to take his spirite the prophetes desired god to
take their soules from them and al the saynctes
went wyth a lustye corage to deeth nether
fearynge or teachyng vs to feare any such crudelyte.
where hath the churche then gotten authorytye
to bynde vs from beyng so perfyte frō
hauyng any such fayth in the goodnes of god
oure Father and Lorde Chryste, and to make
suche perfytnes and fayth of al heresies the
greatest.
                  Salomon sayth in the .xxx. of his Prouerbes
iii. are insaciable and the forth sayth neuer, It
is ynough. But there is a fyft called dame auaryce,
wyth as greadye a gut, as meltyng a mawe, as
wyd a throte, as gapyng a mouth, and
wyth as reauenyng teeth as the best which the
more she eateth the hūgryer she is An vnquyet
euyll neuer at rest a blynde monster and a surmysyng
beest, fearynge at the fal of euery leafe
Quid nō īmortalia, pectora cogis, aurifacta fames?
what doth not ye holy hongur compel thē
that loue thys world inordinatly, to commytte
might that deuyls belye be once ful, trueth shulde
haue audience, and wordes be construed a
ryght, and taken in the same sence as they be
ment.
                  Thowghe hit seme not impossible haplye yt
there myght be a place, where the soules myghte
be kept for a space, to be taught & instruct:
yet that ther shuld be such a Iayle as they Iangle.
& soch fa
                        ••
                     ons as they fayne is playne impossible




& repugnant to ye scripture: for when a
man is translated vtterly, oute of ye kyndome
of Satan, & so confyrmed in grace that he can
not synne, so burnynge in loue that his lust cā
not be plucked from goddes wyl, & beynge partaker
which vs of al the promises of God & vnder
the commaundementes: what coude be denyed
hym in that depe innocencie of his moost
kynde father, yt hath leaft no mercy vnpromysed,
& aringe it therto in the name of his son Iesus,
the chylde of his hertis lust, which is oure
lorde & hath lefe no mercye vndeserued for vs?
namely whan god hathe sworne that he wyll
put of ryghtwisnes, & be to vs a father, & that
of all mercye, and hath slayne hys mooste dere
sonne Iesus to confyrme his oth.
                  Fynally seynge that Chrystes loue taketh all
to the best, & nothyng is here that maye not be
well vnderstanded, (the cyrcūstaunces declarynge
in what sence al was ment (they oughte
to haue interpreted hit charytablye, yf oughte
had bene founde doutfull or semynge to son̄
                     de
amysse Moreouer yf any thyng hed bene theryn
that coude not haue be taken wel yet theyr
parte had bene to haue interprete it as spoken
of, ydelnesse of the heed, by the reason of syckenesse,
for as much as the man was vertuus wise,
& well lerned, & of good fame, and reporte,
& founde in the fayth whyle he was a lyue, but
if they saye he was suspect whan he was a lyue,
then is their doyng so moche the worsse, and
to be thought that they fear hys doctrine whā
he was a lyue & mystrusted their awne part, their
consciences testyfyenge to them that beheld
no nother doctrine then that was true seynge
then they nether spake ner wrote agaynste hym




ner brought hym to any examynacyon. Besyde
that some mery felowes wyl thynke, that they
owght first to haue sent to hym to wyt whethrer
he wold haue reuoked, yet they had so dispytefully
burnt the deed bodye that coude not answere
for it selfe, nor interprete hys wordys,
how he ment them, namely the mā beyng of so
worshypfull & auncient a bloude. But here wyll
I make an ende desyryng the reader to loke on
thys thynge wyth indyferent eyes, & iuge whether
I haue expounded the wordes of thys Testamēt
as they should seame to signify, or not
Iuge also whether ye maker therof seame not
by his worke both vertuous & glory: which if it
so be thynke not yt he was the worsse bycause ye
deede body was burnt to asshes, but rather lerne
to know the great desyre that hypocrytes haue
to fynde one craft or other to dase ye trueth
wyth, and cause hit to be counted for heresye of
the simple & vnlerned people which are so ignoraunt
that they can not spye their sotteltye, hit
must neades be heresye that towcheth any thinge
their ratten byle they wyl haue hit who so euer
saye nay onely the eternal god must be prayed
to nyght & day to amend them in whose power
it onely lyeth, who also graunt them ones
ernestlye to truste his true doctrine conteyned
in the swete & pure foūtaines of his scriptures
and in his pathes to direct
their wayes.
                  Amen
                  ¶Here endeth the Exposicion of wyllyam Tyndall.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Inprynted at Norenburch, 1546.
            
         
      
   