
      
         
            
            
            ¶An expoſition vppon
the Booke of the Canticles, otherwiſe
called Schelomons
Song.
            ¶PVBLISHED FOR
the edification of the
Church of God.
By T. VV.
            
               AT LONDON;
Printed for Thomas Man.
Anno. 1585.
         
         
            
            
            ¶TO THE RIGHT
worſhipfull and his very good friendes
in Chriſt, Sir Iohn Brockette and Sir Iohn Cuttes
Knights, and M. Charles Moriſon Eſquire,
T. VV. vviſheth continuance and increaſe in
that ſtate, vvhich hath the promiſe of this
life and of that that is to come,
thorovv Chriſt.
            
               I Sende vnto youre
worſhips, ſome few
lines and leaues of
mine, long agoe
written vppon the
Canticles of Solomon,
for the deareſt
friende that I had
amongſt men, whil
he was liuing vpon
earth: and lately publiſhed, for the profite of
Gods people, at the earneſt requeſt of ſome
of my very Godly friendes. For mine owne
part I was vtterlye purpoſed, either to haue
buryed the same (as diuers other things that
I haue writtē vpon other books of holy ſcripture)
in perpetuall darknes, that they ſhoulde

neuer haue beheld the light of this ſunne, or
els to haue ſuffered them to periſh amongeſt
wormes & moaths, as the common prouerb
is. Wherevnto I was the rather ledde, not
for want of good will to benefite the church
of Chriſt, (all whoſe cauſes and euerye one of
them, ſhal thorow Gods goodnes be ſo deare
vnto me, as mine owne life) but partly by reaſon
of the great ſinne and inſufficiencie, that
I find in my ſelfe, to perfourme that dutye in
action, wherevnto in affection I will alwayes
be readye, and partlye alſo by reaſon of the
great learning and light, that God hath beſtowed
vppon this laſt age of the worlde, but
moſt eſpecially by reaſon, of that wonderfull
waywardnes, and curiouſneſſe, that I ſee the
ſpirites of ſundrye men to be poſſeſſed withall,
whom nothing can pleaſe, but that which
they them ſelues affect. For if a man bring
new thinges, they are diſcontented, for that
men walke not in former antiquity. And if a
man, tread in the ſteps of the auncient, their
ſtomackes loath it, & they count it coleworts
twiſe ſodde. And yet theſe men that are ſo
diuerſly conceited, hatch or bring foorth nothing
of their owne, either new or olde. For
mine owne part I will not denye, but that in
this poore worke that I now publiſhe, I haue
beene greatlye holpen, by the light of other
mens workes vpon the ſame booke, both old

and new writers I mean: But moſt of all furthered
therein by the writings of men, thogh
of late, yet of worthy memorie, who hauing
receiued more knowledge in tongs, & more
light in the word, by reading, hearing, conference,
and meditation therein, haue more
ſoundlye interpreted the ſame, than ſuch as
went before them in the fleſhe. And yet
I haue not ſo ſworne, into all their wordes,
but that vppon reaſon, I hope I maye both in
tranſlation and ſenſe now & then with their
good leaue ſwarue from them. Whatſoeuer it
be let the church iudge, and take it I beſeech
your worſhips, into your hands frō the hands
of him, that wiſheth you all and euery one of
you, al good in Chriſt. In the penning whereof
I can ſimplye confeſſe, that I haue neither
ſought gaine nor glorye to my ſelfe, but in all
ſimplicity and ſhortnes after my maner, labored
to come to the true meaning of the holy
Ghoſt, and the obſeruation of ſuch neceſſary
doctrines, as the Lorde made mee able to ſee
for the time. The courſe that I haue taken
therin, is plaine and profitable if I be not deceiued.
Firſt connecting the chap. togeather,
then diuiding them into their ſeuerall partes
and portions, afterwardes giuing the ſenſe of
them verſe by verſe, and laſtly obſeruing ſuch
doctrines, as moſt fitlye agree with the place.
If any man ſee more or better, I pray him, not

only not to contemn this that is, which is but
to publiſh that which maye more edifie. And
as for your worſhips, I beſeech you to accept
it, as at the hands of one that doth vnfainedly
both loue & reuerence you all in the truth,
and for the truth. And ſith it principallye intreteth
of the church, let it be a whetſtone to
ad an edge to your care & loue, for the church
& the cauſes therof: and the rather becauſe of
the practiſes of the wicked againſt it, both at
home & abroad, that ſith they doe what they
can to vndermine it, thogh it be to their iuſt
condemnation, you maye doe your vttermoſt
to the vpholding of it, ſith in the peace & floriſhing
eſtate thereof, ſtandeth the glorye of
God, & the good & quiet ſtate of the whole
land, & euery particular ſound member therof.
Chriſt Ieſus the onely head of the church,
encourage your heartes and ſtrengthen your
handes, to minde, ſpeake and do thoſe things
that may tend to his glorye, and the good of
his people, and be anſwearable to the places
wherein he hath put you, in the cōmonwelth,
that when the dayes of your diſſolution ſhall
drawe nigh, you maye in the teſtimonye of a
good hart, feel to your comforts, the aſſured
and vnmoueable hope of the heauenly inheritance.
            
               London the 25 of this Maie. 1585.
               
               Your vvorſhips alvvayes ready and bounden in
Chriſt Ieſus, T. VV. the Lords vnvvorthy.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               CAP. 1. and the ſumme thereof.
               
                  1. The Church being carryed away with the
deſire of the Bridegrome, deſireth to be
imbraced of him. 2. She commendeth
his ſweet ſauouring name, 3. And voweth
that ſhe wil praiſe it. 4. She purgeth
her ſelfe from her vnworthineſſe. 5. 6.
And calleth vppon the bridegrome. 7.
Whom the Bridegome inſtructing, hee
beautifieth with deedes and promiſes. 8.
Wherfore reioyſing between themſelues,
they commend and praiſe one the other.
               
               
                  
                     1 
                           A
                         Song of Songs, which is Schelamons.
                     2 Let him kiſſe me, with the kiſſes
of his mouth: for thy loues
are good before wine.
                     3 To ſmell to, thy oyntmentes
are best, thy name ſpread abroad is as oyntment
therefore thy Damſelles loue thee.
                     4 Drawe mee, wee will runne after thee: when the
King him ſelfe ſhall haue brought me into his
inner Chambers, we will reioyce and be glad in
thee, we will rehearſe thy loue before Wine:

ſuche as loue thee ſhall ſpeake of righteous
thinges.
                     5 Blacke I may bee, yet comely am I, O daughters
of Ieruſalem: I may bee like to the tentes
of Kedar, but I am like to them that dwell vnder
Schelomons tapiſtry.
                     6 Looke not vpon me, becauſe I am ſomwhat black,
becauſe the ſunne hath behelde mee, becauſe
the ſonnes of my mother kindled with
wrath against me, haue appointed mee the keper
of other vineyards, becauſe I haue not kept
to my ſelfe mine owne Ʋine.
                     7 Shew me, O thou whome my ſoule loueth, where
thou feedeſt, where thou careſt, that the flocke
may lye down at noone tide: for why ſhould I be,
as one that ſpreadeth the tent, among the flockes
of thy companions?
                     8 Seeing thou knoweſt not, O thou the faireſt of
women, go out, follow not the ſteps of that flock,
and feede thy kiddes, aboue the Tents of other
ſhepheards.
                     9 I do compare thee, O my loue, to the troupe of
horſes, that are ioyned to Pharaohs chariots.
                     10 Thy cheekes are comely, as it were with rowes of
ſtones: thy necke, as it were with collers.
                     11 Wee will make for thee borders of golde, with
ſtuddes of ſiluer.
                     12 In the mean while that the king is at his repaſt,
he ſendeth out his ſauour of mard.
                     13 My beloued is vnto me, as a bundle of myrre,

remayning between my breaſts.
                     14 My beloued is vnto me, as a berry of the Cypres
tree, in the Ʋineyards of Engedi.
                     15 Behold thou art fayre, my loue, beholde thou art
fayre: thine eyes be like the doues eies.
                     16 Behold thee, thou art fayre, O my beloued, yea
thou art pleaſaunt, yea, our bed is greene.
                     17 The beams of our houſes, are of Ceder trees, our
walking places are of wood like Cypres.
                  
               
               
                  
An expoſition vpon the Canticles, otherwiſe
called Schelomons ſong.
               
                  BEfore wee come to open this
booke, ſomething would ve marked
touching the obſcuritie and
hardneſſe therof, whereof I ſuppoſe
a duble reaſon may be yeelded.
The one is the ſodaine
chaunge of the number, tenſe, and perſonne, as
now ſpeaking ſingularly, then plurally, now in
the preſent time, anone in the time to come, now
in the perſon of the Bride, and anone in the perſon
of the Bridegrome, or ſome other. The other
is, for that in parables and darke ſpeeches, there
is expreſſed vnto vs, verye diuine and heauenlye
matter, the holy Ghoſt vſing this maner of ſpeaking,
not onelye that the eyes of the wicked
might be ſtopped from beholding ſpiritual comfort:
but alſo that the good might know, that
whatſoeuer light they haue, they haue it from
him, (for both which ſee, Math. 13, ver. 11. 12.
13. &c) and alſo that they might imploy all the
vnderſtanding they haue, to the comprehending
of theſe, though darke, yet very excellent miſteries.
Letting paſſe all neceſſities, either of the
Iewiſh Rabbinnes, or of the old expoſitors, and
namelye of Origen, wee will content our ſelues

with a plaine and ſimple ſence of this Booke,
wherin Schelomon being the holy ghoſtes inſtrument,
doth liuely declare, the marter and maner
of mariage, which is betwixt Chriſte and his
Church, ſomtimes ſetting out the ſpeeches that
paſſe betweene them, making as it were thereby,
the betrothment, otherwhiles declaring, the
mutuall duties one of them towardes an other,
but ſpecially that ſame great loue of the Bridegrome
to his ſpouſe, which is neuer remooued,
but alwayes abideth conſtant, how oft ſoeuer
ſhee fall awaye, and ſeeme, as a man would ſaye,
to forſake her huſband. If any think this kinde
of dealing, to be ouerlight for ſo graue, & weighty
a matter, let them take heed that in the height
of their owne hartes, they doe not ouer prowdly
cenſure God and his order, who in many places
vſeth this ſimilitude or parable of mariage, to
expreſſe his loue to his Church by, and the dutie
of the Church towardes him: one or two places
ſhal ſerue, as Hoſchea. 2. 19. I will mary thee
vnto me for euer, yea, I will marry thee vnto
me in righteouſnes, &c. Alſo, 2. Cor. 11. 2. I
haue prepared you for one husbande to preſēnt
you, as a pure virgin to Chriſt. And that
by this meanes Chriſtes loue is expreſſed towardes
his Church, maye appeare, Epheſ. 5. 25.
Husbandes, loue your wiues, euen as Chriſt
loued the Church. And the obedience of the
Church to Chriſte, is declared in the ſame chapter.

ver. 22. 23. 24. Concerning the time when
this Booke ſhould be written, nothing can bee
ſayde of certainty out of the ſcriptures. Wiherfore
leauing coniecturall geſſes, let vs cleaue to
the certeinty, Gods ſpirite hath penned it, and
by the prouidence of our almighty God it hath
beene eſteemed in all times, to the end that we,
vpon whō the ends of the world are come, might
reap and receiue profit and comfort thereby: and
yet ſee ſomewhat thereof hereafter.
               1 This firſt Chapter I doe deuide into three
partes. The firſt comprehendeth the tytle
or inſcription of the worke, together with
the authors name, & this is in the firſt verſ.
               2 The ſeconde ſetteth out the wiſhes of the
Church, derſiing effectuallye to be ioyned
with her head and ſpouſe Chriſt. And this
is from verſe 2. to the end of the 7.
               3 And the third conteineth Chriſts ready offering
of himſelf to his church, with a mutual
cōmendation one of an other: vz. of Chriſt &
his Church, from ver. 8. to the end of ye chap.
               
                  Verſe 1. A ſong of ſonges
                  ) That is to ſay, a moſt
excellent and notable ſong. For by dubbling of
the wordes, the Scripture vſeth, if it ſpeake of
good thinges, to vnderſtande moſte excellent
thinges: as Deut. 10. 17. The Lord your God
is God of Gods, and Lord of Lordes. That is
to ſay, moſt high Lord and God. Whereas if it
ſpeake of baſe thinges, it doth then on the other

ſide by dubbling, debaſe them as much, as Gen.
9. 25. It is ſayd of Ham, A ſeruant of ſeruants
ſhall he be. That is to ſay, a moſt vile ſlaue or
ſeruaunt. Which is Salomons) That is to ſaye,
which Salomon made: putting the time preſent
for the time paſt. And this is the generall title
of the whole Booke, and conteineth as a man
would ſay, not onelye the writers name, but the
verye chiefe matter, it beeing a moſte excellent
mariage ſong, as you would ſay, beeween Chriſt
and his church. That Solomon ment, not onely
to ſet out his match with Pharoas daughter
if which you may ſee, Pſal. 45. thorow out, but
alſo to aſcend on high, vz. to the ſpirituall marriage,
betweene Chriſt and his church, I take it
to be ouer plaine, then needeeh to be ſtood vpon.
               
                  Verſe. 2. Let him kiſſe me
                  ) The Church deſireth,
the vnfained loue and continuall preſence
of Chriſt. For kiſſing in old time was vſed, as a
teſtimony of loue. ſee Geneſ. 31. 28. Geneſ. 45.
15. Luke. 7. 45. 2. Cor. 13. 12. So that he putteth
the ſigne of the thing for the thing it ſelfe. With
the kiſſes of his mouth.) The church meaneth by
kiſes in the plurall number the aboundaunce
am continuaunce of his loue, and by the worde
his mouth, his preſence: euen as it is ioyfull to
parties affiaunced, not onelye to ſee one an other,
but alſo to continue togeather. And in this
part of the verſe is contained the churches wiſh:
in the nexte part is declared the reaſon of her

wiſh) for thy loues are good: By Loues ſhee meaneth
fauour and liking of her: and ſhe ſpeaketh
thereof in the plurall number, both to ſet out the
plentifulneſſe of the ſame in Chriſte, and to declare
alſo what great comfort ſhe did conceiue,
by the aboundance thereof: and by good, ſhe meaneth
profitable, ſweete, pleaſant, and as it were
ful of ſaluation vnto her: and marke the ſoudaine
change of the perſon: for heere the Church ſpeaketh
of Chriſt in the ſecond perſon, whereas before
ſhee had ſpoken of him in the third. Before
Wine, that is to ſay, if they are better then
Wine: if they may be compared therewith: that
men had Wine in great account, and took it as a
ſingular bleſſing from God, may appeare Pſa.
4. 7. But by wine heere he meaneth, a very fine,
ſumptuous, and wel furniſhed feaſt, a part of the
feaſt, or ſome of the thinges vſed in the feaſt for
the feaſt it ſelfe: ſee Heſter. 5. 6. Prou, 21. 17.
Eccleſ. 2. 3.
               
                  Verſ. 3. To ſmell to thy Oyntmentes are bef▪
                     
                  )
The Church commendeth Chriſt for the great
and wonderfull graces in him, declaring that
he was in that reſpect moſte ſweete and ſauo
                     •
                  y,
yea, more excellent then all oyntments. This is
vſuall by oyntmentes or annoynting to ſignify
Gods graces, and benefites, they being ſygnes
thereof, put to the thing it ſelfe: as, 1. Ioh. 2. 20.
Pſalm. 133. 2 Thy name ſprade abroade (that is
to ſay, thy fame, glory, and renoun, made know
                     •
                  
                  
in the world by many meanes: but cheefely by
thy word, is as oyntment, that is to ſay, pretious
in reſpect of it ſelfe, and profitable in reſpect of
others, ſee Eccleſiaſtes. 7. 
                     •
                  . For hee ſpeaketh
as I take it, of oyntmentes powred out of one
Veſſell into another, or vſed about men for diuers
reſpectes, the profite and pleaſure whereof,
commeth not vnto them ſelues onely, but to
other) Therefore the Damſelles loue thee.) By
Damſelles or Virgines, the Church meaneth her
freendes and welwillers, ſuch as were and are
particular Congregations: who are alſo called
Damſelles, and 
                     Ʋirgins, becauſe their conuerſation
was pure, and their heartes right as
thoſe are ſayde to bee Virgins, that were neuer
knowne of men, as Iudges. 21. 12. And in this
ſenſe haue yee the word Damſell or Virgine vſed,
Pſalme 45. 14. vz. taken for particuler Churches)
loue thee, that is to ſay, not onely carry an
inward and hearty affection towards thee, but
alſo teſtify the ſame by outward approouing and
liking of thee, ſee Pſalm 26. 8.
               
                  Verſ. 4. Drawe mee.
                  ) Theſe are ſtill the
wordes of the Church, acknowledging her own
weakneſſes, and crauing, not of deſert, but for
free good will, that ſhe may come to her ſpouſe,
which without his aſſiſtaunce, ſhe cannot perfourm,
as Ioh. 6. 44. alſo Iohn. 15. 5. We will
runne after thee.) This may either bee a ſodaine
change of the number, a thing often vſed in the

Scripture, paſſing from the ſinguler to the
plurall: or els the church ſpeaketh it in her own
name, and the name of her damſels and virgins:
which though they be many in reſpect of the ſeuerall
congregations, yet are they but all one,
in reſpect of ye whole body, and the word of running,
noteth the willingnes and readines of the
church, in following God and his calling. The
inſtruments that God doth vſe to draw her by,
are his word outwardly, and his ſpirit inwardly:
the ready running of the church, conſiſteth in
ſpirituall and holye affections, and in care and
conſcience, euen in outwarde conuerſation to
ſhew themſelues ready to ſtriue to ſanctificatiō.
Now the church addeth a promiſe of praiſe and
thankſgiuing thē to be yeelded and performed,
when the Lorde ſhall in great plentye powre
foorth his graces vppon her, ſaying: When the
King) that is to ſaye, when Chriſt the Lord and
Sauiour, the king that God hath appointed ouer
his Church, as Pſal. 2. 6. Shall haue brought
me) vz. of his meere mercy and grace, for there
was neuer any thing in the Church, to procure
Chriſt to loue it before he loued it, as Epheſ. 5.
25. 26. 27. Into his inner chambers) that is to
ſay, into moſt ſure and ſafe places, ſpeaking after
the maner of men, who hide their moſte precious
thinges in moſt aſſured places, as where
is locke vpon locke: putting alſo the places,
where this kinges wonderfull treaſures were

reſerued, for the treaſures them ſelues, that is
for the excellent aboundance, and riches of his
graces, as of the knowledge of his miſteries and
ſuch like. Neither neede we feare to affirme,
that the Church meaneth hereby the bringing
of her, as a man would ſay, into the bride chāber
where ſhee ſhoulde haue familiaritie, with her
huſband and ſpouſe Chriſt, and ſhoulde partake
with him of al his graces, according to that in ye
Goſpell after S. Iohn: And as of his fulnes
haue we all receiued, & grace for grace. Iohn
1. 16. We will reioyce, and be glad in thee.) A ſuddē
chaunge of the number, as before in this ſame
verſe: Wee will come after thee, for the expoſition
whereof, ſee before alſo in the ſame place: and
the dubling of the wordes, ſerueth to expreſſe
their earneſtneſſe, q. d. This ſhall be it that we
wil take great pleaſure in, yea it ſhalbe the onely
matter of our mirth to praiſe and thank thee.
We will rehearſe) that is to ſaye, wee will both
think vppon in our mindes, and alſo ſpeak of
with our tongues, ſo yt both ſhal go togeather, in
expreſſing thy tender affection towards vs. Thy
loues more then wine.) Theſe wordes are expounded
in verſe 1. of this chapter. Such as loue thee
ſhall ſpeake of righteous thinges) q. d.
                   I and theſe
that are with me which loue thee, will ſpeake of
thoſe thinges that be iuſt and good, opening by
theſe wordes, the allegory, as a man would ſay,
which lay hid vnder the former ſpeeches.
               
                  
                  Verſe. 5. Blacke I may be.
                  ) Theſe are the churches
wordes, but not to her ſpouſe, as before, but
to the particular members of her body, whereby
ſhee preuenteth that, that either her enemies
might obiect againſt her, or her friendes conceiue
of her, as that for her blackneſſe ſhe ſhould
be vnmeet, to match with ſo great a king. By
blacke the Church meaneth, yt throgh her aduerſaries
dealings, as perſecutions, impriſonments,
reuilinges, and ſuch like, ſhe may ſeeme in mens
iudgementes, to be deformed, and therefore not
ſo great account to bee made of her: but ſhe gyueth
them to vnderſtande, that how il fauored ſo
euer ſhee bee outwarde, yet inward ſhee is faier,
beautifull and glorious, as Pſal. 45. 13. ſee alſo
Pſal. 68. 13. Yet comely am I) that is to ſaye,
fayre and beautifull, and in that reſpect to be beloued,
q. d. Blackneſſe ſhall not turne me awaye
from my ſpouſe: neither yet will he for all that
like the worſe of me, for though blacke I be, yet
am I of a comely beautye, and of a louely making
and knitting, of the partes of my body. O
daughters of Ieruſalem) Shee vnderſtandeth by
this ſpeech, the faithfull men and women dwelling
in Ieruſalem, as our Sauiour alſo doth by
the ſame words, Luk. 23. 28. But yet ſo, that vnder
them hee comprehendeth all the reſt of the
faithfull whereſoeuer diſperſed, and the reaſon
is, becauſe that the law ſhould go foorth of Zion,
and the word of the Lord from Ieruſalem, to other

Nations and people, as Iſaiah. 2. 3. I may be
like to the tents of Kedar
                  ) We maye take theſe
wordes, either ſimplye thus, that the Church, by
reaſon of the afflictions that ſhe indured, ſhould
be blacke and deformed, euen as the verye tentes
of the Arabians were, that by the heat of the ſun,
by tempeſtes and ſtormes, and the mutability of
the ayre, were maruailouſlie defaced as it were:
or els, that by the figure Metonomy, he putteth
the tentes, for the people dwelling in the tentes,
which I rather encline vnto, by reaſon of that
which is written, Pſal. 120. 5. Kedar was the
name of one of Iſhmaels Sonnes, as appeareth
Geneſ. 25. 13. who togeather with their poſteritie,
as it ſhould ſeeme inhabited ſome part of Arabia
Petroſa, and called the name of that quarter
where they dwelt, Kedar, by the name of
their firſt Father, ſee Iſaiah. 21. from verſe. 13.
to the end of the chapt. But I take it to be here
vſed more generally, that is a parte of the Countrie
for the whole and the name of the Country,
for the people inhabiting the ſame, as Hieremie.
2. 10. Hiereme. 49. 28. that the people dwelt in
Tentes, it appeareth not onely by this place, but
by Iſaiah. 13. 20: Beſides that they were blacke,
this reaſon me thinketh is ſufficient to proue, becauſe
they were gyuen muche to trauell from
place to place, and to ſore toile in ſo often remouing
their Tentes which they dwelt in, and alſo
by reaſon of their nigh bordering to the Ethiopians
                  
as apeareth 1. Chron. 21. 16. who were
black, & therof were called blackmoores. See Hie.
13. 23. but I am like to them that dwell vnder
Solomons Tapiſtry, (that is to ſay) moſte faire and
comely for thoſe that dwell in Kinges houſes,
and ſpecially thoſe that are continuallye in the
places of moſt coſtly furniture and rich hanging
are not only verie faire, as whoſe beautie the ſun
or ſharpe weather doth ſeldome touche, but alſo
are comely, becauſe of beeing continually in the
Kinges preſence, from which purpoſe our Sauiour
Chriſtes ſpeach. Math. 11. 8. doth not much
vary. And no doubt, but by one parte of Solomons
houſehoulde, as his tapiſtrie or curteines, ſhee
ment all the glorye and furniture of his houſe,
whatſoeuer, of which you maye read at large 1.
Kinges. 10. 1, 2. &c.
               
                  Verſe. 6. Looke not vpon me.
                  ) The church continueth
her ſpeach, to the particular members
thereof, willing them not to looke vpon her, that
is, not to be diſcouraged from ioyning themſelues
vnto her for all her afflictions, which
make her outwardly as it were deformed, but
rather to haue their eyes fixed vppon Chriſt her
huſband, & thoſe inward beauties & graces that
he hath decked her with all. Becauſe I am ſomewhat
blacke.) She doth in this ſpeech ſomewhat
leſſen the word, blacke, that was vſed verſe. 5.
q. d. My blacknes is not ſo much as perhaps
you take it to be: and therefore be not ſo much

diſcouraged as you woulde ſeeme to bee) becauſe
the ſunne hath behelde me.) The Church
declareth in theſe and the wordes following,
that that blackeneſſe was not her owne
naturall colour, as a man woulde ſaye, but that
it came by ſome other meanes: as firſte, becauſe
that thorow oppreſſion and perſecution,
ſhee was as it were by the ſunne dryed vp. So
that the word ſunne is taken here, for the heat of
perſecution, and ſo it is, Math. 13. 6. 21. becauſe
the ſonnes of my mother kindled with wrath againſt
me, haue appointed me the keeper of other vineyards)
I know this place is diuerſly expounded. Some
giue this ſence of it: by ſonnes of the ſame mother,
they vnderſtand originall ſin, and the ſinne
that dwelleth in the church: and by beeing kindled
with wrath, they vnderſtand ſinne increaſing
and raging as it were: and by appoynting the
church to Keepe other vineyardes, they vnderſtand
the committing of the workes of the fleſh,
and the deedes of darkneſſe, with which ſhe was
as it were holden, ſo that ſhe coulde doe nothing
els, till the Lorde had looſed her out of theſe
chaynes. Others to whome I rather incline,
expounde it thus: The ſonnes of my mother) that
is to ſay, thoſe that ſeemed moſte deare vnto
me, and were as it were my ſelfe, who alſo boſted
in the name of the church) Kindled with wrath
againſt me) that is to ſaye, though they pretended

good will towardes mee, yet were they ſet on
fire with wrath and hatred againſt mee (Haue
appointed me the keeper of other vineyards) that is
to ſaye, haue made mee, to take vppon me that,
which did not in deede appertaine vnto me, and
to intermeddlein thoſe thinges that did nothing
reſpect me. And this ſence me thinketh may bee
warranted, not onely becauſe a mans enemies
are they of his owne houſhold, and of his deareſt
acquaintance. Math. 10. 36. Pſal. 50. 20. Pſal.
55. 12. 13. 14. but alſo becauſe we ſee by experience,
howe thoſe that woulde bee counted the
brethren and the fathers of the Church, vnder
the name and title therof, haue labored to thruſt
into the Church, the execution of Ciuill cauſes
and offices, which do not indeede belong to the
Church, nor to the miniſters thereof, as may
appeare. Luke. 12. 13. 14. whereof the Church
maye and doth not without cauſe complaine,
as of a great burthen too heauie for her to bear,
and this is the ſecond cauſe of the Churches
blackneſſe, and now followeth this cauſe of her
blackneſſe, continued in theſe wordes: Becauſe I
would not haue kept to my ſelf mine own vine: That
is to ſay, I haue departed from the dutie that
was preſcribed vnto me, though it were neuer
ſo healthfull and profitable for me: wherein alſo
we ſee the churches humble confeſſion of her
negligence and careleſneſſe in executing the
calling wherein ſhe was placed.
               
                  
                  Verſe. 7. Shew me
                  ) The Church turneth her
ſpeech againe to her ſpouſe q. d. Thinke not,
y• either by others ſlanders, or mine owne offences,
I am diſcouraged to come vnto him, no I
will call vpon him in your preſence, and you ſhal
heare him aunſwearing me. By the word ſhewing,
the Church deſireth inſtruction and knowledge,
ſo haue you the ſame worde vſed, Iob. 10.
2. O thou whom my ſoule loueth) That is to ſaye,
thou whom I loue from my hart. For this Periphraſis
no doubt hath greater force, then if the
church had ſayde, O my beloued, or O my deare
ſpouſe: as the contrary ſpeech Iſaiah. 1. 14. noteth
wonderfull diſliking. Where thou feedeſt)
vz. thy flockes. For ſhe compareth Chriſt to a
good ſheepheard, that prepareth meet and conuenient
food for his flocke. ſee Pſalm. 23. 1. &c.
Iohn. 10. 14. Where thou careſt that thy flock may
lie downe at noone tide) The church here expreſſeth,
the great care and loue that Chriſt hath ouer
his people, which he calleth by the name of
flocke. as Luke. 12. 32. Actes. 20. 28: and alſo in
what a quiet ſtate and condition they are in
which follow Chriſt. True it is, that he expreſſeth
this vnder a parable, of the flockes taking
their reſt at noone time in the heate of the daye,
but by ſuch manner of earthlye ſpeeches, it pleaſeth
the Lord many times in his word to ſet out
ſpirituall and heauenly matters. For why ſhould
I be, as one that ſpreadeth the tent, amongest the

flockes of thy companions.) The church noteth in
this ſpeech two thinges: the one is if ſhee finde
not the ſpouſe, ſhee is in daunger of falling into
manifeſt and manifold corruptions. The other
is that it greeueth her to be conuerſant, though
it were neuer ſo ſmall a while, with counterfeit
hipocrites, and vngodly perſons. q. d. what honour
ſhall come vnto thee, or profit to me, by hiding
thy ſelfe from me, and I by falling thereby
into ſocietie and familiaritie with others? For
the church vſeth ſpreading or pitching of tents,
for familiaritye and felowſhip, ſpeaking according
to the people of Arabia, who as is
ſayde before, dwelt in tents. And when ſhe ſayeth,
Thy companions, ſhee ſpeaketh thus, not as
though ſhee made theſe ſtraunge ſheepheardes,
good ſhepheards, or anye waye comparable with
her ſpouſe. but rather according to that that they
them ſelues, gaue out of them ſelues, and as in
name and outwarde ſhew they woulde ſeeme to
be, when as they had nothing in deed and truth.
See 2. Cor. 11. 14. 15. In a word this me thinketh
is the ſenſe, the church beeing as it were in
daunger wandring vp and downe to ſeeke her
ſpouſe, feareth, leaſt if ſhee ſhoulde not haue the
place ſhewed her, where ſhee might find him, ſhe
ſhould runne aſtray, and ioyne her ſelfe to other
congregations, that do boaſt them ſelues to bee
Chriſts companiōs and friends, & reioyce in the
name of the church, and yet are neither ſo nor ſo.
               
                  
                  Verſe. 8. Seeing thou knoweſt not.
                  ) This is
Chriſtes aunſweare to the church, ſhewing that
he is nigh to them that ſeeke him, as Pſal, 145.
18. and it conſiſteth of two partes, firſt hee aunſweareth
her, and inſtructeth her, and then hee
teſtifieth his good will and kindneſſe towardes
her. Seeing thou knowest not) vz. ſo fully as thou
ſhouldeſt, but in part onelye, (as all the knowledge
of the church in this lyfe, is no other. 1.
Cor. 13. 12. And therefore deſireſt further inſtruction,
I will teach thee. O thou the fayreſt
of women.) Chriſt adorneth his church with this
title, whereby we may ſee that the church is not
as men account of her, but as ſhe is eſteemed by
her ſpouſe. Goe out.) vz. from that companye of
counterfeit ſheepheardes and ſheepe, as may appeare
by that which hee addeth, follow now the
ſteppes of that flocke, for their feete tread not in
the right path to life, but lead the way to eternal
deſtruction. And by that worde, goe out, he noteth,
not onely the ſpeedy departure from them,
but that the church ſhoulde not communicate,
with them nor with any thing that was theirs.
See Iſaiah 52. 11. which alſo he noteth by that
phraſe, follow not the ſteps of that flocke. And
feed the kiddes) I take this particle, and heere to
be put for, but, as in other places of ſcripture q.
d. this is it that thou muſt do, not onely ſhun other
mens euils & corruptions, but do thoſe good
thinges that thou art appoynted vnto. And by

kiddes, he meaneth the flockes of faithfull people,
and euery particular one, noting alſo vnder
that manner of ſpeech the tenderneſſe of the
Church, and euerye particular member thereof.
Aboue the tents of other ſheepheardes) That is to
ſaye, with more excellent paſture, both for ſubſtaunce
and forme, then theſe ſheepheardes with
their tents are conuerſant in. He meaneth that
he would haue the church, by the food of the heauenlye
doctrine, to lift vp the faithfull people,
far aboue the earth, and earthlye thinges, as 1.
Cor. 2. 14. 15. And he calleth them here ſhepheardes
in the ſame ſence that the church
called them verſe. 7. Chriſtes companions.
               
               
                  Verſe. 9. I do compare thee.
                  ) The ſpouſe, after
inſtruction of the church, entereth into the commendation
thereof. verſe. 9. 10. 11. And when he
ſayth that he doth compare her, the meaneth not
onely that he doth reſemble her, no cauſe thereof
beeing in her, why ſhee ſhould be reſembled, but
that he doth and will inable her by his graces euen
to the beſt thinges, for that he meaneth by
horſes ioyned to Pharaohs chariots. This we
know that Pharaoh was a name common to all
the kinges of Aegypt. This we know further,
that the horſes of Aegypt, were in great regarde
and eſtimation, not onely in Aegypt, but in other
countries alſo, as 1. King. 10. 28. 29. Neither is
it without force that he ſpeaketh of troupes, and
multitudes, & of chariots, for for all theſe things

                  Aegypt was very commendable, as Exod. 14. 7.
9. All which layde togeather maketh much, for
the credite, glory and renowne, that Chriſte giueth
vnto his church, & for the excellency therof.
Verſ. 10. Thy cheeks are comely.
                  ) The ſpouſe entreth
into the commendation of the particular
partes of the church, and he ſpeaketh of thoſe
that are moſt to be ſeen, becauſe if they be beautifull
& fayre, inquiry is not made of the beautie
and fayreneſſe of the reſt. And when he ſayth,
that they are comelye, as though they were ſet
with rowes of ſtones, hee alludeth no doubt to
the maner of the Eaſterne princes, who vſed to
trimm their bridles, and other furniture for the
fore part of their horſes, with ſundrye kindes of
ornaments, as golde, pearle, precious ſtones. &c.
See Iudges. 8. 21. meaning that there was no
greater glorye nor comelines in theſe thinges.
then was in the outwarde partes and members
of the church. And to that ſame end muſt that be
referred, when he ſayth. Thy necke as it were with
colours.) As may appeare, in the places of the
Iudges before alleadged. Now to enquire either
heere, or in the other partes of this Booke,
what ſhoulde bee ſignified by the Cheekes, or by
ye 
                  necke, or other members of the church ſpecified
therein, would be curioſitie, becauſe the mind of
the holy Ghoſt, is not ſo much to ſtand vpon the
partes, as by recitall of the ſeuerall partes to
commend the whole: and yet me thinketh ſomething

may now and then be ſayd that way, without
anye preiudice of the truth: as in this place,
to ſay that the cheekes, which in ſhamefaſtneſſe
by meanes of bluſhing moſte commonlye appeareth,
ſhoulde be put for ſhamefaſtneſſe, modeſtye
and chaſtity of the church, which neuer lacketh
her ornaments and deckinges, and the necke for
the miniſters of the word, by whom the word it
ſelfe is deliuered vnto the people, euen as the
meat by the necke is ſent to the ſtomacke, who
haue alſo their glorye and beautifying, but of
this let euery godly and ſober chriſtian Reader
iudge.
               
                  Verſe. 11. We will make for thee.
                  ) Theſe are
ſtill the wordes of Chriſte, not ſpoken as ſome
thinke in his owne name, and the name of the
friendes of the church, ſuch as were ſome faithful
people, but ſpoken in deed, as hauing regarde
to the mi
                     ••
                  ery of the Godhead and Trinity, ſuch
like kind of ſpeeches ſee Geneſ. 1. 26. alſo Geneſ.
11. 7. where God ſpeaketh of him ſelfe in
the plurall number alſo. Borders of golde with
ſtuds of ſiluer) vz. ſet in ſundrye places betweene
them. q. d. though thou be excellently well decked
vp, yet we will more and more adorne and
beautifie thee, ſo that nothing ſhall be wanting
to make thee comelye and fayre, no not Golde
and Siluer, or anye precious thing what ſoeuer.
               
                  Verſe. 12. In the meane while that the king is at

his repaſt.
                  ) Theſe be the wordes of the church,
ſpoken as it ſhould ſeeme to her particular members,
who were called before virgins or Damſelles,
verſe 3. and daughters of Ieruſalem, verſ.
5, declaring what graces ſhe receaueth from her
ſpouſe. For the word king, ſee before verſe 4.
is at his repaſt, that is at his eaſe as it were and
pleaſure, and that euen then when he ſeemeth to
haue little regard of his church in mens iudgement,
and the church to be as it were a pilgrim
from him. He ſendeth foorth) vz. vpon me and
mine, His ſauor of Nard) that is to ſaye, the moſt
ſweet ſauor of his graces, and this he doth by
the word preached, and the mighty working of
his ſpirite in the hartes of his children. Some
of the Rabbins thinke that Nardus was like to
Saffron. Sure it is that there was diuerſ ſortes
of it. One ſort is called Nardus celtica, which the
French men call Lawand, and we in a terme not
far from theirs, call Lawander. An other ſort
was called Nardus Aſſiria, which I take to be
that that the Euangeliſtes, Marke. 14. 3. Ihon.
12. 3. call Spikenard, which was verye coſtly,
as maye appeare there, and reaſon it ſelfe alſo
leadeth it, becauſe it grew in India, or in Aſſyria,
places farre diſtaunt from Iudea, and
of this I ſuppoſe it is, that the holye Ghoſte
ſpeaketh in this place, vſinge a verye precious
thinge amongeſt menne, to note the

moſt precious giftes of Gods graces and goodneſſes
to his church.
               
                  Verſe. 13.. My beloued.
                  ) The church proceedeth
in the commendation of her ſpouſe whome
ſhe calleth here, her beloued, becauſe ſhe did moſt
tenderly loue, like, and ſeeke after him, as verſe
2. 7. is vnto me.) that is to ſay, is as deare, precious,
and as ſweet ſmelling to me, As a bundle of
mirh) which was no doubt of a very good ſauor,
as maye appeare Pſalm. 45. 8. Prouerb. 7. 17.
Remaining betweene my breſtes.) No doubt he alludeth
to the maner of women and maides, who
are wont to weare in their boſomes, noſegaies,
as they call them, made of very odoriferous, and
ſweetſmelling flowres, of which alſo they make
no ſmall account, eſteeming them many times
as a principall part of their furniture. Whatſoeuer
it is, the church mindeth to note, hath how
ſweet her ſpouſe ſhould be vnto her, and in what
great account ſhe would haue him, that woulde
place him ſo nigh her, as between her breſtes, as
it were.
               
                  Verſe 14. My beloued is vnto me.
                  ) The church
goeth on in commending her ſpouſe, and the graces
ſhee receiueth from him, comparing him to
an other ſweet ſmelling thing, as before ſhe had
reſembled him to Spikenard, verſe 12. and to
mirth, verſe. 13. As a berrie of the Cipres tree.)
That is to ſaye, ſweete, pleaſaunt, and very well
ſmelling, for the very Cipres it ſelfe is a very wel

ſmelling Woode, as by experience, wee our
ſelues ſee at this day. The interpretors both
old and new haue much troubled them ſelues about
this tree, and the fruit thereof, ſome affirming
one thing and ſome an other, fewe hitting
the truth. Whatſoeuer it is the holy Ghoſt did
minde in the mouth of the church, to expreſſe a
very adoriferous thing. The church addeth in
the vineyards of Engedi) This was the name of a
place in the tribe of Iudah, as appeareth Ioſh.
15. 62. It ſhould ſeeme to be a citie famous for
ſweet ſmelling trees, and that maketh the holye
Ghoſt to vſe it here in this place, meaning that
the Spouſe was more deare and precious vnto
her, (by reaſon of the wonderfull ſweetneſſe that
ſhe receiueth from him) then the
                     •
                  e thinges.
               
                  Verſe. 15. Behold thou art fayre my loue
                  ) Theſe
are Chriſtes wordes, commending the church
for her fayreneſſe and beauty: ſee before verſe 8.
and he repeateth the wordes againe, behold thou
art fayre, not onelye for the more truth and certainty
of the matter, and to expreſſe the excellent
beauty of the church, which can hardly bee
vttered with any wordes: but alſo, to comfort
the church, and the particular members thereof,
that neither the whole, nor the partes of the
whole, ſhould be diſcouraged with their blackeneſſe.
Thine eyes be like the doues eyes) that is, ſimple
and chaſt: ſo that by this ſimilitude, he ſetteth
out the ſinglenes and chaſtitie of the church

not onely in reſpect of inwarde affection, but of
outward appearaunce alſo, ſo that the church
hath no vnchaſt lookes or countenaunces, (of
which we read ſomewhat Pſal. 44. 17. 18. 20.)
but contenteth her ſelfe with her onely huſband
Chriſte, and ſeeketh no other euen as the Doue
when ſhee hath choſen a match, keepeth her ſelfe
vnto him onelye, and looketh not vpon an other,
(as a man would ſay) as the Philoſophers write
and affirme. And he commendeth her for her
eyes, becauſe if they be fayre they doe eaſely couer
the ſpottes and deformities of the reſt of the
members of the body. And we may referre this
to the Teachers and miniſters of Gods worde
in his church, who, as eyes watch ouer the people
of their God Heb. 13. 17.
               
                  Verſe. 16. Behold thee thou art fayre, &c.
                  ) Theſe
are the wordes of the church praiſing her ſpouſe
q. d. Yea rather thou art fayre, and whatſoeuer
beauty I haue, I haue it from thee, who haſt not
the ſpirite by meaſure. Ihon. 3. 34. but in ſuch
fulneſſe, that of thy fulneſſe haue we all receiued.
Ihon. 1. 16. Thou art pleaſaunt.) vz. not onely
in thy ſelfe, but alſo to me and all mine. Our
bedde is greene. By bed the church vnderſtandeth
not onely the ſeat of the church, whereſoeuer it
bee, but alſo thoſe that in the ſame place, are, as
it were in bedde, ſpirituallye begotten vnto the
Lorde by the Goſpell. As 1. Cor. 4. 15. and by

                  Greene ſhee meaneth the proſperous and flouriſhing
eſtate thereof, as Pſalme. 52. 8. which
ſhould appeare by the great increaſe and multitude,
that ſhoulde bee ioyned thereto.
               
                  Verſe 17. The beames of our houſes.
                  ) I take
this to be the wordes of Chriſte and his church,
ſpeaking both togeather (after they had ſpoken
one of an other) and commending not onelye
their houſe, but their ſeuerall houſes (which alſo
ſerueth for their great magnificence) for the excellencie
and wonderfull commodities thereof:
as for the ſtrength of them, and the preciouſneſſe
and pleaſures thereof. Their ſtrenght is
noted, in that the beames thereof are ſayde to
be of Cedar trees, which wood, as ſome write,
will neuer rotte▪ their excellencie and ſtatelyneſſe
is declared, in that their walking places
were buylded of Cypres, or of Wood lyke Cypres,
which ſome take to bee Firre: whatſoeuer
it is, they were a certayne kinde of Wood,
which yeeldeth a moſte ſweete ſauour: and the
pleaſure thereof ſette out, vnder their walking
places or Galleries. So that I thinke
there is nothing meant thereby, but the ſtability,
excellency and pleaſantneſſe of the church,
and euery particular member of it, both before
God as the chiefe, and one of them before, and
towardes an other.
               
                  
                  Verſe. 1. Teacheth, that how ſoeuer carnall
men carnally minded,Doctrine. can ſee nothing of waight
in theſe canticles, yet God, who hath giuen it ſo
glorious a title, can and will open the eies of the
ſpirituall minded man, that he ſhall ſee wonderfull
great miſteries contayned therein. The
want of ſight in the one, is not in the matter, but
in the blindneſſe of their owne hartes: and the
beholding of theſe thinges in the other, is not in
them ſelues, but in God, who of his mercy onely
hath opened the eyes of their vnderſtanding.
               
                  Verſe. 2. We learne to wiſh and pray for the
continuaunce of Chriſtes fauor towardes vs, becauſe
therein onely conſiſteth all our welfare, either
inward or outward. Some account of one
thing, and ſome of an other: but in truth nothing
is to be regarded, but the goodneſſe of God towardes
vs in Chriſt.
               
                  Verſe. 3. The graces that we receiue from
Chriſt, are moſt excellent, the reaſon is, becauſe
he him ſelfe is moſte excellent, and nothing can
come from him but it muſt taſte of that ſingular
excellencie that is in him.
               
                  Verſe. 4. And theſe wordes Draw me. Wee
learne, that we can not come to Chriſt, except
the father draw vs. Ihon. 6. 44. For it is God
that worketh in vs both the will and the deede.
Phil. 2. 13. and that of his owne good pleaſure,
ſuch is the ſtrength and power of our freewill,
whatſoeuer we haue been taught or learned to

the contrary, And in theſe wordes, When the king
him ſelfe, &c. We learne that Gods miſteries
are to darke for vs to attaine to, with all the wit
and vnderſtanding we haue, till God by his ſpirite
reueale them to vs. 1. Cor. 2. 10. 14. Alſo in
theſe wordes, We will rehearſe thy loues, &c. That
this is, and ought to bee the matter of our ioy, to
thinke vpon and ſpeake of Gods goodneſſes towardes
vs both generallye and particularly: the
remembraunce whereof will not onely be profitable
to ſtirre vs vp to thankfulneſſe, but in all
cauſes continually to truſt in him, who hath ſo
manye wayes ſhewed him ſelfe mercifull towardes
vs.
               
                  Verſe. 5. And theſe wordes, Yet comely am I.
We learne: that we may praiſe Gods giftes and
graces in our ſelues, keeping alwayes a iuſte
meaſure and proportion in that commendation.
Wee learne further in the ſame verſe, that the
blackneſſe, that is, the afflictions and trialles of
the church, ſhoulde not hinder vs from ioyning
our ſelues thereto. For all that will liue godly
in Chriſt Ieſu, muſt ſuffer perſecution. 2. Tim.
3. 12. See alſo Act. 14. 22.
               
                  Verſe. 6. And theſe wordes, becauſe the ſonnes of
my mother, &c. We learne that none are greater
enemies to the church, then thoſe that moſt brag
of her. This we ſee to be true by experience in
the papacy, who haue nothing in their mouthes,
but the church, the church, as the people and

Prieſtes in Ieremies time did, the Temple of
the Lorde, &c. See Ieremie. 7. 4. and yet for all
that both of them were the ſpoilers of the Temple
and Church: Alſo in theſe wordes, the keeper
of other vineyardes: Wee learne, that it behooueth
euery one to keepe him within the compaſſe
of that vocation yt God hath committed to
him, according to the counſell of the holy ghoſt
Let euery man abide in the ſame vocation,
wherin he was called. 1. Cor. 7. 10. Alſo Rom.
12. 7. He that hath an office let him waite on
the office. The Church might haue as much to
ſay for her ſelfe, as ſome in theſe daies haue, it
is giuen mee, but that would not ſtand in ſteede
before the Lord: the reaſon is, becauſe euill and
vnlawfull thinges many times are giuen, which
in deed ought not to bee receiued: and one muſt
not onely looke to the gyft, but to the thing giuen,
whether it be lawfull or no: and to the giuer
alſo, whether hee giue it according to the
good will of God the giuer of all good giftes.
Iames. 1. 17. Laſtly, in theſe wordes, I haue not
kept, &c. We learne humble and vnfayned confeſſion
of our ſinnes, the fruites whereof are deſcribed
Pſal. 32. 5. 1. Ihon. 1. 6.
               
                  Verſe 7. Shew me, &c.
                   This teacheth firſt,
that we ſhoulde bee much mooued with the abſence
of Chriſt: ſecondly that we ſhould ſeek by
al the lawful meanes we can to find him, and to

know the place of his abode, of which ſee an example.
Ihon. 1. 38. and in theſe wordes, Where
the flocke may lye downe at noone, both the great
care and loue of our Sauiour towardes his people,
of which ſee Mat. 9. 36. 37. 38. and the good
eſtate that they are in which follow him. See
Pſalm. 23. 1. Mat. 6. 33. Alſo Math. 14. ver. 15.
16. &c. Alſo in theſe wordes. For why ſhould I be
&c. We learne, that though the abſence of our
ſauiour ſhould be grieuous vnto vs, yet it ſhould
not vtterly make vs to fall awaye from him to
others, but the more earneſtlye to ſeeke after
him.
               
                  Verſe. 8. Setteth out Chriſtes readineſſe
and willingneſſe to inſtructe thoſe that of a
good minde come vnto him. Alſo theſe wordes,
Followe not that flocke, Teache the Church to
flie as farre from infection of euill as may be,
and not to come too nigh the perſons, leaſte
touching pitch they be defiled therewith. See
Prouerb. 6. 27. 28.
               
                  Verſe. 9. Seweth that the church is ſo glorious
as Chriſt her ſpouſe eſteemeth of her. It
teacheth alſo the excellencie of the Church,
and the increaſe of the particular members
thereof (becauſe ſhee is compared to the Horſes
of Aegypt, and to the troupes thereof) of
which ſee Pſalme. 45. from verſe 10. to the
ende of the Pſal. Alſo Act 2. 41. with other
places.
               
                  
                  Verſ. 10. Setteth out the comelineſſe and beuty
of the church, which ſhould alſo cauſe vs with
all care and reuerence to ioyne oure ſelues
thereto.
               
                  Verſe. 11. Declareth the aſſured fauour of the
holy Trinitye, and the vnſpeakable loue thereof
towardes the church, with the glorious decking
and adorning of the ſame.
               
                  Verſe. 12. Teacheth: that Chriſt neuer forgetteth
his church, but is alwayes preſent with
them by his grace and holy ſpirite, Mat. 28. 20.
Ihon. 14. 16.
               
                  Verſe. 13. Teacheth vs in what great account
we ſhoulde haue our ſauiour Chriſte, howſoeuer
moſt reiect him. See Math. 8. 34. Mat. 11. 19.
Mat. 21. 42.
               
                  Verſe. 14. Inſtructeth vs, with humbleneſſe
and loue, to acknowledge the manifold bleſſings
of God in others, as the church doth it in her
ſpouſe. I ſay with humbleneſſe in reſpect of our
ſelues, becauſe when we ſee that God hath endued
others with greater giftes then our ſelues,
he laboureth by that meanes to beat downe the
pride of our nature, which is alwayes clyming:
and I ſay in loue, in reſpect of our brethren, becauſe
it is very hard to fleſh and bloud, not to enuie
one that is his better any way.
               
                  Verſe. 15. Setteth out the loue of Chriſte towardes
his church, and the great account and
regard he hath her in. And theſe wordes▪ 
                  Thine

eyes be like, doues eyes, teach the church to ſtryue
to inward and outward chaſtity, and to Abſtain
from all appearance of euill. as 1. Theſ. 5. 22.
And to hate euen the garment which is ſpotted
by the fleſh. Iude. 23.
               
                  Verſe. 16. Teacheth vs to acknowledge, that
all the good thinges we haue, we haue from aboue,
as Iames 1. 17. And theſe wordes, Our
bed is greene, noteth the flouriſhing of the church
and the increaſe thereof, of which ſee before
verſe 9.
               
                  Verſ. 17. Setteth out the firmity and ſtaydnes
of the church, which thing alſo our ſauiour meaneth
when hee ſayth, that The gates of hell ſhal
not preuaile againſt it. Math. 16. 18. And in an
other place, that if it were poſſible the very elect
ſhould be deceiued. Math. 24. 24. To this
purpoſe alſo it is called the piller and ground of
truth. 1. Tim. 3. 15.
            
            
               
               CHAP. the ſecond and the ſumme thereof.
               
                  The Bridegrome ſetteth out his owne dignitie
and the Brides. 1. 2. She againe anſwearing
praiſeth him, and ſetteth out
the duties that he hath done for her vnder
a banquet, and her exceeding loue
towardes him, by fainting or ſwonning.
3. 4. 5. 6. Afterward, ſhee declareth the
comming of the Bridegrome vnto her,
her calling and moſte large promiſes
made vnto her. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13, &c.
And therefore ſhe not onely reioyceth
that ſhe ſhall haue his company, but deſireth
his preſence vntill the fulfilling of
his promiſes be perfourmed, which ſhal
be in his ſecond comming. 14. 15. 16. 17.
               
               
                  
                     1 I Am the Roſe of Sharon, the Lilie
of the vallies betweene the hils.
                     2 As a lilie among Thornes, ſo is
my loue among the daughters.
                     3 As an Apple tree among the
trees of the forreſt, ſo is my well beloued among
the ſonnes. I doe very greatly deſire to ſit in his
ſhadow, for his fruit is ſweet to the roofe of my
mouth.
                     4 He brought mee into the place of wine: and his

banner towardes me was loue.
                     5 Proppe me vp with theſe flagons: beare mee vp
with theſe apples: for I am ſicke with loue.
                     6 His left hand is vnder mine head: and his right
hand doth imbrace me.
                     7 I charge you, and that by an oth, O yee daughters
of Ieruſalem, tarry ye abroad with the roes,
or with the hindes of the field: ſtirre not vp,
neither wake this loue, vntill he will him ſelfe.
                     8 It is the voyce of my well beloued, behold him, he
commeth leaping vpon theſe mountaines skipping
vpon theſe hils.
                     9 My well beloued is like a roe or a hindes calfe:
beholde him ſtanding behinde our wall, looking
foorth of the windowes, ſpringing out of the
gates.
                     10 My well beloued ſpeaking ſaide vnto me: ariſe
my loue, my fayre one, and come.
                     11 For loe winter is past: the raine is paſt, it is gone
away.
                     12 Flouriſhing thinges are ſeene in the earth, the
time of the ſinging of birdes is come: and the
voyce of the Turtle is heard in our land.
                     13 The fig tree it ſelfe hath brought foorth her very
young figs, and the vines them ſelues, euen in
the firſt grape, do yeeld a ſauour. Ariſe my loue
my fayre one, and come.
                     14 My Doue lyuing in theſe cleftes of the rocke,
in a denne all to broken, ſhew mee thy countenances:
Make mee to heare thy voyce,

for thy voyce is ſweete, and thy countenaunce
comely.
                     15 Take for vs the foxes, yea the little foxes, corrupting
the vines, whilſt our vines bring foorth
the firſt grape.
                     16 My welbeloued is mine, and I am his that feedeth
among the Lilies.
                     17 Vntill that day ſhall come, and theſe ſhadowes
ſhall flye away: returne, belike, O my wel beloued
to a Roe, or as a Hindes calfe running on
mountaines, one of them ſundred from another.
                  
               
               
                  IN the laſt end of the firſt chapter,Con.
Chriſte and his church had
with an harmonicall concluſion
prayſed their houſes, for the
excellencye, continuaunce, and
commodiouſneſſe thereof: that
beeing diſpatched, the Brydegrome beginneth
againe particularlye to praiſe him ſelfe and his
ſpouſe, and likewiſe the ſpouſe to praiſe him, and
to ſet foorth her great loue towardes him.
               1 The chapter hath two ſpeciall parts.Diuiſ. In the
firſt part the bridegrome commendeth him
ſelfe and his ſpouſe, and this is contained
in the two firſt verſes of this chapter.
               2 And in the other the bride praiſeth the bridegrome,
reciteth his benefits towardes her,
and earneſtly calleth vpon him for his continual

preſence and fauor, and this reacheth
from verſe the 3. to the end of the chapter.
               
                  Verſe. 1. I am the roſe of Sharon.
                  ) I take theſe
to be the wordes of the ſpouſe,Senſe. commending him
ſelfe, for his moſte excellent ſweete vertue, teſtified
to all, but ſpeciallye to his church, by communicating
his ſpirite vnto it. If any man maruaile
that the Bryde and the Brydegrome, doe
commende them ſelues both heere and in other
places, let him know, that in olde time this was
not vnſeemely, as it is now accounted. Secondly,
they did not flatter them ſelues in their prayſes,
neither extolled them ſelues more then was
meet. Thirdly, that the Brydegrome in this behalfe
could not offend, becauſe there was neuer
any ſinne founde in him, as 1. Pet. 2. 22. That
Sharon was a plentifull place, maye appeare. 1,
Chr. 27. 29. Alſo Iſaiah. 53. 2. One reaſon of the
fertility therof may be giuen, ye moderate warmnes
of the ſun in that place, in which places alſo
roſes doe moſt delight and flouriſh, & are alſo by
that means, as the Philoſopher ſuppoſeth, more
ſweet of ſauor. So that when Chriſt reſembleth
him ſelfe to the roſe of Sharon, hee meaneth nothing
els, but that he was well coloured, fruitful
and of very good ſauor, able inough thorow his
ſweetneſſe, and the aboundance of his giftes and
graces, to allure and drawe his Churche to him
ſelfe. And the ſame I ſuppoſe he meaneth by
comparing him ſelfe in the nexte part of the

verſe, to the Lilie of the vallies. How glorious
and excellent the Lilie is, our Sauiour himſelfe
beareth witneſſe Math. 6. 28. 29. And
when the Lorde will aſſure his people of a great
bleſſing, hee promiſeth them that they ſhall
grow as the Lilie, Hoſea. 14. 5. Much more
excellent ſhall it be, when it groweth in a moſte
fertile place, ſuch as the vallies are that lie betweene
two hilles, which in all reaſon can not
chuſe, but bee verye fruitefull and plentifull.
Chriſte therefore by this manner of ſpeech, not
onelye noteth his great glorye and excellencye,
but alſo ſetteth foorth the aboundaunce of fruite,
that theſe ſhall yeeld, which ſhall bee ingrafted
into him, as the true vine. For which ſee
Iohn. 15. 2.
               
                  Verſe. 2. As a Lilie among Thornes, ſo is my
loue amonge the Daughters.
                   Theſe are ſtill
Chriſtes wordes, not commending him ſelfe as
before, but the Church, ſhewing heereby, that
the Church in dignitye and honour ſo much excelleth
other companyes and aſſemblyes, as the
Lilie in beautye and ſauour ſurmounteth the
Thornes. He meaneth not that Lilies grow
amongeſt Thornes, but ſpeaketh it by the
waye of compariſon: q. d. there is euen as
much oddes betweene the Church and other
counterfayt congregations, as is betweene
Lilies and Thornes, or as we would ſaye, betweene

Golde and Droſſe. What hee meaneth
by the terme Loue, is playne by that
which is Chapter 1. verſe 9. And by Daughters
he meaneth all thoſe that were and are out
of the boſome of the Church: and I thincke it
ſhoulde not bee amiſſe, for the more plaine ſenſe
of the place, to ioyne to the worde Daughters,
theſe wordes, of men. As Geneſ. 6. 2.
               
                  Verſe. 3. As an Apple tree.
                   Heere beginneth
the ſeconde parte of this Chapter, which
as I take it, contayneth three eſpeciall points.
The firſte is a declaration of the excellencie
of the Spouſe, and of the great deſire that the
Church hath towardes him, and that is comprehended
in this thirde verſe. The ſecond is a
declaration of the duties of mutuall loue between
them, and that reacheth from verſe 4. to
the ende of the 15. And laſtlye, ſhee deſireth
of her Spouſe, a perpetuall feeling of the frute
of this loue, and that is in the twoo laſte verſes.
Now, in that ſhee reſembleth her Spouſe
to an Apple tree, ſhee myndeth thereby to ſet
out his pleaſauntneſſe to the ſight, his goodneſſe
to the taſte, and his profitablenes to other
in reſpect of his frute. Now when ſhee
addeth, Among the trees of the Forreſt, ſhe
meaneth eyther Trees altogeather barren,
or elſe ſuch, as, though they yeelde fruite, yet
is it not good for menne. And when ſhee

ſaith: So is my welbeloued among the ſonns, you may
ad for more playne ſenſe, of men, as Pſalm. 45. 2
yea though they be neuer ſo good and well accepted
of in the Church, meaning that hee is
moſt fruitfull and ſweete, both in ſhadow and in
fruite, as the wordes following in this verſe, doe
playnly expound it. True it is, that he is not
ſo eſteemed of among worldlings, by reaſon of
his baſeneſſe: but yet his owne haue him euer in
that account and regard, howe baſe & contemptible
ſoeuer he be in the world. Read Iſaiah, 53
thoroughout. It followeth: I doe very greatly deſire
to ſit in his ſhadow. Here the Church expreſſeth,
the earneſt affection that ſhee hath to bee
kept vnder Chriſtes prouidence, from the heate
of perſecution, affliction, ſinne, &c. for ſo I take
the word Shadow, to be vſed heere, as Pſalm. 91.
ver. 1. or elſe as ſhe her ſelf ſpeaketh it verſes 16
17. of this chapter, that ſhe might he his, and he
hers for euer, or elſ as our ſauiour himſelf ſaith,
Ioh. 7. I in them, and them in mee, that they
may be made perfect in me, & that they may
be there, euen where I am. ver. 23. 24. And by
ſitting, ſhe meaneth continuall abode and reſidence:
His fruit, that is, that that is to be receiued
from him and his worde. For as Shadow
and fruite and apples are acceptable to the
faint and wearied, Iob. 7. ſo all thinges that
come from Chriſte, are to his moſte ſweete and
comfortable, if they ſtay vppon him and cleaue

onely to his word, yea his very yoke and burthen
ſhall be eaſy and light to them, as Math. 11. 28.
29. 30. 1. Iohn. 5. 3 is ſweete to the roofe of my
mouth. He putteth one part of the man, for the
whole, and namely that part which is moſte apt
for taſting, vnderſtanding thereby, not only how
delightfull Chriſte was to the outwarde man,
but ſpecially and cheefely to the inward, vnder
y• outward part alſo comprehēding the inward.
               
                  Verſe. 4. He brought me vnto the place of wine:
                  
Theſe are ſtill the churches wordes, celebrating
the aboundant kindneſſe and loue of his
ſpouſe. By place of Wine, ſhe meaneth the places
of delicate fare and feaſting, as before, chap. 1. 2
but all this muſt bee ſpiritually vnderſtoode, to
wit that our Sauiour brought the church to
life and ſaluation, by the exerciſes of the worde
and ſacraments, Whereunto the parable of the
mariage. Math. 22. doth in ſome ſort appertain
And his banner towards me was loue, (that is, hee
had loue towards me inſteed of a bāner) Thoſe
that are ſkilled in warre know, that by banners
and Enſignes the ſouldiers are called together,
and kept in awe vnder their owne capitaines,
Whereunto it ſhould ſeeme that the church alludeth,
meaning, that the huſbande of his onely
loue towards the church, did by his fauour, as it
were by a banner ſet before her eys, draw her as
it were vnto him. Or elſ it may be thus. Sundry
people, and namely the Turke, when hee beſiegeth

any place, doth the firſt day ſet vp a banner
al of white, ſignifiyng fauour if they wil accept
it: the next time a red banner, betokening the
execution of the cheefeſt: and the laſt time a
black one, ſignifying all one and other muſt to
the ſworde and fire. But Chriſte the ſpouſe alwaies
ſetteth vp a banner of loue, grace, and fauor,
howſoeuer we little deſerue the ſame at his
hands. The firſt ſeemeth to me to bee the more
plaine ſenſe.
               
                  Verſe. 5. Prop me vp with theſe Flagons,
                   Theſe
are the wordes of the Church, ſpoken vnto her
Damoſels or virgins, of whom ſee before chap.
1. 3. and ſhee ſeemeth to be ſo inflamed with the
loue of Chriſt, that ſhe is ready euen in the middeſt
of the banquet, to ſinck down, or to ſwoone,
as you wold ſay for loue. But ſhe hath two aides
and comfortes in this her weakneſſe: one expreſſed
in this verſe: the other in the next verſe following.
That in this verſe is, that thoſe that
attend vppon her by the Bridegromes appointment,
that is, the Prophetes, Apoſtles and ſeruauntes
of God (See for this purpoſe Epheſ.
4. from verſe 11. to the ende of the 16) doe miniſter
vnto her at her requeſt, the ſpiritual
Treaſures and good thinges of her Huſband,
which I take to bee noted, and that very forcible
and playnly by theſe wordes: Proppe mee
vp with theſe flagons: beare me vp with theſe apples,
as it were appointing ſome certain aides, which

if they were neglected, all the reſt that coulde
bee vſed, were worth nothing. And by Flagons,
no doubt ſhe meaneth, by the figure Metonimie,
the thing contayning, for the thing contained,
that is, the ſweete. Water and drinke of life,
of which ſee Iſaaih, 55. 1. which Treaſure
alſo wee haue in earthen Veſſelles, or Flagonnes,
as 2. Corinthians 4. 7. and is indeede
nothing elſe but the ſweet promiſes of Chriſt
vnto euerlaſting life. And though by Apples
layde vnder her as it were, ſhee meane the
ſelfe ſame thinge: yet there is another order
of it. For hee alludeth to the cuſtome of men,
who, when other are ſwooning or faynting,
are wont to put ſtrong ſmelling, thinges vnto
their Noſtrelles: ſo the Church meaneth, that
for her comforte and refreſhing, and reclayming
her agayne as it were from death to
life, ſhee woulde haue well ſmelling Apples,
fette out of Chriſtes Treaſure, both helde and
applyed to her, that by that meanes ſhee maye
bee, as it were recouered: For I am ſicke with
loue: q. d.
                   I ſhall neuer ceaſe, nor bee in quiet, till
I perfectly enioy my Huſbandes companye,
feeling in this life, the aſſured Teſtimonye of
his continuall fauour, and poſſeſſing the ſame
eternally in the heauenly glory. See 2. Corin.
5. 1. 2. &c. Philip. 1. 23.
               
                  
                  Verſe. 6. His left hande is vnder mine heade, and
his right hand doth imbrace me
                  ) Theſe are ſtill the
wordes of the church, contayning as I ſayde before,
the ſeconde comfort in her fainting: and
that is, that ſhe had her ſpouſe, not onely preſent
with her (who alone is able effectuallye to heal
the church) but ſhewing ſingular loue and kindneſſe
cowardes her: ſtaying her vp with the one
hand that ſhee fall not downe, and comforting
her with the other by lauing imbracing her. I
know that ſome put the right hand for length of
dayes, and the left hande for glory and riches, as
Prouerb. 3. 16. But this is the more ſimple, and
agreeth better with the circumſtaunce of place
& perſon, to wit that Chriſt by vſing the geſtures
of thoſe that do imbrace their friendes, and comfort
and eaſe them in their infirmities, doth expreſſe
thereby, the ſingular loue he hath to his
church, and his tender care ouer her in comforting
her.
               
                  Verſe. 7. I charge you and that by an oth.
                  ) Theſe
are ſtill as I take thē, the wordes of the church,
and not of Chriſt (as ſome ſuppoſe) reſting in the
imbraſing of her ſpouſe, of which we hearde immediatlye
before verſe 6. ſtraightlye charging
thoſe to whom ſhee ſpeaketh, that no manner of
waye they bee troubleſome or diſquietous to her
ſpouſe, that reſteth him ſelf and taketh pleaſure
in the imbracinges of her. And there is a double
reaſon that leadeth me to thinke, that theſe are

the churches words rather then Chriſtes. Firſt,
becauſe that ſhe by reaſon of the authority ſhee
had, might commaunde, as ſhee doth verſe 15. of
this Chapter. Secondly, becauſe all the wordes
that followe till you come to verſe. 15 are the
Churches wordes. When ſhee ſayth that ſhee
chargeth them by an oth, ſhe meaneth that ſhee
doth very hardly and ſtraightly charge them,
and as it were in conſcience binde them. For
the wordes, Daughters of Ieruſalem, ſee chapter
1:5. ſhe meaneth no doubt ſuch, as wiſhed well
to the church, and had ſomewhat to doe therein.
Tarry ye abroad with theroes, or with the hindes of
the field. That is, get you abroade for a while,
take your pleaſure, and do what you will, onely
diſquiet not, neyther vexe my ſpouſe. And all
this is ſpoken by the church, as though the feaſt
had beene kept abroade in ſome country towne
or Village abroade: alſo it is vttered after the
manner of men and their wiues, who when they
will talke of ſecrete matters, or take their reſt
and ſleepe quietly together, will bid their children
and ſeruaunts auoyde, and get them abroad
to recreate them ſelues whether they will for
a while. Stirre not vp, neyther make, That is, diſquiet
him not any manner of way. And this the
church ſpeaketh both of her hearty loue that ſhe
beareth towards her ſpouſe: and alſo of good wil
that ſhe carrieth towards her ſelfe, who earneſtly
wiſheth and deſtreth to inioy the continuall

preſence, and company of her ſpouſe. This loue,
vz. of mine, meaning him, whom ſhe moſt dearly
and tenderly loued: which thing is alſo forcible
and playnlie expreſſed by the article, this.
Vntill he will himſelfe. The Church referreth all,
to the good will and pleaſure of her ſpouſe,
onely this ſhe taketh care for, that he may not be
prouoked or diſturbed by her, or any of hers, by
anye occaſion or offence though neuer ſo ſmall,
but ſheweth herſelfe louing and obedient to him
in all thinges. See Epheſ. 5. 24.
               
                  Verſe 8. It is the voyce of my Welbeloued.
                   The
Church in the verſes before going, and namely
verſ 4. 5. 6. had ſet out one notable duty of our
ſauiour towards her, and that was of life and
ſaluation which he brought her, figured vnder
the ſhadow of a banquet and healing. Nowe ſhee
recokneth vp another kindneſſe ſhewed, to wit,
the giuing of her pleaſure, peace and all good
thinges neceſſary for her: and this he ſetteth out
vnder the figure of the ſpring time, and of all
greene and flouriſhinge thinges, offering them
ſelues as it were to the ſight and ſeruice of the
church, & this reacheth from this verſ to the end
of the 15. And this ſpeech may be deuided into
two partes. One is, that Chriſt offereth all good
thinges to the church, and refreſheth her, beeing
deliuered from the winterly tempeſtes of ſinne:
& this reacheth vnto verſe 14. The other is, that
he putteth back frō her, al euil & hurtful things,

and this is compriſed in ver. 15, both which graces
Chriſt performeth to his church, by his word
& the miniſters thereof, who are his ſeruants appointed
to y• purpoſe: as 2. Cor. 4. 5. But let vs
come to the words as they lie. It is the voice of my
welbeloued. Theſe wordes are ſpoken, as though
while the bride ſlept, the bridegrome had gone
abroad ſome whither, and as though ſhe had bene
ſodainly waked, & made meruellous glad, by the
voice of her ſpouſe returning backe againe, q. d.
Certainly it is my ſpouſes voice, wherin I much
reioyce, al this while I did but dream it, or imagine
it ſo to bee: as when ſtraunge thinges and
vnlooked for come to paſſe, we can hardly be perſwaded
at the firſt that they are ſo, as Pſalme.
126, 1, But now I perceiue of a trueth, it is not
his voice indeed. Behold him. q. d.
                   I woulde haue
you that are my freendes and welwillers, to bee
perſwaded of this, as well as I: for I take that
ſhe ſpeaketh theſe wordes to them. He commeth
leaping vpon theſe mountaines, skipping vppon theſe
hilles. Theſe wordes of leaping and ſkipping, do
not onely note his great ſpeede and hair, to ſuccour
and comforte his churche, which is alſo ſet
out in the nexte Verſe, by the ſimilitude of Roes
and Hindes: but the other wordes alſo of Mountaynes
and Hilles, doe meruelouſly expreſſe his
ſingular loue, as though the Churche ſhoulde
ſaye: the daunger of the iorneye, the hardneſſe
of the waye, neyther anye thing elſe as mans

power, aydes and ſuch like, can hinder him from
comming to me, to comfort mee in my diſtreſſes.
And that mountaines and hilles are ſo vſed,
may appeare. Iſa. 40. 3.
               
                  Verſe 9 My beloued is like a Roe, or a hindes
calfe..
                   The Church meaneth by theſe wordes, to
declare how ſwift and ſpeedy Chriſte is to comfort
and ſuccour her. We our ſelues knowe by
experience that Roes and hindes bee very ſwift
footed: but beſides our owne knowledge, wee
haue the warrant of the word: as Pſalm. 18. 33▪
                  beholding him ſtanding behinde our wall. As though
the church ſhould ſay. It is a wonderfull thing,
be ſtandeth by mee, and is preſent with me ſooner
then I can ſpeake. And when ſhe ſayth, ſtanding
behinde our wall, I thinke by Wall, ſhe meaneth
Gods goodneſſe, and the promiſes and comfortes
of his word, with which the church in the
time of the croſſe and triall, armeth and defendeth
her ſelfe: behind which, Chriſt may be ſaid
to ſtand, when the perfourmance thereof, is not
plainly ſeene to his children, and yet hee is alwayes
nigh vnto them in the trueth thereeof alwayes
to helpe them, as ſhe afterwards addeth.
For the worde Wall, ſee Iſaiah. 26. 1. Looking
foorth of the windowes. I take, that by all theſe
ſpeeches, the church meaneth nothing elſe, but
Chriſtes fauour towards her. This ſpeech may
be borrowed from great perſonages and ſtates:
as kings, Queenes and ſuch like, who do many

times ſhew themſelues at windowes to be ſeene
of their people: which thing alſo the people take
as a teſtimony of great fauour, ſpeciallye when
out of the windowes, they ſhew them pleaſaunt
and delightfull countenaunces. Springing out of
the gates. This ſpeech is ſomewhat darke, and
yet ſo it is in the Hebrue text: and is a Metaphore
taken from floriſhing trees and flowers,
to which Chriſt was reſembled before verſes. 1.
3. The church meaneth nothing by this maner
of ſpeech, but to ſet out, the moſt flouriſhing and
pleaſant countenaunce, that her ſpouſe gaue her.
In ſumme, all comes to this: that the churches
wordes do by certaine ſteppes, as it were, ſet out
the wonderfull worke of Chriſte towardes her:
as firſt, ſhe heareth his voice, verſe 8. Next ſhee
ſeeth him comming, verſe 8. alſo. And laſtly,
ſhee doth preſently behold him preſent. verſe 9.
               
                  Verſe. 10. My welbeloued ſpeaking faire vnto me
                  )
In this verſe, the church taketh vpon her the
perſon of her ſpouſe as it were, declaring what
wordes he vſed to her, who as yet calleth her, not
to the full and abſolute enioying of thoſe good
thinges that are layd vp for her in heauen, but to
the moſt aſſured ſeales and pledges, of thoſe good
thinges that are to come, which Chriſt woulde
haue communicated vnto his Church, both in
word and deed by his eternall ſpirite. Ariſe my
loue, my fayre one, and come. When our ſauiour
calleth the church his loue, hee ſheweth in what

great regard he hath her, and how tenderly hee
fauoreth her: and when hee calleth her, his fayre
one, he ſheweth how much he doth account of her.
For ſo much is the church in deede, and the particular
members therof, as it pleaſeth the ſpouſe
to eſteeme of them. And when he ſaith ariſe and
come, he meaneth that he woulde haue her come
out of the ignoraunce, darkneſſe, and ſinne, wherin
ſhe was, to the pleaſantnes of righteouſneſſe
and holy conuerſation, wherin he taketh delight,
and ſo you ſhall finde the worde ariſe vſed Rom.
13. 11. and the word come. Math. 11. 28.
               
                  Verſe. 11. For loe winter is paſt: the raine is paſt,
it is gone away.
                   This is a reaſon that the ſpouſe
yeeldeth, why the church ſhoulde ariſe and come
vnto him, & it is taken (ioyning this 11. 12. and
13. verſ. following togeather) from a comparing
of the time before her calling, with the time after
her calling. The former time was winterlike
and ſtormye altogeather, and then was the
Church ſtraunge from the common wealth of
God, and wallowing in ſinne: but the time ſince
her calling, is altogeather greene, flouriſhing,
pleaſaunt, ſweet fruitful, and ſuch as ſhould moſt
plentifully repleniſh her heart and all her ſenſes,
and this I take to be the meaning of theſe three
verſes 11. 12. 13. togeather, to wit that by Winter,
raine, &c. he meaneth ſinne, errour, ignorance
and all croſſes either inwarde or outward layde
vpon the church, as perſecution, reproch, &c: and

by floriſhing thinges, ſinging of birdes, the voyce of
Turtles, the figge tree and her young ones: The
Vine and her firſte grape, &c. which are all euident
tokens of ſpring time and Sommer, hee
meaneth aſſured teſtimonies of Gods grace: as
forgiuenes of ſinnes, knowledge, and light of the
truth, and all outwarde bleſſinges of the Lorde,
as peace, plentye, proſperitie, &c. And that by
Winter and raine, ſhoulde bee ſignified ſinne and
ignoraunce, it is not without proportion. For
as in the winter ſeaſon, all is ſtormy▪ turbulent,
and darke: ſo ſinne bearing ſwaye, there is nothing
but diſorder and ignoraunce. Now, let vs
more particularlye, conſider the wordes of the
12. & 13. verſes, which I take to be ſo excellent
a diſcription of the ſpring time, and ſo forward,
as none either hath beene, or can be more liuely
giuen. For in the ſpring time floriſhing things,
that is, flowers ſhewe them ſelues, and Byrdes
ſing, to the great comfort of men, and the figge
doth ſende foorth her greene figges, and the
Vine her tender grape, whereas other trees for
the moſte part, doe ſhewe them in flowers firſte,
and afterwarde in fruite. For the better vnderſtanding
of this place, ſee that which our
ſauiour ſayth, Mat. 24. 32. of the fig tree. And
when he ſayth The Figge tree it ſelfe, and lykewiſe
addeth the Vines them ſelues, hee ſpeaketh
this as a ſure proofe that the ſpring is come.
For the fig tree and the vine, be two of the laſt, trees

(as we know by experience) that make ſhew of
their fruit, q. d. If you will not beleeue, by beholding
the flowres on earth, by hearing the
byrdes and turtles ſing (all which are euident
ſignes of the ſpring time): Yet beleeue it, becauſe
the figg tree and the vine which are more
late then other trees, haue alſo yeelded out their
fruit. And when he ſayth, Euen in the firſt grape,
he meaneth not that the vine yeeldeth fruit twiſe
a yeare, as one grape firſt, and an other after: but
that this was the firſt appearance of the grape,
and that yet notwithſtanding the vine it ſelfe
did yeeld, a ſweete ſmelling ſauour, both in the
leaues and fruite. As for that which followeth
in this 13. verſe, Ariſe my loue, my fayre one and
come, is expounded before verſe 10. of this chapiter.
               
                  Verſ. 14. My doue, &c.
                   The church ſtill repeateth
the wordes of her ſpouſe, begun before ver.
10. And in that he calleth her doue, he meaneth
not onelye thereby her beautye and fayrenes, becauſe
Doues bee commonly white: but alſo hee
meaneth her chaſtitie, as before chap. 1. 15: Alſo
her ſimplicitye and vprightnes, togeather with
freedome from bitternes. See Math. 10. 16. alſo
Pſal. 74. 19. Wryters alſo affirme, that the
doue hath no gall. He alludeth alſo further to the
nature of a doue in the next wordes, when as he
ſayth, Liuing in theſe cliftes of the rocke in a denne
all to broken. For they that wryte of the nature of

creatures, affirme, that the doues doe ſpeciallye
delight to be ſeen in rockes, and to lye hid in the
Holes and cleftes: but by theſe thinges he meaneth
as I take it, the modeſtye or ſhamefaſtneſſe
of the church, who ſomtimes thorow the feeling
of her ſinnes, ſometimes for the grieuouſnes of
perſecutions, is glad to get her into the rockes,
which are taken to be places of ſure defence, and
therefore he addeth particularly in theſe clefies of
the rocke, In which reſpect the faithfull manye
times call their Lord their rocke, as Pſal. 18. 2▪
and ſomtimes to be content with places of leſſe
aſſurance as dens all to broken, to the end that
for a while ſhe maye hide her ſelf there from the
rage and cruelty of the enemy, Shew me thy countenaunces,
that is, ſhew thy ſelfe in my preſence
and come vnto me. Neither lacketh it ſome force
that he ſpeaketh in the plurall number, as that
he woulde haue her to leaue none of her particular
congregations or members behinde her.
Make me to heare thy voyce, that is to ſay, ſpeake
to me, walke continuallye with me, and be conuerſaunt
with me. O ſingular loue of Chriſt to
his church, that doth thus earneſtly ſeeke for and
deſire the preſence and company thereof: and O
wonderfull ingratitude of the church, if ſhe ſhold
contemne it. For thy voyce is ſweete, and thy countenaunce
comelye. All this hee ſpeaketh of the
church, not that ſhe is ſo of her ſelfe, but it pleaſeth
her ſpouſe ſo to accept of her. For therefore

hath hee giuen him ſelfe for the church, that hee
might make it glorious vnto him ſelfe, &c. as Epheſ.
5. 25. 26. 27. And theſe wordes containe
alſo a reaſon, why Chriſte ſo much deſtreth the
preſence and company of his ſpouſe.
               
                  Verſe 15. Take for vs the foxes.
                  ) I take theſe
wordes ſtill to bee ſpoken by the church, in the
perſon of Chriſte, as though that hee ſpake vnto
his friendes, not onely willing but commanding
them earneſtly to endeuour the remoouing of all
thinges great and little, that might hinder the
groweth of his church, which is a peculier inheritaunce
vnto him ſelfe, whether it were in vnſound
doctrine, or in corrupt conuerſation. See
Tit. 2. 14▪ And whē he ſaith, Take for vs, he ſheweth
that hee hath as great loue to the church as
to him ſelfe, which if it be ſpoyled or hurt, it redoundeth
alſo to him ſelfe. By foxes, he meaneth
not onely euill men, as heretickes, diſſolute perſons,
&c. that woulde hinder the groweth of the
church: but all other thinges whatſoeuer, how
great or how little ſoeuer they be: which alſo
he ſignifieth by the next ſpeech, in that he calleth
them little foxes. And when he addeth, corrupting
the vines, hee meaneth marring and deſtroying,
yea bringing as it were to vtter corruption and
deſtruction the churches of God. That Gods
church or the particular churches, are reſembled
to vynes, maye appeare by ſundrye places of

Scripture, as Iſaiah. 5. 1, &c. Pſalm. 80. 8. 14.
Math. 21. 33, &c. And that foxes are hurtfull to
vines, our verye proouerb ſheweth, the foxe will
eate no grapes. Whilest our vines bring foorth
the firſt grape, that is, while they are tender and
yong, as before verſe 13. For euē then when the
church is beginning to grow, woulde it bee looked
vnto ſpeciallye: which they that haue care
of, ought heedely to mark, and to take heed, that
it be not deuoured by grieuous Wolues, and by
men that ſhall riſe vp from among them ſelues.
As Actes. 20. 29. 30. 1. Iohn. 2. 19. aud other
places.
               
                  Verſe. 16. My welbeloued is mine.
                  ) Theſe are
the wordes of the church, ſpoken in her owne
perſon, and is the concluſion of the former diſcourſe
made in this chapter by her: wherein ſhe
firſt reioyceth for the moſt excellent fellowſhip
that ſhee had with Chriſte: and next ſhee wiſheth
as it were, his continuall preſence all the
dayes of her lyfe, promiſing to remayne his, vntill
ſhee be perfectlye ioyned with him in heauen.
Now when ſhee ſayth, My welbeloued is
mine, and I am his, It is as much, as if ſhee
ſhoulde ſaye: he will haue no other for his wife
but me, neither will I acknowledge any other
for my Spouſe but him: wee will eyther of vs
delight one in an other, and bee contented to
take and loue one an other onelye. It followeth.
That feedeth amonge the Lilies.
               
               
                  
I know theſe wordes are diuerſlye interpreted,
and I thinke it ariſeth, becauſe the Hebrue word
may be taken either paſſiuely or actiuely. Some
expound it thus, that feedeth among the lilies, that
is, that is moſt ſweet, and by the good ſmell of his
ſauors, that is by his goodnes, & the ſweetnes of
his promiſes calleth & allureth me vnto him. I
will ſpeak what I thinke, I had rather expound
it thus: that feedeth) vz. his flockes▪ as chap. 1.
7. among the lilies, that is, in ſweet pleaſant, ſoft
and well ſmelling paſture. q. d. He that plentifullye,
pleaſantly and ſweetlye handleth and intreateth
thoſe that are his. And to this ſence
ſeemeth to agree, Pſal. 23. 1. 2.
               
                  Verſe. 17. Vntill that day ſhall come, and theſe
ſhadowes ſhall flye awaye.
                   Theſe are ſtill the
wordes of the church, and muſte bee ioyned to
the latter end of the other verſe, wherein ſhee
promiſeth that ſhee will remaine to him for euer
and euer. For though the worde vntill, doe
moſte commonlye note but a peece of time, yet
here it is vſed for a perpetuitie and euerlaſtingnes
of time, as it is alſo in other places: as 2.
Sam. 6. 23. Pſal. 110. 1. Mat. 5. 26. Mat. 28. 20
Which may alſo appeare in that ſhe ſaith ſo forcibly,
Vntill that day ſhall come, by which he meaneth
that ſame great and laſt day of iudgement,
which is vſually pointed out, by that maner of
ſpeech, both in the olde and new Teſtament: as
Ioel. 2. 31. 2. Tim. 2. 18. And theſe ſhadowes ſhall

flie away. By ſhadows he meaneth both ye troubles
of this life, and al vanityes whatſoeuer, that are
ſet between her and her ſpouſe, while ſhee liueth
in this world: or els we may vnderſtand by ſhadowes,
all thoſe thinges that may ſhadow out vnto
vs, the hope of eternall life and glorye: which
may be called ſhadowes, not that they are ſo of
them ſelues, but beeing compared with others,
that do lead vs vnto thoſe, and when ſhee ſayth,
ſhall flye away, he noteth the ſuddaine vaniſhing
of the ſame. Returne. The church ſpeaketh this,
as though her Spouſe were departed, and as
though ſhee coulde not indure and abide his abſence,
though it were neuer ſo ſmall awhile. Belike
(O my beloued) to a roe, or to a hindes calfe, that
is, make moſt haſte and ſpeede to come vnto me,
as before in this chapter verſe 9. And depart not
any whit at al from me, running on mountains, whē
one of them are ſundred from an other. He meaneth
no doubt the mountaines of Gilead, which
the riuer of Iorden did ſeperate from the reſt of
Iudea. See 2. Sam. 2. 29. Now, he rather remembreth
theſe mountaines then others of the
country of Iudea, becauſe they were notable &
commodious for hunting, and well ſtored with
game, and therfore much haunted. For at what
time Solomon wrote theſe thinges, as it ſhould
appeare, Hamath was not greatly occupied, neither
was the houſe builded in the forreſt of Libanus.
ſee 2. Chro. 8. 2. 3. &c. 1. Kin. 7. 1. 2. &c.
               
                  
                  Ver. 1. Teacheth vs, that if we wil haue pleaſant,
ſweet, & good things, we muſt look for thē
in Chriſt onelye, for it pleaſed the Father, that
in him alone ſhould all fulneſ dwell. Col. 1. 19.
               
                  Verſe. 2. Setteth out the excellency and beauty
of the Church, inſtructing vs to ioyne our
ſelues to that holy felowſhippe, which the Lorde
him ſelfe accounteth the piller of truth, and his
owne houſe. 1. Tim. 3. 15.
               
                  Verſe. 3. Doth not onely ſhew, that our Sauiour
Chriſte hath in him the fulneſſe of all goodneſſe.
Iohn. 1. 16. But alſo theſe wordes, I doe
greatly deſire to ſit, do teach vs what a holy hunger
and thirſt we ought to haue after him. For which
ſee Pſalm. 42. 1. 2. Pſal. 84. 2. and that not for a
ſmall while, but continually, for he that continueth
to the end ſhall be ſaued. Mat. 24. 13.
               
                  Verſ. 4. Teacheth, firſt that al the good things
we haue, we haue from God. Iames. 1. 17. by the
meane of our ſauiour Chriſte, which is alwayes
taught in theſe wordes, Grace be with you and
peace from God our Father, and from the
Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Rom. 1. 7. Secondly, that all
theſe thinges, whether they be bodily, or ſpirituall,
or both, are beſtowed vppon vs for Chriſtes
ſake, and that therefore the Lorde is to be continually
praiſed. as Epheſ. 1, 3. 4. 5. 6. 1. Pet. 1. 3.
               
                  Verſ. 5. Teacheth vs, firſt that we ſhould comfort
& ſtrengthen one an other in our faintinges.
Heb. 3. 12. 13. Heb. 13. 1. 3. Rom. 12. 9. 10. 11.
13. 15. 16. Secondly, how earneſt and harty our

loue ſhoulde bee to Chriſt, who hath loued vs ſo
tenderly, that he hath giuen himſelf for vs. Rom.
5. 6. 7. 1. Iohn. 3. 16. 1. Iohn. 4. 9. 10. 11.
               
                  Verſ. 6. Teacheth, that the preſence of Chriſt
to his church, by his ſpirituall power and grace,
is meruailous comfortable: which made our ſauiour
alſo to promiſe it, as appereth. Mat. 28. 20▪
               
               
                  Verſ. 7. Teacheth vs, that not only thoſe yt are
without the church, but thoſe that are lincked &
ioyned to that holy body, haue need ſundry times
not only to be admoniſhed, but alſo ſtraitly charged,
that they do not any thing that may grieue
or diſquiet Ieſus Chriſt the head therof. Epheſ.
5. 23. For if they doe but neuer ſo little prouoke
him,Pſa. 2. 12▪
                   then bleſſed are all thoſe that truſt in him.
               
                  Verſ. 8. Setteth out the great ſpeed and haſt as
it were, that Chriſt maketh to help & ſuccour his
church in her griefes and diſtreſſes. For proofe
wherof, ſee Luk. 18. 8. True it is, that men many
times thinke the time very long, as Pſal. 13. 1.
But we muſt learne in patience to poſſeſſe our
owne ſoules, Luk. 21. 19. and to tarry the lords
leaſure, Pſal. 27. 14. Pſal. 37. 34.
               
                  Verſ. 9▪
                   Teacheth, that it is meruailous comfortable
to the diſtreſſed oues of God, to be perſuaded,
or to ſee by the eye of faith, teſtimonies and
aſſured tokens of Chriſtes fauor, preſence & help.
               
                  Verſe 10. Doth not onely teach Chriſtes loue
towardes his church, calling her from: the vanityes
and delightes of this life, to the hope

of a farre better ſtate: but alſo teacheth her to
yeeld obedience to that call, and that while it is
to daye. Heb. 3. 7. 15. leaſt otherwiſe we heare
that terrible iudgement pronounced and practized
againſt Ieruſalem Math. 23. 37. 38.
               
                  Verſe. 11. Sheweth, that our ſauiour gratiouſly
remooueth all lettes and impedimentes that
might hinder vs from comming to him, & namely
our ſinnes, as Iſaiah 1. 18. Iere. 3. 35. Pſal.
103. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. So that if there be anye
defect or want, it is not in him, but in our ſelues,
who manye times thorow the corruption of our
owne nature, doe caſte ſtumbling blockes in our
owne wayes, to hinder and let vs in the courſe
and raſe of godlineſſe.
               
                  Verſ. 12. 13. Teach vs further, that God doth
not onely remooue ſtoppes and lets, but alſo gyueth
vnto vs aboundance of his mercyes as continuall
ſpurres in our ſides, to prouoke vs to wel
doing and obedience. Ioſeph made his maiſters
fauoure an effectuall inſtrument, to keepe him
back from committing vilany with his miſtres.
Geneſ. 39. 8. See Deutr. 8. thorow out, but ſpecially
from verſe 10. to the end of the chapter.
               
                  Verſe 14. Teacheth vs, that the church ſometimes
by one meane, and ſometimes by another,
is brought into wonderfull diſtreſſes. Which
thing is liuely expreſſed Iſaiah. 5. 1. 2. 3, &c. Alſo
Math. 21. 33. 34, &c. vnder the parable of the
vineyard. Which alſo rightly conſidered ſerueth

well to ſtop thoſe mens mouthes, that ſtande ſo
much vpon the outward ſhew, and multitude of
the church. See Michaiah 7. 1. Rom. 11. 1. 2. 3-4.
5, &c. Iſaiah. 1 ver. 9.
               
                  Verſe. 15. Teacheth vs that all thinges what
ſoeuer, though they be neuer ſo great or little (&
therefore theſe ſpeeches they are ſmall thinges,
are of no force, hindring ye growth of the church)
ought to be remooued, and that ſpeciallye euen
in the beginning of the planting of Churches,
& while the churches themſelues, be as it were
tender and yong. This order of reformation, the
good kings obſerued: as Iehoſaphat. 2. Chr. thorow
out 17. Hezekiah, alſo 2. Chr. 29. &c. Ioſias
likewiſe 2. Chro. 34. thorow out, & namely verſe
3. from which our ſauiour Chriſt him ſelfe was
not far off in exāple & practiſe. Ioh. 2. 14. 15. &c.
               Verſ. 16. 17. Set out, the aſſured and continuall
affection, that ought to be in the church,
to her ſpouſe and head Chriſt, ſo that in purpoſe
& ſtrength of Gods ſpirit, ſhe may alwaies ſaye:
Who ſhal ſeperate vs from the loue of Chriſt?
Shal tribulation or anguiſh, or perſecution, or
famine, or nakednes, or perill or ſwoord? No,
for I am perſwaded, that neither life nor deth
nor angels nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things preſēt, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, ſhalbe able
to ſeperate vs frō the loue of God, which is in
Chriſt Ieſus our lord, as it is written. Rom. 8.
35. 36. 37. 38. 39.
            
            
               
               CHAP. the third and the ſumme thereof.
               
                  The Church declareth the moſt earneſt deſire
that ſhee had euery daye more then other,
to take hold of, and to obtayne her
ſpouſe, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Afterward beeing
fully aſſured of the glory of her ſpouſe,
ſhee ſheweth that it is much better and
profitable for her, not to ſtay her ſpouſe
here, but to follow him, aſcending into
his heauenlye brydechamber. 7. 8. 9. 10.
11.
               
               
                  
                     1 IN my bed ſundry nights I ſeeking
him, that my ſoule loueth,
I ſeeking him (I ſaye)
when I had not founde him, I
ſayd,
                     2 I will now riſe vp, and I wil
goe about the citie: by the ſtreetes and by the
open places will I ſeeke him, whom my ſoule loueth:
but ſeeking him I haue not found him.
                     3 I ſayd vnto the watchmen that goe about the Citie,
they finding me, haue you ſeene him whom
my ſoule loueth?
                     4 I had but a little paſſed by from them, when I
found him whom my ſoule loueth: I tooke hold

of him, neither will I ſuffer him to depart, till I
ſhall haue brought him into my mothers houſe,
and into the inner chamber of her that conceiued
me.
                     5 I charge you by an oth, O yee daughters of Ieruſalem,
tarrye abroade with the Roes, or with the
hindes of the fielde, stirre not vp, neither awake
this loue till he will himſelfe.
                     6 Who is ſhe that would come vp out of the wildernes,
as it were perfumed with the liftinges vp of
ſmoake, perfumed with myrrh and incenſe,
better then all the fine powder of the Apothecary?
                     7 Behold his bed, which is better then that, that is
Solomons, (about which ſtand threeſcore mightie
men, of the mighty men of Iſraell,
                     8 All taking hold of the ſword, are expert in warre:
euery one is gyrded with his ſwoorde vppon his
thigh, for feare euery night.)
                     9 Yea better then the bed, which king Solomon prepared
for him ſelfe, of the trees of Lebanon:
                     10 Whoſe pillers be made of ſiluer, and that that
was layd vppon it of golde: whoſe couering was
purple coloured, the inwardes wherof were as i
                           •
                        
were, paued with loue, by the Damoſels of Ieruſalem.
                     11 O yee damſels of Sion, come foorth and beholde
king Solomon, with the crown, which his mother
prouided for him, in the day of his betrothinges,
and in the day of the gladnes of his hart.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THough in this ſong it maye be,Con.
that all the chapters thereof, do
not hang and depende one vpon
an other, by reaſon that ſome
thinges were ſayde and done at
one time, and in one place, and
ſome at an other time, and in an other place: yet
for the knitting of this with the former, this me
thinketh may be noted, that hauing before declared,
what paſſed in the daye ſeaſon, or els when
the day was very nigh, and that while they were
togeather in the country as it were; the church
doth now declare the matters and ſpeeches, had
in the night, and in the citie, as may plainly appeare
by the two firſt verſes.
               1 The chapter I take it,Diuiſ. may be deuided into
two partes. In the firſt the church ſetteth
out the great deſire that ſhee hath to take
holde of Chriſte, and to poſſeſſe him, which
appeareth in this, that by daye & by night,
at home and abroad, in the countrey and in
the citie, ſhe is wonderfully inflamed with
his loue, and this reacheth from verſe 1. to
the end of the 5.
               2 In the other ſhe doth as it were correct her
ſelfe, deſiring rather that hee ſhoulde take
hold of her, and that ſhe might abyde with
him, than he with her, where vpon ſhee entreth
into a commendation of his glorye,
ſweetnes, &c. not onely comparing it with

Solomons, but preferring it before it, and
that by manye degrees, and this reacheth
from verſe 6. vnto the end of the chapter.
               
                  Verſe 1. In my bedde
                  ) Theſe are the churches
words, teſtifiyng her hunger and thirſt after her
ſpouſe, that in theſe places, and at theſe times,
wherein menne giue them ſelues to their pleaſures
and reſt, her ſoule was toſſed and troubled
with ſeeking, yea and longing after him, whom
his ſoule loued. And it woulde be marked, that
ſhe ſayth not onely one night, but ſundry nights:
teſtifiyng her continuance and earnellneſſe, in
this holy hunger, and moſt aſſured loue: to which
alſo appertayneth the dubbling of the word ſeeking
him, expreſſing thereby her earneſte affection.
Theſe wordes, whom my ſoule loueth, are expounded
before, chapter 1. 7. In ſum, the church
vſing this Periphraſis inſtead of a proper name,
doth nothing els but expreſſe the force of his
loue, and the earneſtnes thereof. Now where
ſhe addeth, when I had found him, that is, when I
did not ſufficiently perceiue him, to bee preſent
with me according to my hartes deſire (for els
Chriſt is neuer abſent from his church, but continually
preſent therewith, as appeareth Math.
28. 20.) True it is that in our vnderſtanding, &
to the iudgement of the Church, Chriſt ſeemeth
either to be altogeather abſent, or els not verye
nigh: but howſoeuer it be, this is the truth, that
He that keepeth Iſraell, will neither ſlumber

nor ſleep, Pſal. 121. 4. But ye Godlye are moſt
greeued with this aſſault in the time of perſecutions,
trialls, troubles, ſorowes, &c. Which
alſo may be ſignified by the word night in this
place, as it ſeemeth to be taken. Iob. 17. 12. It
followeth I ſayd, (vz. to my ſelfe) for al theſe are
the words of the Church, ſpeaking vnto herſelf,
& as it were declaring the conſultations which
ſhe had with her ſelfe, and reſoluing what ſhee
were beſt to do.
               
                  Verſe. 2. I will now riſe vp. q. d. I will delaye it
no longer, nowe I am reſolued diligentlye and
carefully to ſeeke him, yea leauing my bed and
naturall reſt, to the ende I maye finde him.
And I will go about the City, vz. to ſeeke him. q.
d. I will leaue no place vnſought, which alſo
may appeare by the particulers following of
ſtreetes and open places. I will ſeeke him. vz. with
great diligence and earneſtnesꝭ whome my ſoule
loueth, (ſee verſe. 7. of the firſt chapter) but ſeeking
him I haue not found him. The ſpouſe expreſſeth
theſe wordes ſorrowfully, not ſo much for
the paines ſhe tooke, as that ſhe could not meet
with him, whom ſhe ſo tenderly loued, and carefully
ſought. And when ſhe ſayth, ſhee founde him
not, ſhe meaneth ſo ſufficiently as ſhe would, and
as her heart deſired, as may appear alſo by ver.
1. of this chapter, for the better vnderſtanding of
theſe wordes in this place, read the notes there,
for they ſerue alſo fitly for the purpoſe.
               
                  
                  Verſe 3. I ſayd vnto the watchmen.
                   The church
meaneth by this manner of ſpeech, that ſhe neyther
diſſembled her loue towardes Chriſte, nor
feared to demand euery one that ſhe meetes, no
though they were publique rulers or preachers
(for that it is as I thinke, ſhe meaneth by watch
men: Ezech. 33. 2.) concerning Chriſt her huſband,
but that ſhe did openly declare her vnfeyned
loue towards him, for which ſee, chap. 2. 5.
that go about the city, ſhe ſpeaketh this according
to the cuſtome of men, or townes of warre, who
beſides that they haue ſtanding or ſet watches,
for euery corner or quarter of their citye, haue
alſo certain cheefe men appoynted for their authority
and faithfulneſſe, continually to go from
one place to another, to oueruew the reſt, and to
ſee that they are faythful in the charges committed
vnto them. They finding me, that is, when
they had found me, going about the city by the
ſtreetes and open places thereof, as verſ. 2. Haue
you ſeene him. She ſpeaketh to ſuch as perhaps
knewe him not, neither by name nor by face,
though indeede they ſhould haue beene well acquainted
with him: but ſuch is the force of earneſt
loue, that it many times maketh men beleeue,
that others know them, whome they like
of, though they do not. Whom my ſoul loueth. See
this expounded, chap. 1. 7.
               
                  Verſe. 4. I had but a little paſſed by
from them.
                   The Church declareth not what

comfort or counſell ſhee had at the watch-mens
handes, which perhaps was little or nothing at
all, ſo rechleſſe and vnfaithfull manye times are
they that ſhould be moſt forward, but proceedeth
to declare what iſſue her diligent ſearching had,
namely that ſhee was ſcarce gone from them, or
paſſed but a little way from them. When I found
him, whom my ſoule loueth, vz. to the great ioy and
contentment of my hart. I tooke hold of him. As
in the former wordes ſhe had declared what ſhe
did before ſhee found him, ſo now ſhee ſheweth
what ſhe did after ſhe had found him, vz. laid faſt
and ſure holde of him, as loath to let him depart,
whome ſhee had ſo painefullye ſought, and did ſo
tenderly loue. Neither will I ſuffer him to depart,
vz. at any time or by any meanes from me. She
ſheweth the holy purpoſe ſhe had, to detaine and
keep Chriſt with her, for the better performance
whereof alſo ſhee maketh a promiſe, that ſhee
might thereby be the more ſtraightlye bound to
the doing of the ſame. Till I ſhall haue brought him
into my mothers houſe. For the word till, ſee before
chapter 2. 17. meaning alſo by her mothers
houſe, moſte familiar and delightfull dwelling
and continuaunce with him; by which alſo, (for
the great loue that mothers beare vnto their
children, for which ſee Iſaiah 49. as alſo Iſaiah
66. 13.) ſhe noteth moſt comfortable intertainement,
and friendlye continuing togeather, as it
were vnder one roofe. And into the inner chamber,
                  
ſhee meaneth the beſt place of the houſe, and
moſt ſecreat, and if any one were more ſecreat &
better than an other. See 2. King. 6. 12. Of her
that conceiued me. A periphraſis, or deſcription
of hir mother. See Pſal. 51. 5.
               
                  Verſe. 5. 1. I charge you by an oth.
                   The church hauing
obtayned her huſband, and his holy companye
or felowſhip, enioyneth and that verye vehementlye,
the particular members thereof, to doe
nothing that may bee grieuous vnto him, and no
doubt but ſhee hath a ſpeciall regarde to the cuſtome
vſed then, and yet euen at this day in ſome
places vſed amongeſt vs, namely that ſonges are
ſung before the Bryde chamber, and certaine
noyſes of inſtruments broght, to wake the bride
and bridegrome from ſleepe. See all this verſe,
euen word for word as it is heere, expounded before
chap. 2. verſe 7. which alſo is an vſuall thing
in this booke, as we ſee in many mariage ſongs,
and other kind of verſes alſo.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Who is ſhe,
                   vz. beſide my ſelfe: q. d. what
people is there in the world beſides the church,
that would do this and that, that is, thoſe things
which are expreſſed in this verſe? And heere beginneth
the other part of the chap: in which the
church, correcting as it were, her former ſpeech,
ſpeaketh thus as it were; what ſhoulde I cauſe
him to remaine with me? Nay rather, I ſhoulde
ſtriue to enter into his pallace, who hath all
thinges moſte fayre, beſte furniſhed, and exceedingly

ſweete, and well ſmelling, yea, whoſe
very Bedde or Bride-chamber, is much more
glorious, then all Solomons roialty, which afterwards
ſhee commendeth in many reſpectes.
That would come vp out of the wilderneſſe, that is,
forſake the world, and the things that be therein,
which may bee aptly compared to a wilderneſſe,
becauſe▪ as it is commonly ful of hurtful &
noyſome thinges, ſo is the world. As it were perfumed,
with the liftings vp of ſmoke, that is, aſcending
vp directly euen as pillers of ſmoke. She
addeth, perfumed with myrh and incenſe. Wee
know that theſe were ſweet & pleaſant things,
for the ſauour and ſmell of them, ſee Pſal. 45. 8▪
                  Better then all the fine powder of the Apothecarie.
The worde that is here turned Apothecary,
ſignifieth ſuch a merchaunt as ſelleth all
ſortes of ſweete ſmelling thinges. Our groſſers
heere amongeſt vs, but ſpecially our Apothecaries,
haue their ſhops moſt ſtuffed with ſuch ſauours,
and are moſte often in the compounding
of ſuch things for ſmell, and therefore it is not
yll turned Apothecary. Whatſoeuer it be: the
Church mindeth to declare, that though ſhe had
the vaintieſt, and delightfulleſt thinges in the
world, yet theſe could not hinder her from comming
to her huſbād Chriſt, in whom were hid al
the treaſures of God. Col. 1. 19. Alſo Coll. 2. 3.
and as in reſpect of which, all the thinges of the
world were to be accoūted but loſſe, dyrt, dung,

and whatſoeuer is moſt vile; ſee Phil. 3. 8.
               
                  Verſe 7▪ 
                     Behold this bed, which is better then that
that is Solomons.
                   She amplyfieth the excellency
of the bed of Chriſte and his church, by comparing
it with Solomons, & firſt ſhe commendeth
it for the ſafety that is to be had & found there,
and that in this verſe, and verſe 8: all which
is conteyned in a parentheſis as you may ſee.
Secondly for the deare price, and rich furniture
of the ſame, verſ. 9, 10. And ſhe entreth into
this courſe of commendation, not only to ſet out
the great glory of her huſband, but thereby alſo
the better to ſtirre her vp to perfourme her duty
towardes him, that was of ſuch great ſtate and
magnificēce. About which ſtand threeſcore mighty
men. q. d.
                   The bed is watched, leaſt any ſhold
eyther by force or frawd, annoy the bridegr
                     •
                  me
or his ſpouſe: neither doth this watche conſiſt of
weaklings, but of moſte ſtoute and couragious
men, yea, and that of a greate number of them,
namely threeſcore, and thoſe not heatheniſh idolaters,
or prophane profeſſors, but as ſhee ſayth
afterwards, of the mighty men of Iſrael, that is,
faithfull and godly, hauing the knowledge, beleefe,
zeale, and obedience of religion towardes
the Lord, and therefore moſt likely to be founde
truſty, towardes other. All this is ſpoken after
the manner of earthly princes, who as they haue
their guard for the day, ſo they haue their watch
for ye night, and yt in & about the bed-chambers,

as a man would ſay.
               
                  Verſe. 8. All taking hold of the ſwoord.
                   He amplifieth
this gard or defence, ſhewing that they are
not onely godly men, but as he ſayd before, men
of valure, and courage, able to handle this weapon
both for the defence of them ſelues, & their
king, and for the annoyaunce and hurt of their
enemies. Are expert in warre. As before ſhee had
commended them for their ſtrength, ſo here ſhee
prayſeth them for their ſkill, becauſe one of theſe
without the other are little auaileable. Euery
one is girded with his ſwoord vpon his thigh. This
was the maner and cuſtome then of that people,
as appeareth Pſalm. 45. 3. By which alſo ſhee
noteth their readines in the vſe of their weapōs.
For feare, vz. leaſt any hurt ſhould befaule ye brydgrōe
or ye brid. Euery night, ſhe meaneth yt they vſe
this courſe of a watchful care and wiſe defence
continually. No doubt but vnder all this, the holy
Ghoſt meant to ſhew, in what a ſafe ſtate, and
condition they are, that are matched with him,
who haue both infinite numbers of holy aungels
to attend vpon them, Pſalm. 91. 10. and of godlye
teachers to fence and garde them, as it were
thorow all the daungers and diſtreſſes of this
life whatſoeuer. See Epheſ. 4. 11. 12. 13. For
though he ſpeake here but of a certaine number,
yet no doubt but thereby he vnderſtandeth an infinite
number, which is alſo vſuall in the holye
ſcriptures.
               
                  
                  Verſe. 9. Yea better than the bed which king
Solomon prepared for him ſelfe.
                   Euery word heere
tendeth to the magnifiying of the mariage bed of
Chriſte and his Church. As firſt in that it was
better then a kings bed, who for his ſtate and
riches was commendable thorough the worlde
and wonderfull. 1. King. 10. 27. Thirdly, in that
it was better then that, which hee had prepared
for himſelfe. We know what good thinges men
make for themſelues, ſpecially when they haue
wherewithall to do the ſame. Yea, the very word
which is here rendred Bed tendeth to the amplifying
hereof, becauſe it ſignifieth a fruitfull and
flouriſhing bed, of which ſee before chap. 1. 16.
Yea and the wordes following make alſo to
that purpoſe. When ſhe addeth, of the trees of Lebanon,
which was a place farre from Ieruſalem,
the wood alſo whereof was very excellent and
good, as which for the worthineſſe of it was imployed
to the beſt thing, namely the building of
the Temple, as appeareth 1. King. 5. 6. So that
it was commendable, becauſe it was chargeable,
as being farre fet, and alſo becauſe it was
a notable and famous kinde of wood.
               
                  Verſe. 10. Whoſe pillers are made of ſyluer.
                   As
ſhe had before ſpoken generally of it: ſo now ſhe
commeth to diſcribe it by peece meale as it
were, affirming that the pillers were of ſiluer.
We knowe that ſtanding beddes haue pillers
and poſtes to vphold the Teſters: now whereas

other mens were made of wood, his pillers were
of ſiluer, which ſhould not ſeeme ſtrang vnto vs,
ſeeing the holye Ghoſte ſayth, he gaue ſiluer in
Ieruſalem, as plentifull as ſtones. 1. King. 10.
27. And that that was layd vpon it of gold, he meaneth
by that which was layde vpon it, the bed it
ſelfe, as we ſay, vnderſtanding alſo by golde, that
it was moſte precious, becauſe nothing we haue
is commonly more deare then golde. Whoſe couering
was purple coloured. He meaneth that the couering
or couerlet appertayning to that bed, was
of a ritch and coſtlye colour. For purple was in
thoſe dayes accounted moſt deare and precious.
See Prouerb. 31. 22. Alſo chapter 7. 5. of this
booke, Mark. 15. 17. Luk. 16. 19. The inwardes
whereof, hee meaneth the partes of the bedding,
yt were for the time out of ſight. Were as it were
paued with loue, that is, were as coſtly & rich, as if
they had beene adorned with things yt men moſt
loue & like noting alſo by ye word pauing, the varieties
of workes yt were in the ſame, as in pauinges
we ſee ſome checkered, ſome diamonded
ſome one way, & ſome another, which alſo are no
doubt, cunningly wroght wt needle work, a matter
much ſet by in theſe dais in euery thing. See
Pſal. 45. 14. By the damſels of Ieruſalē, he expreſſeth
ye perſons yt ſhould performe this worke,
not meaning ſuch as were broght vp in the cuntry,
but within the cōpaſſe of the wals of Ieruſalē,
where it was like they had bin trained vp, in

moſt curious, cunning, and coſtly workmanſhip.
               
                  Verſ. 11▪ 
                     O yee damſels of Zion.
                   Thoſe, whom in
the other verſe he had called damſels of Ieruſalē,
he calleth here damſels of Zion, putting a part for
the whole. For the hil of Zion was a peece of the
city, meaning no doubt by theſe, the faithful and
ſound mēbers of the church, whom yet notwithſtanding
they were forwarde, the church putteth
in minde of their duties. Come foorth, vz. out of
your owne priuate houſes, into publicke places,
and beholde king Solomon. The fame and name of
Solomons glory was great, but yet not matchable
with yt of Chriſt, for beholde a greater then Solomon
is here, Mat. 12. 42. and yet becauſe ſhee
had none greater to compare him vnto, ſhe reſembleth
him to the greateſt. For euen as the proper
name Dauid, is in ſcripture attributed to chriſt,
as Iere. 30. 9. So is Solomons here in this place.
With the crowne which his mother prouided for him
Now ſhee deſcribeth Solomons glory, yet ſo that
vnder the ſame is meant, the exceeding maieſtie
of Chriſt. The word crowne is put for the ſame,
as Phil. 4. 1. and by theſe wordes which his mother
prouided for him, is ſet out ye excellency therof:
for mothers wil prouide no baſe or mean things
for their children, if they be able. In the day of his
betrothings, yt is againſt the time yt he ſhold be affianced
& maried alſo, for ſhe putteth ye beginning
as it were of mariage, for 
                     •
                  he whole action of the
ſame. And in the daye of the gladneſſe of his hart,
                  
that is, againſt the daye, wherein his heart was
made glad, which was not onelye when hee and
his wyfe, were affiaunced, but when they were
married, and marriage duties perfourmed, wee
knowing by experience, that the marriage daye
is the day of greateſt myrth, ſpecially to the partyes
maried, againſt which daye alſo the parties
themſelues, and the parentes and all, do beſtow
all the coſt that poſſiblye they can, as we ſee by
dayly and continuall experience.
               
                  Verſe 1. Teacheth vs to be in continuall meditation
of Chriſt and heauenly things, yea and
that we ſhould for that purpoſe, break our ſleeps
as it were, to the ende that we maye bee ſeaſed
with the feeling of the ſame: and though we can
not, at the firſte or ſecond time conceiue thereof,
that yet we ſhoulde not for all that leaue off, but
looke for a time, wherein that holye hunger and
thirſt that we haue of righteouſnes, ſhal be plentifully
ſupplyed, to Gods glory and our comfort.
               
                  Verſe. 2. Teacheth vs to ſhake off all impediments
that may hinder vs from going to Chriſt:
as whether it be the heauines of our fleſh, or corruption
of nature thorow ſinne, &c. For which
ſee Heb. 12. 1. Alſo that we ſhoulde ſeeke good
thinges indeed with diligence and care to attayne
the ſame, and that not in one place onely,
but in euerye place where they were likely to be
had, or maye be founde indeede: and that though
we finde them not at the firſte ſeeking, yet we

ſhould not leaue off. For it may be, that we ſeek
them not, where they are to be had, or ſearch not
after them with a right mind, and therfore good
reaſon why we ſhould want the thinges we wiſh
and deſire; but ſtirre vp our ſelues ſtil, euen as it
were by exceſſiue toyle and importunity to preuaile
at the length.
               
                  Verſe. 3. Teacheth vs not to be aſhamed or afrayde,
by demaunding to come to the poſſeſſing
of thoſe thinges that we wiſhe and ſeeke after.
In labouring to get worldly things, we will endeuour
to ſhake off both ſhame & feare, & whatſoeuer
els might hinder vs, in atchieuing our purpoſes,
therefore for as much as theſe thinges are
farre more excellent, we ſhould labour likewiſe
with all earneſtnes to obtaine them. Alſo it teacheth
vs to be watchful & painfull, in the places
wherein God hath put vs, leaſt otherwiſe thorow
negligence, we offend his Maieſtye, wound
our ſoules, and hurt and hazard them, whom god
hath ſet vs ouer.
               
                  Verſe 4. Teacheth vs, that if we be not faynt
harted, we ſhall ſurelye finde in that time that
God hath appoynted with him ſelfe, from before
all times, the good thinges we long for and ſeek
after. See Galath. 6. 9. Alſo that when we haue
found them, we ſhould labour continually to reteine
them with vs, leaſt otherwiſe letting them
goe, or not ſetting by them, we be made voyde of
excuſe, as in reſpect of our knowledge, and ſo our

latter end be worſe then the beginning. See
Math. 12. 43. 44. Alſo 2. Pet. 2. 20. 21. 22.
               
                  Verſe. 5. Teacheth euery one to haue care and
conſcience, that neither in perſwaſion nor practize,
they do any thing to grieue or diſpleaſe the
Lorde Chriſte, and to cauſe him to depart for a
time, either from the whole church, or the particular
members thereof: for beſides that it is a
grieuous tranſgreſſion to contemne him, and ſo
great graces as he bringeth with him: it carryeth
with it alſo, the eternall deſtruction of our
ſoules.
               
                  Verſe. 6. Teacheth vs, that Gods children are
and ſhould be, alwayes willing and contented,
to depart from all thinges for the gayning of
Chriſt. For if they make more account of the
thinges of this life, they are not fit for him, as
he him ſelfe plainely telleth vs. Math. 10. 37.
Reuel. 14. 26. Secondlye, that howſoeuer the
thinges that God gyueth vs in this life, are of
them ſelues good, yet that they are euill, when
they hinder vs from approching to our ſauiour,
and that therefore we ſhould ſo vſe the world, as
though we vſed it not. 1. Cor. 7. 31. and no further
then as thereby we may be furthered, in the
aſſured feeling of Chriſte and eternall bleſſedneſſe
thorow him.
               
                  Verſe. 7. Teacheth vs to preferre things that
be indeed good, yea thinges that are the beſt indeed:
and that we ſhoulde not be deceiued with

a vaine ſhew of thinges, appearing to bee that
which they are not. See Phillip. 4. 8. Secondly,
that ſtrength of bodye and courage of hart,
is a thing not to be diſpiſed, but greatly eſteemed
rather, as a notable meane, that the Lorde
hath beſtowed vppon men, both for the iuſt defence
of them ſelues, and of other oppreſſed.
Prouided alwayes that they doe not as Lamech
or Nimrod, abuſe to pryde in them ſelues, or tyranny
towardes other, or to roioyce in the ſame
againſt the Lorde, becauſe the Lorde will not
haue ye 
                  Strong man glory in his ſtrength. Ier.
9. 23. But let him that gloryeth, glory in this,
that hee vnderſtandeth and knoweth the
Lorde. Thirdlye, that it is a notable thing for
Princes and men of might, to haue godlye and
faithfull men about them for their guarde, becauſe
it is impoſſible, that any man ſhoulde euer
be ſoundlye and continually truſtye to an other,
that is not vnfaynedly ſeaſed with the loue and
reuerence of God.
               
                  Verſe 8. Teacheth vs this much, yt euerye one
taking any charge vppon them, and therefore
particularly ſuch as haue the guarde and keeping
of other mens perſons, ſhoulde not onelye
bee men of valure and courage, for if they haue
no more but that, they maye eaſely runne into
rage and raſheneſſe: but alſo that they ſhould
be well qualified for knowledge and ſkill, leaſt
otherwyſe they maye thorowe ignoraunce,

indaunger both them ſelues, and the perſonnes
committed vnto them: yea that they ſhoulde be
alwayes ready for feare of daungerous inconue,
niences and afterclaps, continually to ſtand vppon
their watch Tower, for the faithfull diſcharge
of their duties, both towards themſelues
and others.
               
                  Verſ. 9. and 10. Teache vs, that great and
mighty perſonages, may haue and vſe very coſtly
and ſumptuous things, both becauſe the Lord
hath therefore ordayned them, and their eſtate
(wherevnto likewiſe the Lorde hath aduaunced
them) doth requyre the ſame. For in as much as
preferment commeth not from the Eaſt, nor
from the Weſt, but that it is the Lord that keepeth
ſome low, and aduanceth otherſome whom
he will: the Lorde by that preferment ſheweth,
that it is his purpoſe, that mightye men ſhoulde
haue the moſte large and liberall allowaunce of
all his creatures, becauſe he hath as it were put
them in poſſeſſion of the ſame, and indued them
with moſte excellent meanes for the atchieuing
thereof. Notwithſtanding alwayes they muſte
take heede, that they abuſe them not, either in
waſtefulnes, for then they ſhall aunſwere it to ye
Lord: or for oſtentation, as Ezechias did. Iſaiah
38. for that is againſt charity, and the Lord that
hath ſet them vpp, maye pull them downe, and
aduaunce others according to his good pleaſure.
               
                  
                  Verſe 11. Teacheth vs, that euen thoſe in the
church, that ſeeme to be moſte forwarde, had yet
notwithſtanding need, not onelye to bee tolde of
their duties, but euen to be exhorted and prouoked,
to imbrace the beſt thinges. Wherevnto
alſo they ſhould be incouraged, not onely by reaſon
of the remainders of dulneſſe and heauines,
which thorow corruption of nature, cleaue faſte
vnto them: but alſo by the excellencye of the
good thinges ſet before them, ſpeciallye Chriſte
him ſelfe, and the fulnes of all goodnes in him,
who is as a treaſure of good thinges that neuer
can be waſted, of whoſe fulneſſe we haue all receiued,
euen grace for grace, who though he giue
all his church and euery member thereof aboundaunce
of bleſſinges, hath yet notwithſtanding
neuer a whit the leſſe in him ſelfe.
            
            
               CHAP. 4. and the ſumme
thereof.
               
                  Chriſt the ſpouſe or husbande of the church,
greatlye commendeth the perfection
thereof, and highly extolleth the pleaſantnes
of her ſpeeches, & the ſweet ſauor
of her ornamentes, faithfulnes, dutyes
and fruites: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
11. 12. 13. 14. Which when the Church
heareth, and perceiueth, ſhee againe on
the other ſide, doth not onely confeſſe,
that all the good thinges ſhe hath, were
wrought in hir by Chriſt, but taketh alſo
therby an occaſion more & more to cō
                     mend
him, and to requeſt him, continually
to be preſent with her, and to do
her good, whervnto alſo Chriſt conſenteth.
verſ. 15. 16. 17.
               
               
                  
                     
                     1 BEholde thou art fayre my loue,
beholde thou art fayre: thine
eyes are like the doues, among
thy lockes of hayre: thine hayre
is like the flock of goates, which
looke downe from the mountain
of Gilead.
                     2 Thy teeth are like a flocke of ſheep, of equal proportion,
which goe vppe from the waſhing, all
which bring out twinnes, and there is none barren
amongeſt them.
                     3 Thy lips are like a threed of skarlet, and thy talke
is comely, thy temples among thy lockes, are as a
peece of a Pomegranate.
                     4 Thy necke is as the tower of Dauid, built for defence:
a thouſand ſhieldes hang therein: all the
tergates of the mighty men.
                     5 Thy two breaſtes are as two young roes, that are

twinnes, feeding amongest the lilies.
                     6 Vntill that day ſhall come, & theſe ſhadowes fly away,
I will goe into the mountayne of mirrh, &
into the hill of incenſe.
                     7 Thou art all fayre my loue, and there is no ſpot in
thee.
                     8 O ſpouſe, thou ſhalt come with me from Lebanon,
thou ſhalt come with me from Lebanon: thou
ſhalt looke from the top of Amanah, from the
top of Shenir and Hermon, from the dennes of
the Lions, and from the mountaynes of Leopardes.
                     9 Thou haſt woūded mine hart, my ſiſter, my ſpouſe:
thou haſt wounded mine hart with one of thine
eyes, and with one chaine of thy necke.
                     01 How fayre are thy loues, my ſiſter, my ſpouſe?
How good are thy loues before wine, and the ſauour
of thine oyntments before all ſpices.
                     11 Thy lips (O ſpouſe,) drop the honie combe: honie
and milke are vnder thy tongue: and the
ſauour of thy oyntmentes, is as the ſmell of Lebanon.
                     12 Thou art as a Garden incloſed, my ſiſter, my
ſpouſe: as a ſpring ſhut vp, and as a fountayne
ſealed vp.
                     13 Thy plants are as an orcharde of Pomgranates,
with ſweet fruits as of the cipres tree, with nard.
                     14 Euen Nard and Saffron, Calamus and Synamome,
with all the trees of incenſe, myrrh and
aloes; with all the beſt of the ſpices.

15 O fountaine of the gardens, O well of liuing
waters, and ſuch as flow from Lebanon.
                     16 Ariſe O north, and come O ſouth, blow on my
garden, that the ſpices thereof may flow out: let
my welbeloued come to his garden, and eat the
fruit of his ſweetneſſes.
                     17 I am come into my garden my ſiſter my ſpouſe,
I gathered my mirrh with my ſpice: I did eate
myne honie combe, with my hony: I did drinck
my wine with my milke: eat O friendes, drincke
and be filled therewith, O welbeloued.
                  
               
               
                  TO the ende that the Church
might well perceiue and feele,Con.
that her loue towardes Chriſte,
and her looking for him, was
not loſt, as alſo that ſhee had not
commended him in vaine, all
which things were largely handled in the other
chapter: it pleaſeth Chriſte the head and ſpouſe
of the Church in this chapter, not onely to enter
into a ſingular commendation of the excellency
of the church, as in ſundry ſpeciall partes of the
ſame: but alſo to declare his vnfayned loue againe
towardes her, and euen as it were to aſſure
her of the ſame.
               1 In my minde this whole chapter doth contayne
two ſpeciall points.Diuiſ. The firſt is a
ſingular commendation, that Chriſt gyueth
to the church, which beginneth at the

firſt verſe, & ſo holdeth on to the 14: whereof
alſo there are three partes: vz. an excellent
and ſingular deſcription (handled allegorically)
of the partes and members of
the church, he putting down eight in number.
verſ. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Secondly, Chriſt profeſſeth,
his great and wonderfull loue towardes
the church, making large promiſes,
and deſcribing notable duties appertayning
thereto. verſ. 6. 7. 8. 9. Thirdly, he
returneth againe to commend the church,
and many excellent graces in the ſame, as
the ſweetnes, delightfulneſſe and pleaſure
thereof. verſ. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
               2 The ſecond is, a notable ſpeech of the church,
with Chriſtes anſwer vnto the ſame verſ.
15. 16. 17. In the churches ſpeech, there
is firſte a commendation of her head and
ſpouſe. verſ. 15. and a wiſhe that all graces
may be conuayed from him ſelfe to her, ſhe
confeſſing that all the good ſhe had, ſhe had
it from him verſ. 16. And in Chriſtes aunſwere,
there is contayned a promiſe, of his
gracious acceptation of ſuch fruits, as the
church ſhall yeeld him. verſ. 17.
               
                  Verſe 1. Behold thou art fayre my loue.
                   He beginneth
the commendation of the church,Senſe. and
firſt as you may ſee, he commendeth it generally
in theſe wordes, and afterwards in this verſe,
and the verſes following, he entreth into a particular

commendation of the ſeuerall partes and
members thereof. Behold thou art fayre. The dubbling
of this ſaying, ſerueth not only to ſet forth
the vehemencye of Chriſtes loue towardes the
church: but alſo the excellencye of the church it
ſelfe, in that Chriſt can as it were, find no words
ſufficient to expreſſe the ſame, her beauty beeing
ſo great both outward and inward, and excellent
alſo in both reſpectes. See this expounded alſo
before chapter 1. 15. Thine eyes are like the doues,
vz. eyes. Meaning by this, that they were cleare
and ſimple: no doubt but he vnderſtandeth hereby
the Preachers and teachers of Gods worde,
who are or ſhoulde be the ſame vnto the church,
that the eye is to the body, vz. watchfull and he
                     •
                  
                  dy,
that nothing annoy it: in which reſpect alſo,
ye Prophets were called in the olde Teſtament
Seers, 1. Sam. 9. 9. See the ſame phraſe expounded,
chap. 1. 15. Among thy locks of hayre. This is
not chapter 1. 15. he ſpeaketh this according to
the maner of women in thoſe daies, who let their
ſmal locks, for ornaments, as they tooke it, hang
downe vppon ther temples, forehead, and faces,
vnder which and from amongſt which, as it were
the eyes did very comely ſhew themſelues. A
man may ſay, that by this he meaneth the large
aſſemblyes of the church, in the middeſt whereof
as the eyes in the head, doe the Miniſters and
Teachers of Gods worde, moſte notablye ſhine
foorth. Thine hayre is like the flocke of goates.
               
               
                  
He meaneth that it was verye ſmoath, cleare,
and fayre, as the wooll or fleeces of a flocke of
ſheepe or goates, that are well fedde and looked
too, which he doth yet more plainely expreſſe by
the wordes following. Which looke downe. This
word beeing vſed heere, and ver. 4. of the 6. chapter,
is diuerſly taken of ſundry men: ſome interpret
it thus, which riſe vp from the mountayne
of Gilead: ſome thus: which croppe from the
mountaine of Gilead: ſome one way, and ſome
an other. Whatſoeuer it be the holy Ghoſt meaneth
nothing hereby but to note, that euen as it
was a goodly ſight to beholde a flocke of goates,
looking from the mountayne of Gilead, which
lying on the further ſide of Iorden, was plentifull
of paſture, and therfore the cattell fed there,
muſt be fayre and well liking: ſo was it a pleaſant
thing, to behold the hayre of the church, that
is, the faythfull multitude and beleeuing people
in the church, which though there were no other
reſpect, yet euen for the infinite number thereof,
might well bee reſembled thereto, as the
haires of our head are without count. See for ye
proofe both of the one, and the other: Pſalme
40. 12. Alſo Reuel. 7. 9. Alſo 14. 1, &c. And
concerning Gilead, and the fruitfulneſſe thereof.
See Numbers. 32. 1. and other places.
               
                  Verſe. 2. Thy teeth are like a flocke
                   (as it is in
the Hebrue of equall ones, in adding eyther

the word ſheepe, for the more cleare ſenſe, as before:
or the word goates, which is indeed in the
Hebrue text of the other verſe. Which go vp from
the waſhing, that is are made white and cleane,
for that commodity alſo do ſheepe or goates get
after their waſhing: namely, that filth and duſte
by water is taken awaye from them. All which
bring out twinnes, that is two, one reſembling an
other, and aunſwering an other as it were. And
there is none barren amongeſt them. This ſeemeth
to be more then needed, becauſe he had ſayd before,
They brought foorth twinnes. But vnder
ſuch aboundant ſpeeches, the holye Ghoſte mindeth
to note, the moſte aſſured certaintye of the
thinges propounded. See the like Iohn. 1. 20.
Rom. 9. 1. Now in all this reſembling of the
teeth of the church, to ſheepe of equall proportion,
and that are waſhed and fruitfull, we maye
ſee that there is a threefolde commendation of
the teeth, namely a iuſt proportion of them all amongeſt
them ſelues, as amongeſt ſheepe, and
goates, of one breed or ſtature: cleanneſſe and
whitenes of them, as there is in the flockes that
are waſhed, and a meruailous fruitfull increaſe,
as there is of thoſe, that bring foorth twinnes.
And when he ſayth, that There is none barren amongeſt
them, he meaneth as a man would ſaye,
that there is no tooth wanting in their order and
place, but euen as ſheepe yeelding twinnes haue
alwayes their young by them, one aunſwering

another: ſo hath the Church her teeth. And no
doubt but by teeth heere, the holy ghoſt meaneth
the ſame that before he did by eyes, vz, the miniſters
and preachers of the worde, who muſt
as it were champe and chawe the ſame with
their teeth, that the people may the more eaſily
eate it: and all theſe are equall, not onely in that
they are or ſhoulde be all of one minde, all alſo
preaching and profeſſing one doctrine, but euery
man gouerning by one rule, that part of ye lords
flocke, that is committed vnto him: and they are
all waſhed in the bloud of Chriſt, and all made
fruitfull thorow the Lords bleſſing, by gaining
a multitude of ſoules vnto God, thorow the fooliſhnes
of preaching, as the world accounteth it.
If any man thinke it is not wel to reſemble one
matter to diuerſe things, let them take heed how
they ſaucely controull the Lord, who to the end
that we might the better conceiue of the things
themſelues, and he the more effectually expreſſe
the excellency of them, hath vſed it often both in
the old and new teſtament. See Iſaiah. 10. 15.
Amos. 3. 3. 4. 5. 9. Mathew. 9. 16. 17. 1. Corinth
9. 7.
               
                  Verſe. 3. Thy lips are like a thrid of Scarlet.
                   By
reſembling them to a thrid, hee noteth the
ſmalneſſe or thinneſſe of them, which in all
perſons, but eſpecially in womankinde is ſuppoſed
to be comely: and by ſaying they are like a
thrid of Scarlet, he meaneth that they were red

and beautifull, a thing alſo much tending to the
commendation of the lippes. Where alſo wee
muſt remember, that howſoeuer theſe thinges
are ſpoken, in outward ſhewe, after the manner
of earthly louers, that yet we muſt not thinke
vpon any outwarde loue, but referre all to the
inward and ſpirituall. If any by the ſmalneſſe of
the lippes, liſt to vnderſtande, the comelineſſe of
the miniſtery, and by the colour of them, the feruency
and earneſtneſſe of the teachers, I minde
not to contend. And thy talke is comely. From the
inſtrumentes of nature, whereby the voice is
framed, he proceedeth to the wordes expreſſed
thereby, meaning that the ſpeech of the church,
which indeede is the preaching and prayers of
the ſame, is fayre, fine, beautifull, and ſweet. Thy
Temples among thy lockes. He deſcribeth another
part of the countenaunce or face, vz. the Temples
of the heade, ſpeaking alſo of them according
to the cuſtome then vſed, the women ſuffering
their hayre to hang about their temples.
See verſe 1. of this chapter. Are as a peece of
a Pomegranate. For the vnderſtanding of this,
wee are to note, that a Pomegranate, when it is
broken or cut, is not only of a glorious & ruddye
colour, or as we woulde ſay, like to goodly roſes,
but alſo hath many grains and kernels in it, by
both which layde together, it ſeemeth vnto me,
that he doth not only deſcribe the beauty of the

particuler members of the Church, but alſo the
fruitfulnes and great increaſe of the ſame. If any
ſee more or better, let him thank God for it,
& vſe it to his glory.
               
                  Verſe. 4. Thy necke is as the towre of Dauid,
                   yt
is, like the towre that he built, at the ende of his
own houſe vppon mount Sion for a defence, of
which we may read ſomewhat. Nehe. 3. 19. 25.
&c. Built for defence, vz. of his owne houſe: and to
ſuccour▪ it againſt the rage of the enimies, if any
ſhould approch. A thouſand ſhieldes hang therein.
Firſt he putteth a number certain, for an vncertaine.
Secondlye, hee proceedeth to the commendation
of Dauids Tower, that thereby
the ſtate of Chriſtes church, and the excellency
thereof mighte better appeare. q. d. It is meruellouſly
well furniſhed with armour and munition,
yea, with armour that is polliſhed,
and prepared for moſte neceſſarye vſes: which
ſenſe I reſt perſwaded, both the compoſition
of the hebrue worde, & alſo the ſpeeches following,
will eaſily beare. All the Tergats of the
mighty, that is, euery one of them are meete for
mighty and noble men, they are ſo good and excellent.
q. d. they are no baſe things, nor belong
not to meane men, but to ſuch as are captains &
haue authority ouer the kings armies: of whom
we may read 2. Sam. 23. 8. 9. 10. &c. And Neh.
3. 16. The ſenſe is playn, yt the neck of ye church,
being reſembled vnto the tower of Dauid &c, he

meaneth thereby, that it was fayre and comelye,
alſo that it was forcible and ſtrong, yea that is
was well ſtored, with innumerable and excellent
graces. True it is, that theſe and ſuch other
ſimilitudes ſeeme ſomewhat hard, but louers
affections heere muſt be borne withal, and
ſith it pleaſeth the holy Ghoſte to ſtrammer as it
were, for our ſakes, we muſt ſubmit our ſelues to
learne of him. And no doubt, but ſtill he meaneth
hereby, the Preachers and Miniſters of
the worde, which in the church ſhine aboue others,
as a man would ſaye, euen as Turrets or
towers doe, aboue the reſt of the wals, that compaſſe
cities, whom the Lord alſo vſeth, for the defence
of the people: and of whom as he hath good
ſtore: ſo he furniſheth them with excellent graces,
fit for ſo great and holy a purpoſe.
               
                  Verſe. 5. Thy two breastes.
                  ) He commeth from
the necke to the breaſtes or teates: are as two
young roes, that is, freſhe and luſty. That are twins
that is of equall bignes and proportion. Feeding
among the lilies, that is, in ſweet and ſmelling paſture,
which can not chuſe but make the cattle
there fed, to thryue and be good. See for this
phraſe, chapter 2. 16. Many vnderſtand by the
two breſtes, the twoo Teſtamentes, which haue
mutuall reſpect one to an other, neither can one
of them well eaſely be vnderſtood without an other,
where there are alſo Lilies, that is, moſte
ſweet doctrines, by which mens mindes may be

refreſhed and recreated. For mine owne part I
take it, that ſpeaking of ſpirituall thinges after
the maner of men, and particularly of louer, he
doth deale therein according to their maners.
The breſts of women, haue bin alwaies accounted
to them ſelues and their good louers, not only
comely, but meanes alſo to make loue and liking.
See Prouerb. 5. 19. Whatſoeuer it be,
this me thinketh ſhould be plaine and certaine,
that all that hitherto hath beene ſpoken of the
comelines & beauty of the church, doth generallye
ſhew her to bee moſte abſolute and perfect,
which alſo may appeare by verſe 7. following:
neither need we to doubt, but that the ſame alſo
may be vnderſtood ſpecially by the waye of proportion,
euen of all the members of the ſame, euen
from the head, if you will, vnto the ſoales of
the feete, for as all the members of the church,
and euery one of them, haue their ſeuerall functions,
ſo may theſe thinges that be ſpoken of the
ſeuerall members, be applyed to euery one ſeuerally:
but howſoeuer in ſome we haue dealt ſo,
becauſe we haue the warrant of the worde, and
the proportion of faith, as a ground for the ſame,
yet to ſtand vpon them all, ſpecially where ſuch
props faile me, were too too much curious.
               
                  Verſe. 6. Vntill that day ſhall come, and theſe ſhadowes
ſhall flye away.
                   For the wordes ſee them expounded
before. chapter 2. 17. There beeing only
this difference, betweene this and that place,

yt there ye church promiſeth to remayn wt Chriſt
for euer, & here Chriſt promiſeth to abide with
it continually. As Math. 28. 19. Otherwiſe the
ſenſe and meaning is al one. And in this and the
two verſes following, ther is contained Chriſts
anſwere and promiſes, vnto the petitions that
the church made before, chap. 3. where ſhee wiſheth
and ſeeketh for his preſence, & other good
graces in him, Chriſte promiſing as before is
ſayd, his preſence vnto the Church, and the particuler
members therof, ſo long as in this world
they wander as pilgrims from the Lord. 2. Cor.
3. 6. and afterwards verſ. 8. 9. of this chapter.
He promiſeth that the weariſome dayes of this
pilgrimage being finiſhed, hee will bring the
church, euen into his owne houſe, which is eternall
in the heauens. I will go into the mountaine
of myrrh, and into the hill of incenſe. Becauſe the
church had before exhorted him, to go to the pleaſant
mountains: chap. 17. he ſayth here that hee
will perfourme the ſame: It is vncertain, whether
there were mountaines of myrrh, and hils
of incenſe in yt country yea or no. But whether
there were yea or no, the meaning is ſpirituall,
namely that as in reſpect of the church militant
he would get him to the moſt pleaſaunt places,
euen to the mountayn of Moriah, vpon which it
is certain the temple was builded, as appeareth
2. chro. 3. 1. which mighte rightly bee called the
mountaine of myrrh, and the hill of incenſe, becauſe

of the great ſtore, that there was offered
vp and burnt to the Lorde. Whereof alſo this
may ſeeme ſome reaſon, that the word here vſed
for Incenſe, differeth not much from the name,
wherewith that mountayne is called: ſo in reſpect
of the church triumphant, he wold get him
to the heauenly Ieruſalem, which is in heauen,
where alſo ſundrye of his freendes are preſent
with him, and whoſe duties perfourmed vnto
him, are moſte ſweete and pleaſant for this and
other things, ſee Reuel. 21. 20.
               
                  Verſe. 7. Thou art all fayre my loue.
                   Another
commendation of the church, containing alſo in
it a promiſe, ſpecially of ſanctification and holineſſe
to be beſtowed vpon it in this life, as in ye
next verſ folowing, he promiſeth vnto it eternal
bleſſednes. And ther is no ſpot in thee, This muſt
bee referred ſpecially to ye eſtate of the church,
which ſhall be in the life to come: or elſe to men
nowe raunged into the Church, to whom their
ſinnes are forgiuen, and Chriſtes righteouſneſſe
is imputed, who hath waſhed vs in his bloude
from all ſinne, 1, Iohn. 1. 7. ſee Epheſ. 5. 26. 27.
               
                  Verſe. 8. O Spouſe,
                   This is the firſt time
that hee calleth her by this name, which yet
notwithſtanding ſundrye times after, hee giueth
vnto her, as Verſe. 9, 10, 11, 12, of this
Chapiter. Alſo Chapiter 5, 1, And the churche
hath this name giuen her, both in reſpect of
the betrothement that paſſeth betweene her and

Chriſte. Iſaiah. 1. 19. 20. As in reſpect alſo of
that ſolemne and bleſſed daie, that the Lorde
hathe appoynted for oure eternall marryage.
Thou ſhalt come. It is a promiſe as I ſayde before,
euen of eternall life. With me, to wit,
my ſelfe. Chriſt meaneth by this, not onely his
continuall preſence with the Churche, both in
this life and in the life to come: but alſo that he
will ſo wholly and thoroughly gather it, that
none of thoſe that come vnto him, ſhal eyther be
taken out of his handes, or periſh. &c. See Iohn
17. 12, & other places. Frō Lebanon. He meaneth
hereby a moſt pleaſant and fruitful place, where
there were many ſweete, tall, and excellent
trees, meaning hereby that none of thoſe things
ſhold let the church from being coupled with hir
huſband Chriſte. Of this place wee haue ſpoken
of before: It was a mountain vpon the borders
of the Lande of promiſe, or Iudea. Thou
ſhalt come with me from Lebanon. It is doubled,
both for the more vehemency of him yt ſpeaketh
as alſo for ye more certaintye of the thing pronounced:
q. d. Nothing ſhall ſtay thee, but thou
ſhalt indeede come with me, and enioy my continuall
preſence. Thou ſhalt looke from the toppe of
Amanah. Some thinke it to be a mountayne in
that part of Cilicia, that bordereth vpō the land
of Iſrael. Some of the Rabbins hold it to bee a
mountaine, in the borders of Iury, lying on the
north ſide thereof. I ſhame not to ſay, that for

the particuler I knowe not what to affirme,
howbeit this is the meaning, that from all the
quarrers of the worlde, they ſhall beholde the
eternall kingdom of God. From the top of Shenir
and Hermon. The holy ghoſt Deut. 3. 9. ſeemeth
to meane by both theſe names one mountain.
Wherefore it maye bee thought ſtraunge, that
Solomon in this place, maketh them diuers.
For the clearing whereof this would bee marked,
that at the firſt one and the ſelf ſame thing,
might be called by many names, as in reſpect of
diuers people, dwelling nigh vnto the ſame, and
the ſeuerall proprieties of their tongues, which
ſeemeth indeede to be the moſte naturall meaning
of Deut. 3. 9. and yet notwithſtanding in
proceſſe of time, and multitudes of people increaſing,
ſome of thoſe names applyed to the
whole, might be attributed to ſome part of it.
And this we ſee both by ſcripture, examples,
and otherwiſe. In old time the riuer Danubius
was indifferently named Danubius or Iſter,
whereas at this day, it is onely called Iſter at
that place, at which it entereth into the Ocean.
So likewiſe theſe wordes Horeb, Synai, Pharan,
are moſt commonly in the ſcriptures taken
for one and the ſelfe ſame mount, whereas wee
knowe that theſe words are ſo vſed, eyther becauſe
the mount Synai was very large, and ſo
according to the diuers partes thereof, had diuers
names: or elſe they were mountaynes

one nigh to an other. The like maye we ſaye of
Hermon, that part that lay towardes Sydon, beeing
called Shirron, as Moſes ſayth, and that part
that the Amorites had gotten, being called Shenir:
and that howſoeuer they ſeemed to be confounded
in the dayes of Moſes, yet afterwardes
they were diſtinguiſhed one from an other, as
appeareth not onelye by this place, but alſo 1.
Chro. 5. 23. From the dens of the lions, and from the
mountaynes of the Leopardes. Theſe places belike,
as moſte commonlye mountaines and ſuch
ſolitarye places, abounded with wilde, noyſome,
and hurtfull beaſtes, by which Chriſt noteth alſo,
that he woulde ſet his church free from daungers.
This then is the meaning, that Chriſt promiſeth
to bring the church out of Lebanon, and
to effect this much for her, that from the top of
moſt high mountaines, ſhee ſhall beholde, to her
moſt ioyful contentment, who be malicious, cruell
and fierce, ſubiected vnto her. And heere we
muſt know, that in all this, he alludeth to thoſe
places of the lande of promiſe, by which the Iſraelites
firſte entred into the ſame, and from
whence they might beholde that goodly cuntry.
Shenir and Hermon, were very high mountaines,
on the farther ſide of Iorden, from whence they
might behold ye land of promiſe. Lebanon as alſo
Amanah, as it ſhould ſeem, was on this ſide Iorden,
but yet in the borders of the land of Canaan
towardes the north. Now we muſt vnderſtand,

that many tymes in the ſcriptures, vnder the reſemblaunce
of theſe thinges, that were done amongeſt
the old people, there are ſet out vnto vs
ſuch thinges, as Chriſt ſhould doe for his, vnder
the new Teſtament. For as much therefore, as
in all this ſong, Lebanon is taken for a pleaſant
and plentifull place, as alſo in many other ſcriptures
beſide, for which ſee Deut. 
                     •
                  . 25. and on
the other ſide the Amorites and other enemies
dwelt in Hermon, and Shenir: the holy Ghoſte
vnder theſe ſhadowes meaneth, that as from Libanus
and other mountaynes ſcituated on the
borders of the land of promiſe, they did beholde
the whole country, and at the laſt, come into the
land of promiſe: ſo when they come vnto Chriſt,
they ſhould haue a gappe layde open vnto many
miſteries, and by Chriſte at the laſt bee brought
vnto the knowledge of God, and life euerlaſting,
from the attaynment whereof neither the
pleaſures of Lebanō, nor ye dens of Lions & wild
beaſtes, ſhould hinder them, but yt in the midſt of
perſecutions & tyrannus oppreſſions, they ſhold
haue free acceſſe and enteraunce thereto.
               
                  Ver. 9. Thou haſt wounded my hart,
                  ) or as the
word alſo may import, Thou haſt caught my hart,
or taken it from me, meaning by both theſe termes
of loue, one thing, to wit yt Chriſt was euen inwardly
rauiſhed as it were, with the loue of the
church: and ſo he beginneth now to come again
to the praiſes of the church, ſpeaking notwithſtanding

as it were a man, burning with moſte
earneſt loue, for all theſe thinges are ſet downe,
to expreſſe Chriſtes ſingular loue to the church,
which when he hath declared with a maruailous
earneſt affection, & ſet out with graue & waighty
exclamations in this & the next verſe following,
he proceedeth to praiſethe church, for the graces
before rehearſed. My ſiſter my ſpouſe. Chriſt gyueth
the church both theſe names, his ſiſter, becauſe
ſhe is the daughter of the heauenly father,
and as fellow heyre of eternal glory with chriſt:
and his ſpouſe, becauſe he hath betrothed her vnto
him ſelfe in mercye, truth and righteouſneſſe.
Hoſea. 2. and accounteth of her as a moſt dearely
beloued wife. thou haſt wounded my hart. He repeateth
the former wordes, the more ſtill to expreſſe
the earneſtneſſe of his loue. With one of
thine eyes, q. d.
                   I need not to beholde both, thy
beauty is ſo great in one, that I am euen taken
therewith. Thus he ſpeaketh of ſpirituall graces,
as earthly louers do, of the outwarde partes
of thoſe, whome they affect: meaning no doubt
by this, not onelye the excellent wiſedome, and
foreſight of the church, but alſo the beauty therof,
for euen in the eye there is beauty. And with
one chaine of thy necke: q. d.
                   not all thine ornaments,
but euen one of them alone, hath drawne
me to loue and like thee: by which we maye ſee,
what account the Lorde hath euen of the beſt of
the graces, that he hath beſtowed on the church,

and here ſtill he ſpeaketh, as though the church
had beene decked after the maner of coſtly women,
with chaines, iewels, and ſuch like ornaments,
for the beautifiyng of her.
               
                  Verſe. 10. How fayre are thy loues,
                   that is, how
glorious and excellent, yea and full of delight,
are thoſe ſound affections of a good minde, that
thou carryeſt towardes me, by which I am alſo
moued, euen to loue thee againe: and hee ſpeaketh
of them in the plurall number, not onelye
thereby to expreſſe the multitude of thē, but the
excellency alſo. My ſister my ſpouſe. Theſe words
are interpreted before verſe 9. of this chapter.
How good are thy loues before wine, that is, they
are better and more delightfull by much, then
very good wine. See chapter 1. 2. where the
church ſpeaketh the ſame wordes of Chriſt, that
Chriſt ſpeaketh here of her, rendring as it were
like for like, which is an vſuall maner among
louers, and particularly in their words and ſpeeches
one of them to an other. And the ſauour of
thine oyntments, that is, the ſweete and pleaſaunt
ſmell of ſuch graces as thou haſt receiued. For
it is vſuall in the ſcriptures, by oyle, oyntment,
annoynting, &c. to vnderſtand, the graces of God
beſtowed vpon his children. See Pſalm. 89. 20.
Alſo 45. 7. 1. Iohn. 2. 20. 27. And yet no doubt
but he meaneth alſo the pleaſantneſſe that is in
the oyntmentes them ſelues. Of which ſee Prouerb.
27. 9. Pſalm. 133. 2. vnder theſe earthlye

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
ſo the word incloſed, doth expreſſe her chaſtitye
as before: and noteth alſo the aboundaunce of
fruite in the ſame, ſhee lying not open as a pray
to bee ſpoiled. The incloſure of the church, is
Gods ayde and prouidence, by which he defendeth
her againſt all her and his enimies. The
church heere compared to a garden incloſed, in
Iſaiah cap. 5. 1. 2. &c. is reſembled to a vine or
Vineyard. See pſalm. 8. ver. 8. 12. 13. 14. My
ſiſter my Spouſe. Theſe are expounded verſe 9.
of this chapter. As a spring ſhut vp, vz, thou art
like vnto it. He meaneth by this, not onelye the
aboundaunce of waters that the church hath to
refreſh it ſelfe withall, in that he compareth it,
to a plentiful ſpring, able to water all the parts
of his grounde or Garden, as the beds and the
plants therin, &c. but by ſaying that it was ſhut
vp, he noteth that it did not ly open to the ſtranger,
yea, that no man coulde come vnto it, but by
his ſufferaunce and appointment. And as a fountaine
ſealed vp, vz. that no man can come to, or
haue thereof: and this tendeth to the ſame ende,
that the former ſimilitude. Al being ſpoken according
to the manner of that country, wherein
water was not onely ſkant, and therfore a good
bleſſing to haue water, but alſo ther was much
a doe to keepe it to them ſelues: ſee Geneſ. 21.
25. Alſo Geneſ. 26, 17. 18. 19 &c.
               
                  Verſe. 13. Thy plantes,
                   that is, all that is
planted and ſet in thee, are as an Orcharde of

Pomegranates, that is, are verye deare and precious,
yea very healthfull and good, for all theſe
as we know by experience, belong to pomegranates.
With ſweet fruites, that is, abounding with
other ſweete fruites and profitable thinges. beſides
Pomegranates, ſome particulars whereof
he reckoneth in this verſe, and in the verſe following.
As of the Cipres tree. See this expounded
before, chapter 1. 14. With Nard. An other particular
thing of good ſauor and ſweet ſmelling, no
doubt but it was very coſtly alſo. See Mark, 14
3. Alſo Iohn. 12. 3. and groweth in India, Syria,
and other places there about.
               
                  Verſe 14. Euen nard.
                   This is ſpoken of already,
and ſaffron, a thing well knowne to euery one
of vs, to bee profitable and precious. Calamus.
There are of this kinde of calamus or reed, diuers
ſortes, as the Herbaxians doe well inough
know. It is moſte likely, he meaneth it of that
which is called Calamus Aromaticus, or odoratus
for the excellent ſmell it had, and was wont
to be brought out of Arabia Felix, into Iudea,
& was appoynted to be vſed in the confection
of the holy oyle. Exo. 30. 23. And Sinamome,
This is a thing well known to vs, to be far fet.
and of great price and excellencie. With all the
trees of incenſe, that is, all trees bearing incenſe.
or matter that yeeldeth a ſweet ſmell or ſauour,
whereof alſo he reciteth two afterwardes in this
verſe. Myrrh. For this ſee chap. 1. 13. And Aloes.
                  
This is a certaine kinde of ſweete and precious
wood, and ſmelleth well, both it and myrrhe togeather,
as appeareth Pſalm 45. 8. and is forcible
againſt putrification, in which reſpect they
vſed to annoynte dead bodies with it as appeareth
Iohn. 19. 30. 40. for Aloes ſee Num. 24. 6.
With all the beſt of the ſpices, that is, with al moſt
coſtly, ſweet and precious thinges: and all this
tendeth to the commendation of the Church, after
this ſort, that as thoſe Gardens be moſt excellent,
and worthye after a ſort to bee beloued
and eſteemed, that haue the moſte rare, beſt, and
precious thinges growing in them: ſo theſe excellent
graces and fruites of the Church, doo
commend the ſame to God and men, and make
the Lord Ieſus as a man would ſay, inamoured
with the loue thereof. Many men do more curiouſlie
then needeth, according to the ſeueral proprieties
of the matters mentioned, applie them
to the Church. It is inough that generally we
know, that by al theſe things are ment, the gifts
and graces wherwith the Church is beautyfied
and adorned, euen as a plentifull and pleaſaunt
Garden, with infinite numbers of rare and pleaſant
ſimples, as they call them, or fruites, wherby
ſhe is made commēdable, ſpreading her fame
far & wide, inſomuch yt therof Chriſt her huſband
is euē as it were, rauiſhed with her loue, hauing
yet notwithſtanding nothing of her owne to
moue him to that affection, but all yt ſhe hath be

ſtowed vpon her frō him. See to this end a large
diſcourſe. Ezech. 16. thorowe out almoſt.
               
                  Ver. 15 O fountain of the gardens.
                   Heere beginneth
the ſecond part of this chapter, the Church
ſpeaking vnto Chriſt, & ſingularly commending
him in this verſe. q. d. I humbly acknoweledge
the thinges to be in me that thou haſt ſaid,
howbeit I confeſſe, that they are not of my ſelf,
but from thee, who art the authour and giuer of
all good thinges: and though that I do perform
the dutie of a fountaine towardes mine, yet thou
art hee, to whome indeede the name of fountaine
and liuing waters, yea of life it ſelfe doth onelie
appertaine: yea thou art that onely fountaine,
and I do but water others as from thee. O well of
liuing waters. The church meaneth by this word
continuall waters, & ſuch as cannot be drawen
drie, ſee Gen. 26. 19. meaning yet notwithſtanding,
vnder theſe earthly waters, heauenly and
eternal graces: of which our ſauiour Chriſt Ioh
7. 8. ſaith, that out of his belly that beleeueth
in him, ſhal flow riuers of water of life. And in
another place, namely Ioh. 4. 14. He that drinketh
of the water that Chriſte ſhall gyue him
ſhall neuer thirſte anye more, but that water
ſhallbe in him a well of water, ſpringing into
euerlaſting life. And ſuch as flow from Lebanon.
                  
She procedeth ſtil in ye cōmendaciō of the excellency
of her ſpouſe, moſt pure & clear water cam
from Lebanon, yea Iorden it ſelfe watering the
land of Iſraell, came after a ſorte from thence &

no doubt but the water of Lebanon, taſted of
that ſweetneſſe, that is mentioned before verſe
11. of this chapter. Euen as we ſee by experience,
that the waters that come out of the hilles
of ſome of ye Ilands of Molucca, taſte of the Sinamome,
Cloues, &c. that grow there. In ſumme
ſhee commendeth Chriſt, for the plentye of ſpiritual
graces in him, and the conueiyng of them ouer
to other, in that ſhee calleth him the fountaine
of the gardens. Secondly, for the perpetuity of the
graces, in that ſhee calleth him the well of liuing
waters: and thirdly for the ſweetneſſe and pleaſauntneſſe
of the ſame, in that ſhee reſembleth
him to the moſt ſweet and pleaſaunt waters, flowing
from Lebanon.
               
               
                  Verſ. 16. Ariſe O north.
                   The wordes of the
Church, intreating graces of her head and huſband
Chriſt, to make her fruitfull withall. It is
a notable turning of her ſpeech, to the windes
and quarters of the world, attributing ſence vnto
thinges without life: which alſo is common
to Poets and louers, ſpeciallye in their loueſonges.
He meaneth firſt the north quarter, becauſe
it is cold and moyſt, as beeing farre remoued
from the ſunne, and this he ſpeaketh as hauing
regard to the daye, and hotte country of the
land of Iudea. And come O ſouth. This quarter
is hot and drye, hee ioyneth them togeather, that
ſo there beeing a good mixture made of them
both, extreemity of cold, or continuance of heat,

might not worke barrenneſſe. And no doubt but
vnder theſe quarters, and a good and equal mixture
of them both, ſhe meaneth Chriſt and all the
members he hath, and vſeth to make his church
fruitfull, who graunteth the vſe of ſuch ſundrye
ſortes of ayre, to make his garden fruitfull, and
withall manye times by the contrarye courſe of
the windes, purgeth the ayre, and giueth ſometimes
cleare, and ſometimes dropping ſeaſons,
as maye ſerue moſte for the commoditye of his
ground or garden. Blow on my garden, that is, euen
as it were by blaſtes or blowing from ſundry
quarters, worke that which thou ſeeſt to bee
good and profitable for me, For it is a requeſt
hauing a regard to the former compariſon of the
windes and Chriſt togeather. It is ſomewhat
darke, in that the church calleth the church her
garden: but ſhee doth it not as hauing any thing
of her ſelfe. For whatſoeuer ornaments, flowers,
plants, &c. ſhe hath, ſhee hath it from Chriſte: but
by reaſon of the nigh coniunction which is betwixt
Chriſt and his church, ſhee beeing fleſh of
his fleſh, and bone of his bones. Epheſ. 5. 30. yea
and the titles of the one and the other, being indifferently
attributed to the one and the other.
As 1. Cor. 12. 12. where the church is called by
ye name of Chriſt. That the ſpices thereof may flow
out. By ſpices ſhe meaneth all maner of graces:
and by flowing out, ſhe meaneth continuall aboad
and increaſe in the ſame, ſo that we ſee to what

end the Church deſireth graces for Chriſte, vz.
that ſhee in her ſeuerall members, may bee yet
more and more fruitfull. Iohn. 15. 2. Let my
beloued come to his garden. An another petition,
containing the crauing of Chriſtes preſence,
meaninge that ſhee would haue him come and
dwell in her, euen as he had promiſed verſe. 6. of
this chapter. And eate the fruit of his ſweeteneſſes.
The ende of the prayer of the churche, vz. that
Chriſte might receiue glory and profite, by the
graces giuen vnto the ſame. And that worde
ſweeteneſſes in the plurall number, ſerueth to
two endes, to wit, to expreſſe the aboundance of
Gods graces, and alſo to denote and ſet out the
excellency of the ſame.
               
                  Verſ. 17. I am come into my Garden. q. d. Now
at ye length I haue yeelded vnto thy requeſt, to
come more fauorably & plainly vnto thee thā before.
For no doubt but he was continually preſent,
though the church either felt it not, or hee
himſelf did not ſo fully manifeſt ye ſame. My ſiſter
my ſpouſe. This is expounded alredy ver. 9. of this
chap. I gathered my myrrh with my ſpice, yt is, ſuch
pleaſant & delightfull fruits, as yu diddeſt yeeld,
& did indeed belong vnto me. I did eat mine hony
comb with my hony. He meaneth yt he receiued ye
fulnes of fruit from the church, namely yt as hee
had the hony, ſo likewiſe he had the honicombe. I
did drinck my wine with my milke, that is, both the
wine & the milk yt did belong to me. vnder theſe

ſeuerall ſortes hee meaneth ſtill, the ſweet, pleaſaunt,
and profitable fruites that the church did
yeelde vnto him, declaring heereby, that he did
moſte fauourablye accept the woorkes of his
church: and that hee was much more delighted
therewith, than any man is or can be in gathering
moſt ſweete ſmelling herbes and ſpices, or
in eating hony, yea though he eat it ſo greedely,
that he do with all deuour the combe: or in drinking
the beſte wine and pureſt milke, by which
no doubt he meaneth, the worde of God, and the
doctrine of the church, (as we haue heretofore
noted the ſame) becauſe that as wine, ſo it maketh
the hart merry, and as ſincere milke, it nouriſheth,
yea and ſtrengtheneth the infirme or
weake. Eat O friendes, vz. of mine hony and hony
comb. Drincke, vz. of my milke and wine. And be
filled therewith O welbeloued, that is, drincke plentifully
of the ſame, by which we ſee, that he compareth
the fellowſhip and coniunction, that is
betweene him and the church, vnto a banquet or
feaſt: q. d. take the ſame fruite that I haue of
the church, and be delighted therin and ſatiſfied
therwith, as it were with moſt ſumptuous banquets,
or daintie diſhes. So plentifull and kind
harted is the lord, yt he can not keep his ioy with
in himſelfe, but ſtirreth vp his friends & companions,
to eat and drincke, and reioyce with him,
meaning thereby ſpeciallye the miniſters of his
word, becauſe God vſeth them as his cōpanions,

in the aduauncement of the worke of mans ſaluation,
and generally all the faithfull, who ſhall
be fellow heyres with Chriſt.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Teacheth vs, that as the beauty of the
church generallye, ſhoulde cauſe vs to loue and
like the ſame: ſo particularly the faithfull Paſtors,
performing their dutie, and the holy multitude
of Gods people, they ſhould make vs moſt
to affect and commend the ſame. For if Chriſt
the head and ſouſe thereof, bee carried away euen
to the loue and liking, yea and to the commendation
thereof alſo; with the beholding of
thoſe graces, who yet notwithſtanding as in reſpect
of him ſelfe, needeth not them or to regard
them: how much more ſhould we do it, who need
not onely theſe things for our owne ſtay, but by
commending the church, or imbracing it doe
greatly prouide for our owne good thereby.
               
                  Verſ. 2. Teacheth, what a iuſt compoſition and
order there ought to be obſerued in the church,
and the holye gouernement thereof, and that to
theſe two endes eſpecially, namely that Chriſte
might take a ſingular delight and pleaſure therin,
all thinges beeing there perfourmed decently
& in order, according to ye generall rule of the
Apoſtle. 1. Cor. 14. 40. and that his people by
the ſame, might be builded vp in all holines and
righteouſneſſe euerye day more then other: and
in all reuerend regarde of that holy fellowſhip,
that maintayneth ſo right and good a courſe of

holy gouernment.
               
                  Verſ. 3. Teacheth vs, that there is nothing in
the church, that may or ought, to make vs more
in loue with the ſame, than the holy exerciſes vſed
there, and particularly the exerciſes of preaching
and prayer. For as by the one God begetteth
vs againe to him ſelfe, thorow the incorruptible
ſeed of the word. 1. Pet. 1. 23. which is his
effectuall inſtrument, to ſaue all them that beleeue.
Rom. 1. 16: ſo by the other rightly performed,
he prouideth for his own glory, while he is
called vpon in faith. Rom. 10. 14. And for our
good, giuing vs the meanes and grace to vſe the
ſame, whereby we are to lay our needes before
him, and to obtayne ſuch things as we ſhal aſke,
according to his will, in the name of his ſonne
Chriſt. Iohn. 16. 23.
               
                  Verſe. 4. Doth notably paint out vnto vs, the
great glorye and wonderfull ſtrength of the
church of God: which we are to ſet, as on the one
ſide againſt all weaknes of our owne, ſo againſt
all malice and power of the wicked, our ſauiour
telling vs, that The gates of hell ſhall not preuaile
againſt it. Math. 16. 18. And the Apoſtle
naming it the piller and ground of the truth. 1.
Timot. 3. 15. what meane weake ones then, for
feare or ſauour, in the dayes of perſecution to
fall away from it? Or the wicked in ſuch rage
& fury to ſet them ſelues againſte it, ſeeing that
al their labor is loſt, that they ſpend there about?
               
                  
                  Verſ. 5. Teacheth vs, that euen euerye thing in
the church, maye kindle in vs an vnfayned affection
to loue and like the ſame. So that he that is
not, or can not be mooued therewith, is altogeather
benummed and ſenceles: for if outwarde
comelines, do worke delight in outward things:
how much more ſhould inward beauty, draw affection
to ſpiritual & diuine graces. True it is,
that we walke heere by faith, & not by ſight, and
therefore we muſt haue other eyes, than the eies
of our bodie, to beholde theſe ſpirituall matters
withall, or elſe wee ſhall neuer thryue thereby,
which alſo we may ſee by daily experience. For
what is the reaſō, that ſo few regard the church,
and the graces of God giuen to the ſame, but becauſe
they meaſure it according to the rule or
yarde of their owne vnderſtanding?
               
                  Verſ. 6. Teacheth vs two thinges: firſt that
Chriſt the head of the church, graciouſly graunteth
the petitions of the church made vnto him,
and yeeldeth to her ſuit: which as it excellently
expreſſeth his wonderfull mercy, and great liberality
towardes his owne people: ſo is it, yea and
it ought to be a notable incouragement vnto thē,
by prayer to repayre to him, that is continually
and at all times more readye to giue, than they
are at anye time prepared or diſpoſed to aſke.
Secondlye, that the continuall and perpetuall
preſence of the Lord with his church, hath been,
is and euer wil be vnto his people, both generallye
and particularlye, a notable argument of no

ſmall comfort and incouragement to them. See
for this purpoſe. Exo. 3. 12. Act. 18. 10. For if
Gods people ſhould regard, either the malice of
the wicked on the one ſide: or their owne weakeneſſe
on the other ſide, they might eaſely be caſt
downe; but when they conſider, that hee that is
with them is ſtrōger then al, they take courage
and bee, as it were men reſtored from death to
life, and in him become more then conquerours.
               
                  Verſ. 7. Containing an excellent commendation
of the holines of the church, teacheth vs to
be rauiſhed as it were, with the holy loue thereof:
for Chriſt doth not ſo highly extoll the ſame
for his owne cauſe onely, but to teach vs both by
his wordes of prayſe, and example of practiſe, to
do the like. Secondly, the whole church, and euery
particular member thereof, learneth thereby,
what ſtrife there ſhould be in them, to attaine to
an excellent meaſure of holines and righteouſnes,
that might be acceptable to the Lorde, who
delighteth in the ſame: profitable to our brethrē,
who therby may be drawn to performe the like:
& comfortable to our ſoules whil we ſee, that by
ye faithful fruits of a ſoūd mind, God hath diſcerned
vs, frō the prophane & wicked of the world.
               
                  Verſe. 8. Teacheth vs, that howſoeuer wee
maye haue great ioye, and contentment in that
part of the Church, that warre-fareth heere
vpon earth, and in the great and ſingular beauty
of the ſame, by reaſon of the graces that God

graunteth thereto, as his worde, the prayers of
his people, and manye ſuch like: yet that we
ſhould not alwayes ſtay our ſelues heere below,
but by fayth and patience, bee lifted vp and prepared,
euen to the full fruition and poſſeſſion of
all heauenly ioyes, ſpecially ſith that Chriſte as
you ſee, draweth his church in this place, to the
vnfayned beholding thereof, which thing, if it be
rightly planted in our hartes, let vs aſſure our
ſelues of this, that no lawfull either pleaſures
or profites of this lyfe, nor no tyrannus perſecution
of the enemies, ſhall drawe vs awaye, from
the obedience of our God: for why, the loue of
heauen ſhall haue ſuch hold in our hartes, that it
will make vs in regarde thereof, to account all
thinges but loſſe and donge, ſo we maye gaine
Chriſt, and the fruition of his preſence. 1. Phillip.
3. 8.
               
                  Verſe. 9. Propoundeth vnto vs Chriſtes loue
towardes the church, to the ende that all men
might by his example, be taught to doe the like,
that is, in an vnfayned affection to loue and imbrace
the ſame. Secondly, that the graces of the
church, how great or ſmall ſoeuer they bee, are
accepted of Chriſte, euen as ſufficient to drawe
his loue towardes the ſame: for if Chriſt loued
vs, when we were his enemies, how much more
ſhall he loue the church, that is adorned not with
graces of her owne, but with gyftes of goodnes
from him, which ſeeing they are his owne, hee

will not refuſe, though the glory of them may be
ſomewhat darkened, thorow our corruptions.
               
                  Verſe 10. Teacheth vs, not ſlenderly, but in a
moſt large meaſure, to loue the Lorde Chriſte,
that loueth his ſo bountifullye and ſo tenderlye,
forgyuing vs ſo great a debt, and infinite multitude
of tranſgreſſions, that ſo hee might make
our loue more plentifull, faſt and ſure vnto him.
See Luk. 7. 47.
               
                  Verſe. 11. Teacheth vs to eſteeme aboue all
thinges in the church, that treaſure of the word,
that God hath committed to it: and that not onlye,
becauſe the worde it ſelfe is as it were the
life and ſoule of the church, from which if the
worde be ſundred, it can bee no more a Church,
than a corps without a ſoule, can be a man: but
alſo becauſe in it is contayned food, for all the
periods & points of our life. For if we be infants
in Chriſts ſchoole, it is milke vnto vs, and if we
be grown to the yeeres of diſcretion, it is ſtrong
meate to bring vs vnto a perfect man, and vnto
the meaſure of the age of the fulneſſe of Chriſt.
Epheſ. 4. 13.
               
                  Verſe. 12. Teacheth the church, that ſith the
Lorde in the multitude of his mercies, compaſſeth
it about with his fauour, and incloſeth it as
it were, with the walles and hedges of his continuall
prouidence, and all to this ende, that ſhe
might remayne as a chaſte ſpouſe, and pure Virgin
vnto him ſelfe, coupled vnto him in mercye,

righteouſnes & trueth, that therefore ſhe ſhould
beware, that ſhe doe not eyther thorow diſobedience,
vnfaythfully giue ouer her ſelf vnto others,
or by negligence ſuffer her ſelf to be carryed frō
him, but in all care and conſcience to bee anſwerable
to that holye chaſtitie, that the Lorde looketh
for in her, and ſhe in duty oweth to him.
               
                  Verſ. 13. and 14. Teacheth vs what great delight
the Lorde taketh in the ſeuerall fruites of
the church. Which ſhould teach the church, and
euery particular member of the ſame theſe ſpeciall
dutyes: namelye to bee zealous, yea plentifull
and aboundaunt in all good workes, and in
the ſeuerall ſortes and varietie of the ſame, and
the rather, becauſe this is an argument of incouragement
to them therein, that Chriſte the
head and ſauiour of the whole bodye, taketh ſingular
pleaſure therein.
               
                  Verſe 15. Teacheth vs: firſte that the praiſes
that Chriſt giueth vnto the church, ſhold not
make the church, either careleſſe of good works,
or proud in the ſame; not careleſſe, becauſe they
haue not as yet attayned vnto perfection: nor
proude, becauſe they haue nothing but that
which they haue receiued from him, but rather
to regard Chriſts purpoſe in prayſing, yr church
which is to prouoke her thereby, ſpecially ſith
he taketh delight in her goodneſſe, more and
more to proceed in the ſame: becauſe there is no
church ſo good, but it may be ſtill bettered, and

though they haue proceeded well, yet the Lorde
hath ſomewhat to ſay againſt them, as Reuel. 2.
4. 14. &c. Secondly, that the fulneſſe of all good
thinges are in Chriſt, and none other, and that
therefore they doe the church great iniury, (beſides
that they deface Chriſt him ſelfe,) that either
woulde vtterly ſpoyle the church of him, or
mingle others togeather with him. Thirdly,
that the church ſhould neuer ceaſe prayſing and
magnifiyng her head and ſpouſe Chriſt, in whom
ſhee cannot chuſe but ſee and confeſſe, that there
dwelleth the fulnes of all heauenlye graces, yea
the very Godhead it ſelfe bodily. Colloſ. 2. 9.
               
                  Verſe. 16. Teacheth the church, that howſoeuer
ſhee her ſelfe, and her particular members
feele them ſelues in reaſonable good caſe as we
ſay, as in reſpect of ſpirituall graces, yea and be
ſo eſteemed, not onely in their owne and other
mens mindes, but euen in the verye iudgement
and ſentence of Chriſt, that yet for all that they
ceaſe not ſtill to intreat the Lorde Ieſus, not
onely to continue, but to increaſe all the gyftes
and graces of his holy ſpirite in them, and particularly
fayth and obedience, euen vntill they
come to the finiſhing of their faith and hope,
which is eternall lyfe at the laſt thorow Chriſt.
               
                  Verſ. 17. Teacheth vs, that the prayers of the
church made to God in Chriſtes name, ſhall neuer
be fruſtrate or voyd, and therfore good cauſe
haue we, to bee often, yea after a ſort as it were,
contiuall in the ſame.
            
            
               
               CAP. 5. and the ſumme
thereof.
               
                  The church attributing the departure of chriſt
from her to her owne ſinnes, declareth
her offence, and the puniſhmentes ſhee
had deſerued therefore. verſ. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
She craueth the ayde of all the godlye,
with common conſent as it were and
ayde, to ſet foorth her affection towards
him, who in that they might be the better
able to know, ſhe doth liuely deſcribe
him, and noteth the place whither he is
gone, and ſo at the laſt ſtrengtheneth
her ſelfe in fayth and hope verſ. 7. 8. &c.
to the end of the chapter.
               
               
                  
                     1 I Slept, but myne hart waketh: it
is the voyce of my welbeloued
that knocketh, ſaying, open vnto
me, my ſiſter, my loue, my doue,
my perfect one: for my heade is
full of dew, and my lockes with
the drops of the night.
                     2 I aunſwered: I haue put off from me my coate,
how ſhould I put it on? I haue waſhed my feet,

how ſhould I defile them?
                     3 My welbeloued put downe his hand frō the hole,
and my bowels were moued touching him.
                     4 I roſe vp to open to my welbeloued, & mine hands
did drop downe myrrhe, and my fingers myrrhe
that paſſed vpon the handles of the locke.
                     5 I opened to my welbeloued, but my welbeloued
with-drawing him ſelf paſſed by: my ſoule departed
while hee was in ſpeaking: I ſought him
but I could not finde him: I called him, but he
aunſwered me not.
                     6 The watchmen that goe about the citie founde
me, they ſmote me, they wounded me: the wathmen
of the wals, tooke my vaile away from me.
                     7 I charge you O Daughters of Ieruſalem, if yee
find my beloued that yee tell him, that I am ſicke
of loue.
                     8 O thou the fayreſt among women, what hath thy
welbeloued more then another welbeloued? what
hath thy welbeloued more then an other welbeued,
that thou doſt ſo charge vs?
                     9 My welbeloued is white and ruddy, euen a ſtanderd
bearer aboue ten thouſand.
                     10 His head is excellent golde, yea moſt pure gold,
his lockes are curled and blacke as a rauen.
                     11 His eyes are like doues eyes, by the riuers of waters
waſhing them ſelues in milke, and remaining
by fulnes.
                     12 His cheekes are as a bed of ſpice, & as the flowers
of ſpices, his lippes are as lilies, dropping down

pure myrrh.
                     13 His handes, as ringes of golde, ſet full of Tarſhiſhe:
his bellye like the whitenes of Iuory, couered
with Sapphires.
                     14 His thies are as pillers of marble, ſet vppon ſockets
of fine gold: his countenaunce as Lebanon,
excellent as the Cedars.
                     15 The roof of his mouth is ſweetneſſes, & he himſelfe
is wholly delectable: this is my welbeloued,
and this is my louer O Daughters of Ieruſalem.
                     16 O thou the fayreſt among women, whither is thy
welbeloued gone: whither is thy welbeloued turned
a ſide, that we may ſeeke him witb thee:
                     17 My welbeloued is gone down into his garden,
to the beds of ſpice, to feed in the gardens, and to
gather lilies.
                     18 I am my welbeloueds, and my welbeloued is mine,
who feedeth among the Lilies.
                  
               
               
                  HOwſoeuer Chriſt the Sauiour
and head of the Church,Con. had ſhewed
him ſelfe in the laſte verſe
of the former chapter, not onely
willing to enter into the church,
but was indeed already entred
into the ſame, to receiue the fruite thereof, yet
the church in this chapter, and particularlye in
the verye beginning of it declareth, that ſhee

was not ſo readye to intertayne and receiue
him, as eyther he was to offer him ſelfe, or ſhee
in duty ſhould haue beene: which offence of hers
ſhe acknowledgeth vnfaignedly, commending
hir huſband Chriſte, with a ſinguler prayſe, both
to aggrauace her own tranſgreſſion, and alſo to
ſtirre vp her ſelfe and others thereby to ſeeke
after him, that hath ſuch excellency in him, requiring
as well aid of them in this behalfe, as
tendring after a ſort, helpe from hir ſelfe to others,
in that caſe alſo.
               Salomon alluding in this chapter to the manner
vſed in Commodies and tragedies, in which
diuers perſons are brought in, ſome tarrying, &
ſome departing, doth cheefly propounde vnto vs
2. pointes. The firſt is a lamentable complaint 
that the Church maketh, accuſing hereſelfe for ye
ſhe had not diligently enough performed her duty,
to her head & huſband Chriſt, & this is contained
in the ſix firſt verſes: Wherin alſo there are
two eſpecial matters deliuered vnto vs: the firſt
is an open confeſſion of the offence committed.
Verſ. 1. 2. 3. 4. and the other, a recitall of the
myſeries that fell vppon her by the meanes of
that ſynne. Verſ. 5. 6. The ſeconde thing ſette 
forth vnto vs in this chap. is a familiar ſpeeche
had betweene the Church, and ſuch as were her
freendes and welwillers, who demanding ſome
queſtions of her, the Churche inſtructeth them,
concerning the ſtate, dwelling and mutuall fellowſhip,

that is betwixte her and Chriſte her
ſpouſe. This matter beginning at verſe 7. and ſo
holding on to the end of the chapter. The queſtions
with the aunſweres thereto, touche two
thinges: the firſt concerneth the ſpouſe him ſelf.
verſ. 8. whereunto there is a large anſwere. ver.
9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. And the ſeconde concerneth
the place of his aboad: the queſtion being
contayned ver. 16. and the aunſwere in the two
laſt verſes, the occaſion both of the one and of
the other was, that vehement charge that the
Church giueth her freends in the ſeuenth verſ.
both concerning the ſpouſe him ſelfe, and the
place where they ſhould finde him.
               
                  Verſe. 1. l ſlept.
                   Theſe are the churches words,
declaring what befell her in the night ſeaſon
while ſhe ſlept q, d.
                  Senſe. I was very ſleepy and heauy,
yea my fayth ſeemed thorow drowſineſſe and
ſleepe, to be as it were oppreſſed, howbeit yet it
was neuer ouercome, or vtterly put out (for indeed
it cānot 1. cor. 4. 8. 9. 1. Ioh. 5. 4.) which alſo
may appeare by the words following, in that
ſhe addeth but mine heart waketh, meaning thereby,
that howſoeuer ſhee were ouertaken in the
outward man, or corruption of nature (as you
woulde ſay) and the members thereof, yet ſhee
could not but in her heart, and regenerated affection,
thinke vpon her head and ſpouſe, It is the
voice of my welbeloued. vz. that I ſuppoſe, or I
am ſure I heare. She ſpeaketh as if it were one

that being waked out of ſleepe, or ſlumber, ſhold
ſay, that it was ſuch or ſuch a one, that called
or ſpake: many alſo beeing ſo well acquainted
with men, that they can certainly as it were diſcerne
them, by their wordes. That knocketh ſaying:
She heard not onely a bare ſound, but obſerued
the matter. Open vnto me. Theſe things are
ſpoken after the manner of earthly louers, who
come in the night ſeaſon ſomtimes to viſit their
freendes, and prouoke them as it were by fayre
ſpeeches, to open vnto them when they knocke,
to which end alſo tende all theſe ſeuerall titles
rmentioned in this verſe. Of Chriſtes knocking,
and the church her opening, ſee Reuel. 3. 20.
My Siſter. See this expounded chapter, 4. 9. My
loue, that is, one whom I doe moſt tenderly loue,
ſee cha. 1. 9. My doue, ſee this expounded before
chap. 2. 14. My perfect one. This title is attributed
to the church, not as though ſhee had perfection
in this life, or of her ſelfe, but becauſe
ſhe looketh for it in the life that ſhall be reuealed,
and becauſe her heade hath perfection, and
ther is a moſt ſtraight cōiunction between him
and her, therfore it may after a ſort be attributed
vnto her. Some interpret this worde vndefiled,
but indeede it doth moſte commonly and moſte
properly ſignifye perfect and ſounde. And the
church doth moſt liuely expreſſe this ſpeeche of
Chriſts cōming vnto her, euen the more greatly
to encreaſe by the recitall thereof, the foulneſſe

of her fact and offence committed. q. d, hee ſpake
ſo kindly, fauourably, and gloriouſly of me, yea,
he did ſo carefully prouoke me to embrace him
and his trueth, as if his owne buſineſſe and affayres
had beene in hand and not mine. And
therefore I cannot chuſe, but accuſe my ſelf the
more, for yt I haue not profited by ſo louing and
mercifull a calling. It followeth. For my heade is
full of dew. A reaſon why he would haue the dore
opened, & be let in, vz, becauſe hee had refuſed no
hurt or incōmodity, but vndertooke al for y• good
of the church: ye cold dews of the night, ſpecially
in thoſe hotte countries, were neither good nor
wholſom for ye people. And my locks with the drops
of the night. A ſine deſcription of the dew, he perſiſting
in the ſelf ſame metaphore begun, proceeding
from the head to ye hair, they alſo eſteeming
very much in thoſe countries, the locks of their
hair. But by both theſe ſimilituds, Chriſt noteth
one thing, namely yt he had ſtood as a watchman
& yt not one night but many nightes, waiting to
haue entrance, & cold haue none, ye ye he had ſtood
not as in a cōmaunding maner, hauing his head
armed or couered, but as one yt wold intreat her
bareheaded to be let in, & could not yet preuaile.
               
                  Ver. 2. I anſwered.
                   As ye church had before ſet
out Chriſtes great loue, to aggrauate her tranſgreſſion:
ſo here ſhe deſcribeth her own froward
dealing, yt by ye meanes alſo her iniquity might
become more great & grieuous. I haue put of from

me my coat, yt is, my garments & apparell is of, &
I am ready as it were, to go to bed. How ſhould I
put it on? q. d.
                   There is no reaſon I ſhould ſo doe
nowe. I haue waſhed my feete, howe ſhould I defile
them? q. d.
                   I will not come vpon the foul ground
to defile my feete, that I haue made ſo cleane:
neither is there any reaſon, ſeeing they are clean
already, that they ſhould be defiled againe. Both
ye ſimilitudes tend to one purpoſe, vz, to expreſſe
the deniall of the church in opening to Chriſt, &
to let him in. For euen as they that be vndreſſed
are both to put on their clothes againe till morning
that they muſt needes riſe: & as they yt haue
waſhed their feete, are vnwilling to foul them, &
many times alledge theſe thinges for excuſes, yt
ſo they may yt more ſafely neglect their duties:
euen ſo doth the church here. Thoſe yt vnderſtād
by putting of her garments, the renouncing of the
old man, & by waſhing of her feet, ye ſanctificatiō of
her affections, are greatly deceiued: for the more
ſhe had either of ye one or of the other, the nearer
ſhe was to Chriſte, and the more ſoon ſhe might
haue entertained him: but the true and naturall
ſenſe is as before. In ſum, ſhe meaneth yt ſhe reaſoned
to & fro in her hart, & yt her faith did gretly
wauer, ye yt her own weaknes did ſo far preuail
with her, as not only to thinke, but to ſay, yt ſhee
could not without ſome pain of clothing her ſelf
again, or without ſom hurt by ye cold, if ſhe came
without her apparel, or wtout ſome diſcōmodity
by fouling her faire feet as ſhe thought, riſe vp

and to open the dores, and let Chriſt in: yea vnwiſe
as ſhee was, ſhee more eſteemed ſo ſmall a
diſcommodity, in doing and executing of her duty,
then the vnſpeakable pleaſures ſhee might
haue had by Chriſt, who willingly for her ſake,
had taken vpon him many inconueniences and
hurtes.
               
                  Verſe. 3. My welbeloued put down his hand from
the hole.
                   vz. of the locke of the dore, which he had
layd hold of (as it were) thinking indeed to haue
had entraunce there, but hearinge my vnkinde
ſpeech departed: for it is the purpoſe of ye church
here ſtill to aggrauate hir owne ſinne, ſhewing
that ſhe gaue Chriſte no leſſe occaſion to goe away,
then if men ſhoulde deale vncurteouſly or
vnkindly with their beſt freendes, ſtanding at
their dores, and knocking to be let in. And my
bowels were mooued touching him, vz, after that he
was gone, meaning that then ſhe begun to bee
moued in her minde, and troubled in her ſelfe,
and after a ſorte to repent her of it, but then it
was too late. All which tendeth ſtill to amplify
her tranſgreſſion, in that ſhe had no better grace
to regard and receiue the acceptable time of her
viſitation. See Luke. 19. 42.
               
                  Verſe 4 I roſe vp to open,
                   vz. the dores, to my welbeloued.
The church ſpeaketh this, as though ſhe
ſuppoſed that Chriſt had not yet bene gone, for
all the iuſt occaſions that ſhee had giuen him of
departure from her, but it was all to late. And

my handes, vz, laying holde of the places of the
dore, that Chriſt himſelfe had handled, as verſe
3. Did drop downe myrrh. What myrrh is hath
beene ſhewed before. She meaneth that Chriſt
left ſuch a plentifull and pleaſant ſmell behinde
him, that euen ſhee comming after his departure
had ſuch aboundaunce of it, as if ſhee had
had ſuch ſtoore of myrrh, as woulde haue made
her handes to drop. This alſo is an other circumſtaunce,
tending to the amplyfiying and increaſing
of the vnworthineſſe and offence of the
church, to wit becauſe Chriſte did notwithſtanding
her drowſineſſe, leaue before the dores ſuch
ſweet ſmelling ſteps and pathes of his comfortable
comming, as were fit, to furniſh her with
fulneſſe after his departure, which alſo tended to
ſtirre vp the church, beeing drowſie and dull, as
though the church ſhould ſay, he did ſo plentifully
perfume my dores with his bleſſing, and the
ſauour of his goſpell, that I my ſelfe but onelye
touching the ſame, was euen therewith perfumed
and made ſweete, yea called backe and put
in minde, to thincke vpon the vnworthye fact
committed. And my fingers, vz. dropped downe
myrrh, yt paſſed vpō the handles of the lock, that
is, thin & pure myrrh, which the ſpouſe had left
behind him, the holy ghoſt alſo meaning by this
to commend the excellency of the graces, as he
had done before the aboundaunce of them.
               
                  Verſ. 5. I opened, vz. my dores to my welbeloued,
                  
                  
vz, ſuppoſing that he had tarryed there ſtil:
but my welbeloued withdrawing him ſelfe, ſecreatly
& quietly, particularly alſo putting vp ye great
iniury of refuſall, that I had offered him, paſſed
by, vz, my dores and ſo went his waye. My ſoule
departed, vz, out of my body as it were, meaning
that ſhe was in a ſowne as it were, or halfe dead
for the time, while he was in ſpeaking, or rather becauſe
of his ſpeech to me, which I had neglected:
for howſoeuer the Hebrue wil beare both, yet I
think this latter moſt agreeable with ye purpoſe
of ye church, which as we haue heard before, is to
aggrauate her offence, & in this place to ſhew alſo
the miſeries that ſhe fell into, for ſo great neglect.
I ſought him, vz, after his departure from me,
but I could not find him, vz, for all that trauail and
toile that I could take: ſo it pleaſeth God to puniſh
not onely the wicked, in the contempt of his
graces offered,ſee Amos. 8. 22. but euen his owne people, in neglect
of the ſame. I called him, but he aunſwered me
not. She meaneth ye ſelfe ſame thing that before,
namely, that ſith ſhe neglected his call, he regarded
not hers. And in this verſe the church beginnneth
to declare, the miſeries and calamities that
fel vppon her,See Pro. 1. 38. for her negligence and idlenes or
ſloth. And in this ver. ſhe reckoneth vp two chief
ones. The firſt is, that Chriſt her head & ſpouſe,
did for a time withdraw himſelf from her: not ye
Chriſt is at any time abſent frō his church, (for
Chriſt is no partaker with nonreſidents) but that

then he ſeemeth to be ſo, when he doth withdraw
the former teſtimonies of his free & ful fauor for
a time: which he doth not, as thogh he loued not
his church ſtill, but either therby to try the faith
& patience of his people, or to cauſe thē more reuerently
to regard his excellent mercies beſtowed
vpon them. The ſecond miſery is, yt the church
it ſelf is in great danger euen of death, becauſe
yt thorow her default, ſhee had after a ſort prouoked
ye ſpouſe to depart, which iudgement alſo ſhe
had iuſtly pulled vpō her for ſo great wickednes.
Verſ. 6. The watchmen that go about the city found
me.
                   It is to be noted yt ſhe ſaith not ſimply, watch
men, but with an addition, that goe about the city,
wherby ſhe noteth, as vnder the word watchmen,
their painfulnes, ſo vnder ye word going about, ther
diligence. ſee 1. Pet. 5. 8. This alſo is expounded
before chap. 3. 3. where yt ſelfe ſame thing is put
down, ſauing yt there is no mentiō made of their
abuſing of her, but only of her demand, who therby
could tel where he was yt her ſoul loued. They
ſmote me, they wounded me. In that ſhe ſpeaketh ſo
wtout a particle to ioin thē (which maner of ſpech
yt Rhetoritians cal Aſyndeton) ſhe doth it both to
ſhew her own vehemency, & the quick diſpatch, yt
the enemies made in ſo ill intreating of her: & in
yt ſhe addeth ye word woūding after ſmiting, ſhe doth
as it were by a gradatiō, paint out their wickedneſſe,
and her miſery, becauſe many maye faint
and be ſmiten, and yet not wound or bee wounded.
The watchmen of the wals. She meaneth thoſe

that had a continuall ſtanding allowed them,
both to deſcrye the enemies, and to repell them
alſo if they can: q. d. neither the running watch,
nor the ſtanding watch fauoured mee, but both
ſortes cruelly intreated me. Now what it was
that theſe men perfourmed againſt her, is declared
in the wordes following. Tooke my vaile away
from me. She ſayth not tooke it awaye from
her, but as it were for the time pulled it off her:
which they did not onely the better to ſee her, or
with an vngodly eye to behold her, for which ſee
the ſtorye of Suſanna verſ. 32. but also to bring
her thereby the more to the diſobedience of her
huſband: for vailes, as it doth appeare by many
places of ſcripture, were giuen vnto marryed
women, both to expreſſe the authoritye that the
huſbandes had ouer them, and alſo to put them
in minde of their obedience and ſubiection. See
Geneſ. 20. 16. Alſo Geneſ. 24. 65. 1. Cor. 11. 5.
6. 10. Such a like phraſe is that that is vſed.
Ruth. 3. 9. of ſpreading the winge of his garment
ouer her. The word that is here turned
vaile, is in the Hebrue tongue deriued from thinneſſe,
and I ſuppoſe verelye that it was made of
the fineſt and pureſt linnen that coulde be gotte.
What ſhoulde bee meant by it, we are not curiouſly
to ſeeke. This I ſuppoſe may be ſafelye
ſayd, that the church falling in the abſence of her
ſpouſe, into the handes of corrupt and falſe teachers,
they labour to depryue her of that ſame

puritie and ſoundnes of doctrine, that hee hath
committed vnto her, as a meane to hold her in
the dutie of all holy obedience and faithfulneſſe
towardes him. And more then this, I ſee not.
If any bee more quicke ſighted, I pray them in
Gods name to reueale it to the benefite of the
Church. In a worde there is in this verſe contained,
the third calamity of the Church, vz, that
Chriſt her head, beeing abſent from her, and ſhe
labouring to ſeeke him, ſhee falleth into ſundrie
daungers and diſtreſſes: yea all became noiſome
and hurtfull vnto hir, yea euen thoſe who ſhould
haue kept and preſerued her, from all violence
and iniurye, they did bounſe and beat her, yea
cruelly wound her, and dealt moſte vilanouſlye
with her, as the particulars ſhewe.
               
                  Verſe 7. I charge you.
                   to writte very ſtaightly
as it were by an othe which form alſo the church
vſeth, both to teſtifie her vnfeined loue, towards
her ſpouſe, and to prouoke them, with whome
ſhee dealeth to deale faithfullye in doing her
meſſage: O daughters of Ieruſalem. Shee was il
intreated of her enimies, as appeareth verſe. 6.
Therefore now ſhee ſpeaketh vnto her friendes,
looking to finde fauour and curteſie amongeſt
them. See theſe words expounded before. chap.
2. 7. alſo chap. 3. 5. and at this verſe beginneth
the ſeconde part of the chapter, containing as
is ſaid before, a dialogue betweene the Church,
and the damſells or daughters of Ieruſalem in

her freendes. If ye finde my beloued, ſhee meaneth
Chriſt whom ſhe loued, as he likewiſe yt church,
Eph. 5. 25. That ye tell him. In hebrue, what ſhold
ye tell him? interrogatiuely, which ſhee ſpeaketh
ſhortly, as many times louers doe, and yet the
interrogation conteineth more vehemency in it,
and ſerueth to beautifye the ſpeeche alſo. q. d.
Would you know, what you ſhould tell him? euen
that which followeth. That I am ſicke of loue,
She can not conceale the heate and vehemency
of her loue, but euen after the manner of Louers,
bewraieth the ſame, who the more they are
abſent one of them from another, the more their
loue increaſeth, and the greatlier doe they deſire
to be ioyned together. The meaning of the
wordes is, that the church is ſo far of, from keeping
cloſe her loue, that ſhee doth not onely reueale
it to them, but intreateth thē rather freely
to open it, and to declare the ſame ſpeciallye to
her beloued.
               
                  Verſ. 8. O thou the faireſt amongſt women.
                   This
is the title that the faythfull attribute vnto the
church, in whoſe iudgement indeede ſhee is ſo,
not ſo much for anye beautye in her ſelfe, as becauſe
ſhe is adorned, with the ſinguler gifts and
excellent graces of God. What hath thy welbeloued
more then another welbeloued? They double
the Queſtion, for the more vehemency, as alſo
for the ſtrangeneſſe of the matter. That thou doeſt
ſo charge vs: vz. ſo hardly and ſtraightly, & euen

as it were, by the vertue of an oth. q. d. Some
thing there is, that thou laieſt ſo hard a burden,
and ſtraight a charge vppon vs, or elſe thou
wouldeſt not doe it. And this is the firſt queſtiō
mooued to the church, concerning the perſon of
hir ſpouſe, they maruelling as it were, what excellent
thing ſhould be in him, that ſhee ſhoulde
ſo highly eſteeme him by occaſion of which demaund,
ſhe entreth into a notable deſcription of
Chriſt, in the verſes following, firſt ſetting him
out generally, verſ. 9. and afterward particlarly,
by ſingular recitall of his partes and members,
euen ten in number, beginning as you
would ſay, from the higheſt, & ſo comming down
to the nethermoſt: the church perfourming that
here for her head and ſpouſe, both in a general &
particuler commendation of him and his parts,
that he had done before for her chap. 4, 1. 2. 3. &c
Which alſo is vſuall amongeſt earthly louers,
to requite one kindneſſe with another, wherevnto
no doubt the churche had ſpeciall regarde,
though ſhe could not perfourm any ſufficient duty
that way.
               
                  Verſe. 9 My beloued is white.
                   Shee beginneth
to anſwere their demaund vnder many
allegories, commending her ſpouſe: as firſt in
this verſe ſhee dothe prayſe him, for the excellente
hewe and liuelye coloure: and afterwards
in the verſes following, ſhe commendeth
his particular parts. And firſt ſhe mētioneth his

whiteneſſe or his fayreneſſe, which amongeſt
earthly louers is a thing much ſet by, and therefore
muſt be much more glorious, in this ſpirituall
huſband. And ruddie, that is, red and as you
would ſaye, of a ſanguine complexion, and this
colour of ruddines is commended in Dauid. 1.
Sam. 16. 12. And note that the holy Ghoſt ioyneth
both theſe togeather, the whiteneſſe makinge
the ruddyneſſe more freſhe and fayre,
and the ruddineſſe diſcerning the whitnes from
paleneſſe of face, or flegmatick complexion: both
which colours if they concurre in an earthlye
creature, ſpecially ſuch as be yong (for theſe are
colours belonging to them,) make the ſame to
be liked: how much more then ſhoulde they, conſidered
ſpiritually in Chriſt, (in reſpect of whom
all the good thinges of this lyfe, are not ſo much
as a ſhadow) not onelye be excellent in him, but
draw vs on vnfaynedly to loue him alſo. Euen a
ſtanderd bearer aboue ten thouſaand. She vſeth a
metaphor taken from the warre, as alſo putteth
a number certayne for an vncertayne, to expreſſe
the commendation of her loue. Commonly ſtanderd
bearers are moſt tall and mighty men, and
amongſt tenne thouſand men, a man maye finde
manye comely countenaunces, but yet ſaith ſhee
for ſound and naturall moyſture, and for a moſt
temperate and fit colour, looke amongſt infinite
numbers of people, you ſhall not find one or any,
any way matchable with my beloued: ſhe meaning

alſo by this diſcription of him, that he is of
a moſt ſound and ſure health, as thoſe moſt commonly
are, that are of ſo good complexions and
conſtitutions: but all this muſte bee vnderſtood
ſpiritually, as before hath been ſayd, and no carnall
or earthly thought muſt be conceiued here.
               
                  Verſ. 10. His head is excellent gold, yea moſt pure
gold,
                   She entreth into the deſcription of the particular
partes of her ſpouſe, whoſe head was not
of gold, as the wordes may ſeeme to import, but
that in a certaine proportion, ſhee reſembleth it
thereto. Gold for the excellency and purity of it,
is a mettall highly extolled & regarded amongſt
men: ſo the ſpirituall beautye of Chriſt, and his
excellent puritye, is to bee preferred aboue all.
Neither doth ſhe ſimply compare him, to euerye
kind of gold, but to that which is moſt pure and
fine, if anye one be better then an other, as in
truth we know by experience there is great difference,
and all is done to this ende, that vnder
the ſame ſhee might ſet foorth the moſte perfect
purity, ſoundneſſe and excellencye of her ſpouſe.
His lockes are curled, or the word alſo may import
thicke, both of theſe tending to expreſſe his
might and ſtrength, and not to approoue, either
of curling or criſping of hayre in men or women
which is condēned. 1. Pe. 3. And blacke as a rauen,
that is, comelye and ſightlye: for blacknes of it
ſelfe, is not an euill or vnſeemly colour ſpecially
in mens hayres, and the rather if we haue regard

to the people, inhabiting the land of Iury,
which is meruailous hotte ouer ours is: and by
theſe wordes, As a Rauen, ſhee meant that it
was a naturall and pure black of it ſelfe, which
is farre more excellent, both in blacke and all other
colours, than anye of theſe that be made by
art.
               
                  Verſe. 11. His eyes are like doues eyes.
                   She now
deſcribeth his eyes, by the ſober comelines and
beauty of them, they beeing full of all innocency,
ſinglenes, and chaſtity, which he meaneth to
expreſſe by comparing them to doues eyes. The
church attributeth it here vnto Chriſt, which he
before attributed vnto her, cha. 1. 15. Alſo chap.
4. 1. where looke for the more full expoſition of
the ſame: neither doth ye church, ſimply compare
them to Doues eyes, that is, to euery ſort of doues
eyes, but to ſuch doues as be moſt beautifull and
cleare, which may appeare by the words following.
By the riuers of waters, that is, like the eyes of
ſuch doues as haunt and abyde by the riuers of
waters, where they haue ſtore inough of water,
to waſh them ſelues and their eies, to make them
cleare & freſh, we knowing alſo by experience, yt
euery running water is good to freſh and cleare
the ſight. Waſhing them ſelues in milke: q. d.
                  
If that bee not ſufficient to reſemble him and
his eies to Doues, haunting the cleare ſtreames,
let them be compared to ſuch, as for the clearing
and freſhing of their eyes, waſh themſelues

in milke, that ſo they maye appeare, and bee iudged
white and comelye, ſhyning with cleare
brightneſſe, And remayning by fulneſſe. Theſe
wordes haue beene diuerſly interpreted, and according
to the ſame, ſeuerall ſenſes haue beene
gyuen. I will onely rehearſe two, leauing the
godly reader to imbrace that, which hee ſhall
finde to be moſt agreable to godlynes and truth.
Some thinke, that by this ſhould be meant, that
as the doues bee full of moyſture, that remayne
and continue by full veſſelles: ſo is Chriſte the
huſbande of the church, of whoſe fulneſſe we all
receiue euen grace for grace. Otherſome, becauſe
the word which is here trāſlated fulnes, ſignifieth
a thing ſometimes, that is fitted for anye
hollow place or roome, as the precious Stone
in a ring is made meete and fitte, to fill vp the
hollow place of the ring, doe therefore interpret
it of the eyes, fitted as it were, for the holes of
the heade: q. d, As the Stones that are ſet in
ringes, are fitted for the place, and ſo make a
comely ſhew: ſo are the eyes of the Spouſe, none
of them ſtanding too farre out of the head, for
that is full of ſtaring, neyther anye of them
ſincke in, for that is piteous to beholde, (both
which thinges are vnſeemelye and deformed in
the eyes, as we ſee by experience, and do after a
ſort diſfigure the countenance) but more fitly apted
by a thouſand degrees, than precious ſtones
are to ringes, for the beautifiing therof. And this

I take to be the more ſimple ſenſe, but as I ſaid
before, I leaue ye reader to his own holy choyſe.
               
                  Verſe. 12. His cheekes are a bed of ſpice,
                  
that is, comely and pleaſant to the ſight, and
ſweete to the ſmell. The comlineſſe thereof is
contayned in the worde bed, and the ſweeteneſſe
thereof in the worde Spice. For beds, as we ſee,
ſet out the gardens, and ſpices we knowe, ſmell
well then, when they haue bene long gathered,
no doubt alſo but they are ſweete then when
they growe. And as the flowers of ſpices, I take
it that hee meaneth by this ſpeeche, they are
moſt ſweete and pleaſant to looke vpon. For the
flowers of good things, as we ſee by experience,
are for the time, more delightfull to looke vpon,
and more ſweete to ſmell too, then the bodies
themſelues yeelding the ſame. His lippes are as
Lillies, that is, glorious and beautifull, and faire
to beholde, for that flowre amongeſt others, is of
a goodly colour, and fayre to looke vppon. This
flowre is commended in many places of this
book, as wherunto ſomtimes the church it ſelfe
is compared for the beauty of it cap. 2. 2. And in
ye ſame cap. ver. 16. it is attributed to Chriſt. Se
alſo cap. 4. 5. Neither is this flowre only beautifull,
but of a pleaſant ſmell, and of good and tall
growth, al which tendeth ſtill to ye expreſſing of
the glory and beauty of Chriſt, and to the ſweet
and pleaſaunt ſmelles, that are to bee founde in
him, whereunto alſo no doubt, but he alludeth in

the words following, ſaying dropping down pure
myrrh. This is expounded before verſ. 4. of this
cha. In all this, as alſo that which goeth before
and followeth after, we muſt mark, that the holy
ghoſt meaneth not to mooue men to wanton
loue (for beſides that he knoweth our ouer great
inclination thereto, wee beleeue according to
trueth, that no vngodlineſſe dwelleth with him)
nor inſtructeth men to paynt out their louers,
according to their fleſhly liking: but vnder theſe
figuratiue and borrowed kinde of ſpeeches, taken
from the comlineſſe of the creatures, yt we
our ſelues are well acquainted with, as alſo frō
other porportions in them, hee doth liuely paint
out the excellent graces in Chriſt, which as in
reſpect of themſelues cannot well bee expreſſed,
and by reaſon of our weakneſſe, can not better
be declared: yea, he paynteth out vnder the ſame,
the ſpirituall and heauenly loue of the Churche
to Chriſte, which doth not nor cannot ſatiſfy hir
ſelf with any words or compariſons, to expreſſe
both the moſt excellent maieſty and glory of her
loue Chriſte, and the holye cauſes in him that
ſtirre vp her affections of loue towardes him.
Allegorically to handle all theſe thinges, is not
in my purpoſe or power, and yet mee thinketh
this much maye bee ſayde according to trueth,
that by his head, mentioned verſ. 10. and there
reſembled to gold, yea to moſt pure golde, there
may well bee ment, his eternall diety or Godhead,

or if you wil his whole perſon, which doth
as farre exceede all thinges, both in colour and
glittering, and all manner goodnes, as gold, yea
moſt fine golde, all other metalles: and by his
locks mentioned in the ſame verſe may be ſignified,
the innumerable & vnmeaſurable graces of
God beſtowed vpon him, euen as the hayres of a
mans head, are without account: to proceede, by
the curling of them, may be ſignified not only the
faſt twiſting and twinding of them one within
another, they beeing tied together as it were
with a chaine, but alſo the preuailing ſtrength
of the ſame: as alſo there maye bee meant by the
blacknes, that excellent comelineſſe, beauty, and
glory thereof. And whereas verſ. 11. ſhe maketh
mention of his eyes, thereby may well be reſembled
the quickneſſe of ſight, as you woulde ſay,
that is in Chriſte, or his vnderſtanding or perceiuing
of thinges, that beeing more excellente
in him, then our eyes in vs, becauſe our ſight
maye bee deceiued, but hee can not. For hee
ſeeth and beholdeth all thinges, as the ſcripture
affirmeth in many places, as Prouerbes
15. 3. Zecha. 4. 10. Heb, 4. 13. And whereas ſhee
reſembleth them to Doues eies, ſitting by the riuers
of waters. &c. No doubt but thereby ſhe meaneth
the purity and cleanneſſe of Gods ſighte, who
as hee loueth no wickedneſſe, neyther will
haue euill to dwell with him. Pſalme. 5. 4.

So hee cannot abide to beholde it, in whiche
reſpect Abacuck ſayth notably of him chapter 1.
13. Thou art of pure eyes, and canſt not ſee euill.
thou canſt not beholde wickednes. And
whereas in this verſe 12. ſhe mencioneth Chriſtes
cheekes, lips &c. no doubt, but by the cheekes
ſhe meaneth his comely and fauourable countenaunce,
as by comparing the ſame to ſpices, the
ſweetneſſe and pleaſauntnes thereof: as alſo by
the lippes &c, the ſweetnes of his word and truth,
full of all maner of ioye, and reioycing the heart,
as the Prophet ſaith Pſalm. 19. 6. ſpreading abroad
the ſweetnes therof euen farre and wide,
after the maner of the pleaſaunt lilies, and moſt
precious, pure, and ſweet myrth. For the worde
lippes, ſee before chapter 4. 3. alſo verſ. 11. attributed
there by Chriſte, to the church. Thus the
ſcripture vſeth to reſemble diuine thinges to humaine,
though it be true, deuine thinges can by
no humaine, either wordes or matters, be ſufficiently
expreſſed.
               
                  Verſe 13. His handes as ringes of golde,
                   that is,
glorious and precious, for ringes were counted
in thoſe dayes, great ornaments and deckinges.
Iſaiah. 3. 21. Luke. 15. 22. neither doth ſhe ſaye
ſimply ringes, but ringes of gold, adding yet ſomewhat
more in the wordes following, to expreſſe
his glory. Set full of Tarſhiſh, that is, of precious
ſtones ſo called, which what they were, is not

certaine, and that maketh the interpreters to
turne it diuerſely, ſome vſing heere the worde
Chriſolite, other ſome turning it, Beril of the ſea.
If it bee a Chryſolite, ſome take it then to bee
a very rich precious ſtone, that came out of Aethiopia,
gliſtering as gold (whereof it ſeemeth
alſo in the greek tongue, to take the name) ſparkling
as fire, but yet as ſome thinke ſomewhat
greene, or as other report hauing the colour of
the ſea in ſome ſort. If we read it Beril, it is another
ſtone, that groweth (as ſome holde) in
India, Berill, it ſelfe, beeing as they ſuppoſe an
indian word, and giuen by the people as a name
to that ſtone, in greene colour it reſembleth the
ſucaradge as ſome ſuppoſe, and was wonte to
be cut of the Indians ſixe ſquare, which they
did to make the dimme or dull colour to ſhewe
better, for otherwiſe, as ſome affirme, it did not
ſhewe, becauſe it was of a colour like oyle after
ſome, or like water in the ſea, after otherſome.
Some write, that in former times, this
ſtone was moſt vſually ſet, in ſuch rings as louers
did vſe to giue one to another, or in mariage
rings, becauſe of the power that was thoght
to be in it, to procure and continue loue and liking,
one of them towards another. But to come
to the worde it ſelfe, that the holy ghoſte vſeth
here, I finde it in the ſcripture to be vſed, ſometimes
for the name of a man, as Geneſ. 10. 4.
ſometimes for the name of a citye or place in

                  Cilicia, as Iona. 1. 3. which it ſhoulde ſeeme to
take from them, it is mentioned in Geneſ. chap.
10. 4. And this place was famous by Paules
byrth, as appeareth Act. 21. 39. Sometimes it
is vſed for the name of a precious ſtone, as here,
which the interpretors in other places where it
is mentioned, haue not yet agreed vpon what it
ſhould be, ſometimes they turning it, a Chryſolite,
an other while a Carbuncle, an other while
a Hyachath, an other while an Onix, &c. ſuch varietie
there is. Other ſome will haue it to be a
ſtone of a blewiſhe colour, or of colour like the
ſkie, or blackiſh or darke as water beeing deep,
which they cal by the name of Turkes, this and
the name of Tarſhiſh, not much differing. Some
of the Iewiſh Rabbins, take it to be a precious
ſtone, whoſe colour commeth nigh to the colour
of Hyacinth or Iamith, which ſome take to bee
purple coloured. All this is put downe, that the
godly reader may chuſe that which he ſhal iudg
moſt agreeable to the truth. For mine own part
I think ſhe meaneth, that ther is nothing in her
ſpouſe, but moſt rare, deare, precious, and glorious
thinges: vnderſtanding alſo by his handes,
not onely his ſtrength and power, which is alſo
vſuall in the ſcripture, but alſo al his workes,
becauſe Chriſtes power in the perfourmaunce
of them, is the ſame that mens handes are to
them, meaning hereby, that the workes of God
are pure and beautifull, yea moſt precious, yea

then gold or precious ſtones, yea as numbers of
ringes filled with all maner of coſtly ſtones; by
which alſo vſing the worde ringes in the plural
number, no doubt but ſhe meaneth to expreſſe the
varietye and great ſtoore of theſe wonderfull
workes, of which Dauid ſayth, Pſalm. 40. 5. If
I would declare and ſpeake of them, they are
more in number than I am able to expreſſe.
It followeth. His belly, vz, or his breaſt. She putteth
part of him for the whole bodye. Like the
whitenes of Iuorye. Shee meaneth that he was
as comely and cleare as the Iuorye, which is a
thing well knowen vnto us, to bee verye white
and bright, made (as ſome ſaye) of an Elophantes
tuſke, which kinde of beaſtes are onely in Africa,
naturally as ſome hold: neither doth ſhe ſimply
compare it to Ioury, but addeth, couered with
Saphirs, that is, that hath moſt ritch and ſumptuous
coſt beſtowed vpon it. Iuory of it ſelfe, becauſe
it is a thing rare, and farre brought, muſte
needes be very coſty, how much more then, when
it is beſet wholly with precious ſtones, yea with
moſt coſtlye precious ſtones, ſuch as Saphirs
are, of which we can hardly ſaye anye more certainly,
than before of Tarſhiſh. Some, ſpecially
of the Iewiſh wryters, take it to bee of the
colour of the ayre: ſome a white ſtone, ſome a
red ſtone, ſome take it to bee an adamant: ſome
thinke it to bee of a blewiſhe colour, intermixed
with purple, hauing certaine ſparkes, like golde

as it were, in the ſame: and this laſt ſeemeth in
my mind, to be the liklieſt iudgement. In Medea,
or amongeſt the Medes, is the beſt ſort of
them, and yet none of them all, are very cleare.
Whatſoeuer it bee, this I take to bee the meaning
of the church, to ſhewe, that Chriſte her
ſpouſe, was not onelye moſt comely adorned, but
alſo moſt ſumptuouſly and coſtly, euen as Iuory
beſet with pearles and moſt precious ſtones.
               
                  Verſe 14. His thies, are as pillers of marble.
                   She
proceedeth in the commendation of his partes:
and in that ſhee reſembleth his thies vnto pillers,
ſhee meaneth thereby his ſtrength, which
yet is more ſet out, in that ſhe ſayth they are
of marble: by which ſhee doth not onelye note as
before, the ſtrength thereof, but alſo the comelynes
of the ſame. For marble (though there bee
ſundrye ſortes thereof) are counted ſuch ſtones,
as are commended for ſeueral colours and ſpots
in the ſame, and hath his name in the Greeke
tongue, as it ſhould ſeeme, for a certaine greene
kind of glittering greene. Set vpon ſockets of fine
gold. She meaneth by this ſpeech, that they haue
not only a fayre & fine foundatiō, but euen a ſure
one alſo. For as thoſe pillers are glorious, that
are ſet vpon fine gold, and lyke long to laſte, becauſe
golde hardlye ruſteth or cankereth, ſo is it
with Chriſte: the Church noting by all theſe
thinges, the aſſured ſoundes, ſtrength, conſtancy,
and durablenes of her ſpouſe: becauſe as amongſt

ſtones, marble, ſo amongſt mettall, golde, is moſt
ſtrong and durable. His countenaunce as Lebanon,
that is, pleaſaunt and delightfull: for Lebanon
as we haue heard before, was a pleaſant and
fruitfull place. Excellent as the Cedars, that is,
as glorious and as much to be eſteemed, as the
high and mighty Ceders of Lebanon. So we
read, as the Laurix tree, which is a tree hauing
leaues lyke a Pine tree, the wood and timber
whereof, is very fit for building, not onelye becauſe
it is eaſie to worke in, but becauſe it will
hardlye or not at all periſhe, either by rotting or
wormes, yea if that be true, which ſome write of
it, it will not eaſely be conſumed with fyre, but
there is a long ſpace, before the fire can either
take hold of it, or burne it to coales. By which
no doubt alſo, there may be well meant, the eternall
durablenes of Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of
God, who though he bee a fyre to conſume the
wicked, and though the wicked thinke by flames
as it were, to burne him, yet they ſhall not bee able
to annoy him.
               
                  Verſe 15. The roofe of his mouth is ſweetneſſes.
                  
Shee meaneth by one inſtrument of nature,
wherewith the voyce is formed, to wit, the roofe
of the mouth, euen the voyce it ſelfe, & the words
vttered therewith: and by ſweetneſſes, which ſhe
vſeth in the plurall number, ſhe meaneth not only
the pleaſantneſſe of his worde, which as Dauid
ſayth, is more ſweete vnto his taſte, than the

hony and the hony combe. Pſalm. 19. 10: but alſo
the great aboundaunce, and wonderfull plentye
thereof. What a ſweet voyce is this: Come vnto
mee all yee that labour, and be heauie
loden &c. Math. 11. 28. And this: So God loued
the world, that he gaue his onelye begotten
Sonne &c. Iohn 3. 26. See for this Phraſe
alſo, Pſal. 45. 2. And he himſelf is wholly delectable,
yt is, there is nothing, neither within him,
nor wtout him, but it may moue mē to take a ſingular
delight & pleaſure in him: ſhe affirming yt
we are of him whollye and together, which ſhee
had before declared in euery part of him almoſt.
And how can this chuſe but be true, both in the
whole, and in euerye part, ſeeing that God was
in Chriſte, and reconciled the worlde vnto him
ſelfe. 2. Cor. 5. 19. and that in him dwelleth the
fulneſſe of the godhead bodely, God beeing manifeſted
in the fleſhe, and iuſtified in the ſpirite.
Colloſ. 2. 9. 1. Tim. 3. 16. So that whoſoeuer
doubteth of this, or denyeth it, may as well call
the truth of God him ſelfe into queſtion. This is
my welbeloued, vz, that I haue deſcribed vnto you
And this is my louer O daughters of Ieruſalem. As
though ſhe ſhould ſay: he is ſuch a one, as I haue
painted him out vnto you, in this excellent ſhew
and beautye, that yee maye eaſelye know him in
and amongeſt others. And this dubbling of the
wordes, that ſhee here vſed, was not onely profitable
to expreſſe her earneſt affection towardes

him, but alſo to mooue them, with whom ſhe talked,
both to the earneſte louing, and liking of
him, whom ſhee had deſcribed, and alſo that they
might be the better able, either to do her meſſage
mētioned verſ. 7. of this cha, to chriſt, or to bring
her, wher he himſelf was. And in calling him her
welbeloued and louer, ſhe meanneth to expreſſe, that
as Chriſte had carryed vnfayned good will towards
her, ſo ſhe did in ſome meaſure, of a ſound
mind vnto him, as her dearling & beſt beloued,
on whō alone, ſhe could find in her hart, as we ſay,
to beſtow her whole loue, her ſelfe and all. To
be ſhort, in ending thus emphatically, ſhe giueth
vs to vnderſtand, that not beeing able by any figures,
phraſes, metaphors, ſimilitudes, words or
ſpeeches to deſcribe him to the full, ſhe would in
a worde as it were, ſhut vp all, that he him ſelfe
within and without, both generallye and euerye
part of him, was altogeather amiable, and worthy
indeed to be affected, both of her and alſo of
all thoſe, that either ſhoulde heare of him, or ſee
him.
               
                  Verſe 16. O thou the fayreſt among women.
                   See
this expounded before in this chapter verſe 8.
Whither is my welbeloued. This is the ſecond
queſtion of the Damſelles and friendes of the
Church, as we haue noted before, which they
propound not, as of euill wil towardes her or her
ſpouſe, but of a good minde to imbrace him, as
appeareth by the wordes, and to goe with her to

ſeeke him. Whither is thy welbeloued, (vz, yt thou
haſt ſo notably painted out vnto vs, and ſo plainlye
opened,) Turned a ſide, vz, from thee, and yet
it ſhoulde ſeeme, that they meane by the worde,
yt he is not gone far, nor will be long abſent. That
we ſeek him with thee. They ſhew the end of their
aſking, that ſo they may remooue all doubt, and
ſuſpition out of the Churches heade, that they
aſke not otherwiſe, than of an vnfayned minde,
and harty good will, both towardes Chriſte and
her, in that they offer them ſelues as it were, to
be companions with her in ſeeking him. All
commeth to this, that after the Church had
liuelye painted out the perſon of her loue, to the
Daughters of Ieruſalem, that is, to the friends
of the church, and had deſcrybed his complexion,
members, ſpeech, and other excellent vertues,
qualities and graces in him, that if they had but
either ſeen him, or heard him ſpeake, they might
haue knowen him, the holy Ghoſt ſheweth what
effect this tooke in their heartes, namely it ſo
inflamed them, with an vnfayned loue towardes
him, that preſently they will be companions
with her in ſeeking of him. Theſe queſtions
do the faythfull, and elect people of God propound,
labouring thereby to fetch from the
mouth of the Church, a profitable inſtruction,
and profeſſing that they are deſirous to ſeeke &
find him, euen as ſhe. If this ſeeme ſtraunge, we
muſt know & vnderſtand, yt without the church,

Chriſt can neither bee ſought for as he ſhoulde,
neither indeed found.
               
                  Verſ. 17. My welbeloued is gone down into his garden.
                  
The churches anſwere to yt former demand,
for ſhee hath nothing in her, but ſhe wil acquaint
her children and friendes with the ſame. And in
that ſhe vſeth the word of going downe, ſhe ſpeaketh
it not onely as hauing reſpect to the daughters
of Ieruſalē, with whō ſhe talked for their
good and inſtruction, but as hauing regard alſo,
to the ſcituation of the city it ſelfe, from whence
they could not paſſe to their gardens of pleaſure
without the city, but they muſt of neceſſitye goe
downward, becauſe the city ſtood vpon the hill,
and they planted their gardens in the lower places,
becauſe they were more plentiful and fruitfull:
and what ſhee ſhoulde meane by the worde
garden, ſee before chapter 4. 17. To the beddes of
ſpice, that is, to comely and ſweete ſmelling places
in the ſame: this Phraſe is expounded verſe
12. of this chapter. To feed in the gardens. The
church noteth the endes, wherfore Chriſte is
gone downe into the gardens, that is, to eate and
to drincke there, and to take therein his pleaſure
and refreſhing. And to gather lilies, that is, ſweet
and good flowers. Men goe to ther gardens commonly
(as we ſee by experience amongſt vs) eyther
to make merry as we ſaye, or els to gather
ſuch fruites, as grow there: that doth the church
applye in a ſpirituall ſence, vnto her head and

ſpouſe Chriſt, meaning that Chriſt is come into
that place, where his worde is purelye preached
and hearde (for there in deed is the ſeate of the
church) that is Chriſt his garden, ſet with diuers
ſortes of plants, and decked with excellent flowers:
this was called before a garden incloſed,
chapter 4. 12. thorow the beds of ſweet ſmelling
ſpices, which he as a good gardiner treadeth out,
planteth watereth and doth all in all, namelye,
the heartes and conſciences of ſuch as he hath
regenerated, repleniſhing them with ſundrye
gyftes and graces, as of prayer, thankeſgyuing,
obedience, &c, which are vnto him as it were
ſweete ſmelling ſpices or flowres: yea he fedeth
in his gardens, that is to ſaye, particular churches,
for it is as it were food vnto him, to haue
churches, in which he maye be confeſſed and ſerued,
yea it is his meat and drincke to him, either
to doe him ſelfe, or to haue others doe his Fathers
will. Iohn. 4. 32. 34. And he gathereth lylies
and other flowres for them, when he perceiueth
them to doe good workes, which is an odor
that ſmelleth ſweete, and a ſacrifice farre more
acceptable and pleaſaunt to him. Philip. 4. 18,
then all the pleaſant flowres in the world, can be
to any man earthly.
               
                  Verſe. 18. I am my welbeloueds, and my welbeloued
is mine.
                  ) This is the concluſion of the whole
chapter, and of all the ſpeech that the church
hath with her Daughters and Damſels, wherein

the church openly profeſſeth that whatſoeuer
may bee either ſtaied or done againſt her, yt ſhee
is and will be of a ſtayed and vnmoueable affection
towards Chriſte, and will be continuallye
ſtrengthened in an aſſured perſwaſiō of his good
will towards her, and ſo by this meanes ſhee foſtereth
and foodeth her affection and good will
towards him: for ſhee meaneth by this ſpeeche,
that ſhe belongeth ſo to Chriſt, and Chriſt ſo to
her, that there can bee no ſeparation, and therefore
good cauſe why ſhe ſhould continually loue
and like him: we had the ſame before chap. 2. 16
Ther being no difference in the meaning, thogh
as in reſpect of the order of the words, there is
ſome that being put ther in the firſt place which
is here in the latter, & that there in the latter,
which is heere in the firſt, the meaning beeing
thus, As he will not haue an other but whollye
delighteth in me, ſo I will not haue another louer,
but hold my ſelf wholy and onely contented
with him. Who feedeth among the Lillies, That
is, who liueth moſt pleaſantly and ſweetely: q. d.
as they that eate there me at among the Lillies,
and other ſweet ſmelling flowers, can not chuſe
but liue in delights, pleaſantneſſe, and ſweeteneſſe:
ſo doth Chriſt in his church, and thoſe that
ther liue with him. And the church propoundeth
this, not only for the ſingular commendation of
Chriſt her ſpouſe, but alſo thereby as it were by
a forcible argument, to moue all the faithful cō
                  tinually

to loue and like him that hath in him
ſuch aboundaunce of ſweetenes & pleaſure.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Teacheth vs, yt howſoeuer God haue beſtowed
great & many ſpiritual graces vppon his
church, & the particuler members, ſo yt they are
indued with knowledge, faith, & many other holy
vertues, yt yet notwithſtanding, ther are certain
remainders of their naturall corruption in
them, which will ſometimes breake foorth in
them, to manifeſt the neglect of their duetye towardes
God and men: which yet notwithſtanding
wee ſhoulde labour all the dais of our life
in a holy ſtriuing to ſet our ſelues againſt. Of
this combate reade Rom. 7. 14. 15. 16. &c. Secondlye,
it teacheth vs, as on the one ſide to confeſſe
our infirmityes, as the church doth here
her drowſineſſe and ſleeping, that ſo we may obtayne
forgiueneſſe at Gods handes, for if wee
confeſſe our ſinnes, God is faithfull and iuſte to
forgiue vs our ſinnes. 1. Ioh. 1. 9. and receiue
inſtruction, comfort and praye for our brethrē,
who knowing our miſeries, can not but extend ye
bowels of pity & compaſſion towards vs, becauſe
they haue learned to weep with thē yt weepe, &c.
Rom. 12. 15. So on ye other ſide notwithſtāding,
to acknowlege the graces of God in vs & vpō vs
as the church doth here, ſayng that her hart was
awake: for otherwiſe we ſhal rod God of his glory,
who hath giuen vs his good things, & depriue
ye brethren of yt comfort they might haue by vs.

Satans ſubtletie woulde be waighed in this aſſault,
who if he can not puffe vs vp in pryde of
the thinges we haue not, woulde caſt vs downe,
in ſuppoſing a want of the thinges we haue, So
hard a matter is it to bee wiſe according to ſobriety,
as the Apoſtle willeth vs. Roman. 12. 3.
Thirdly, we may learne, for the better feeling of
our ſinne, and the working of a more ſound deteſtation
of it in vs, to aggrauate the ſame vnto
our ſelues, in all the circumſtaunces and occaſions
thereof: howbeit in a iuſt meaſure and proportion,
leaſt otherwiſe we bee found falſe witneſſe
bearers againſt our own ſoules. This doth
the Prophet Dauid in many Pſalmes, & namely
Pſalm. 51. and Daniel alſo chap. 9. 5. 6. &c, yea
& the whole church in ſundry Pſalmes, and particularly.
Pſal. 106. 6. But this wil not our curſed
generation yeeld vnto, and that is the reaſon
why we are ſo beſotted, and ſenſeles in our ſins,
yea froſen as (the Prophet ſayth) in the dregs of
our owne iniquity: Zephan. 1. 12.
               
                  Verſ. 2.Doc. Teacheth vs, what ſhiftes and excuſes
fleſhe and bloud can finde, to put the Lorde from
them in his gracious calling of them, with the
refuſall alſo of their own good, thorow the want
of the graces that hee woulde giue them: ſometymes
they alleadging, that it is no conuenient
tyme to come, as the people did in the buylding
of the Lordes houſe. Haggai. 1. 2. Sometimes
that there profittes and pleaſures are to bee followed,

as in the parable of them that were bidden
to the wedding. Mat. 22. 1. 2, &c. And ſometimes
one thing & ſomtimes an other. And euen
as the church here hath her excuſes, and reaſons
of refuſal. So we ſee ye ſame in Moſes the man of
God, when he was to be ſent for the deliuerance
of Gods people out of Egypt, Exo. 3. 11. 13. alſo
Exo. 4. 1. 10. &c. and in Ieremy, refuſing the execution
of the Prophets office. chap. 1. 6.
               
                  Verſe 3. Teacheth vs, in tyme to accept of the
Lordes mercifull viſitation, leaſt otherwyſe hee
offering vs his fauour, and we eyther contemning
it, or neglecting, or not reuerentlye eſteeming
of it, according to the worthineſſe therof,
we do not onely prouoke him to depart, and pull
ſorrowes vpon our ſelues thereby, but cauſe him
to beſtow it vpon them that will thankfullye receiue
it, and bring foorth the fruites thereof, as
our ſauiour ſayth Math. 21. 43. It is a doctrine
much vſed in the old and new Teſtament, both
to ſtirre vp men, to imbrace and that with ſpeed
and earneſtneſſe Gods fauour offered them, leaſt
refuſing it, they be barred of it then, when they
would be glad of it. See to this ende. Prouerb.
1. 24. 25. &c. Iſaiah. 55. 6. Amos. 8. 12. Galat. 6
10. Epheſ. 5. 6. Heb. 3. 13. and in ſundrye other
places of that Epiſtle.
               
                  Ver. 4. Doth not onelye teach vs, what excellency
and fulneſſe there is of good thinges in
Chriſt, but withal ſheweth his great & vnſpeakable

loue towards the Church, who though ſhee
haue offered him, by meanes of her vncurteous
dealing, iuſt occaſion not onelye to departe from
her, but to take with him alſo, all his fauours,
doth yet notwithſtanding not deale ſo, the Lord
comfortably, as in reſpect of the church, & wiſely
as in regarde of him ſelfe, ſupplying his abſence,
with the ſweete graces that hee hath left
behinde him: which graces alſo the Church ſhal
do well, not onely thankfully to receiue, but profitably
to vſe, to the ſtrengthning of her fayth
and hope, euen vntill ſhe may come vnto the ful
fruition of her head and ſpouſe for euer. To this
end tendeth Paules doctrine of the miniſteries
of the Church, mentioned Eph. 4. 8. 9. 10. 11. &c
               
                  Ver. 10 Teacheth vs, not only to be greatly
greeued for our former iniquities, yea ſo greeued,
that we ſeeme to bee and are in deede, euen
almoſt as it were ſwallowed vp of death with ye
ſame, or as ye prophet ſpeaketh pſal, 88. 3. There
is nothing ſound in my fleſh becauſe of thine
anger, neither is ther reſt in mi bones becauſe
of my ſin. &c: But alſo yt howſoeuer the Lorde
loue his, he doth notwithſtanding for their ſins
chaſtice them, and yet not take his louing kindnes
from thē for euer. Pſa. 89. 32. 33. Yea theſe
afflictions, are both tokens of his fatherly loue
towards them, as Heb. 12. 7. 8. and pledges alſo
of our ſaluation. 1. Corinth. 11. 32.
               
                  Verſ. 6. Teacheth vs, what is the nature of

the wicked againſt the godly, vz. hardlye to intreat
them and to deale moſt cruelly with them
which the Churche of God, and the particuler
members thereof haue found true in all ages &
times, which thing alſo the holy ghoſt propoundeth
not onely here but in many other places of
ſcripture, not as to diſcourage vs from entringe
into the race and courſe of godlineſſe, but to fore
tell vs before hand, what we muſt looke for, and
to forewarne vs alſo to bee furniſhed with the
graces of conſtancy and patience in the trueth.
And as we ſee the perſecutions of the church put
downe in the worde, and foretold there, as acts.
14. 22. 2. Timoth. 3. 12. and other places, ſo we
haue notable places, containing the terrors of ye
wicked, and the ioyes of the faythfull, as Philip.
1. 28. In nothing feare your aduerſaries, which
is to them a ſure token of deſtruction, but to you
of ſaluation and that of God. And 2. Theſ. 1, 6.
7. &c. It is a righteous thinge with God to
recompence trybulation to them that trouble
you, (which what it is he declareth verſ. 8. 9.)
and to you which are troubled reſt with vs:
by which we ſee, that the ſufferinges of the
Saintes, ſhall not be in vayne, and that the vngodly
ſhall not alwayes triumph, whatſoeuer
they imagine or ſuppoſe.
               
                  Verſ. 7. Teacheth vs in the daies of our diſtreſſe
and heauineſſe, not to conceale the ſame
or keep it cloſe, for then it wilbe as a fire to conſume

vs, but to laie it out to the Godly, that ſo
from them we may receiue according to Gods
good pleaſure, inſtruction and comfort, and by
doctrine and praier: according to Saint Iames
his rule. Acknowledge your faultes one to another,
and pray one for an other,. Iames 5. 16.
Taking alwaies heed, that in this behalfe wee
chuſe ſuch, as wil faithfully keepe thinges committed
vnto them, & be able alſo to giue vs comfort
by the knowledge and experiēce which they
them ſelues haue had. 2. Cor. 1. 4. Leaſt otherwiſe
laying our afflictiōs before them that are
vnſkillfull, wee looſe our labour, aud trifle
out the time, or committing them to ſuch as wil
blaſe them abroade, we adde yet more affliction
and griefe vnto our owne ſoules for want of circumſpection
and warines both in that and other
great caſes alſo.
               
                  Verſe. 8. Teacheth vs, by queſtioning and demaundes
(ſpecially propounded vnto them that
be able to inſtruct vs) to labour to attain to the
knowledge of ſuch thinges as we haue ſmall, or
no ſkil at all in, finally & aboue al the knowledg
of Chriſt, for this is life euerlaſting to knowe
God, to bee the onely true God, and him, whom
hee hath ſent Ieſus Chriſt. Iohn 17. 3. And by
this meanes haue alwaies Gods Children, laboured
to profite, as Iohn. 1. 38. 48. alſo Iohn.
14. 22. See alſo Exod. 13. 14. &c. Alſo Deut. 6.
20. and ſundry other places. By which the Lord

would ſeeme amongeſt other wayes allowed in
his word to make this, whereby men might attayne
to ſound knowledge and ripe iudgement
in his truth, and though we in the corruption of
our nature, caſt in our own waies, the ſtumbling
blockes of feare, of ſhamefaſtnes, and ſundry ſuch
like, to hinder vs in this caſe and courſe of godlineſſe,
yet we muſte labor agayne to remooue
them, and in holye boldnes to propound queſtions,
yet none that are curious, but ſuch as are
good to edifie withall. Rom. 14. 1. 19.
               
                  Verſe. 9. Teacheth vs, firſt if we know anye
thing, the manifeſting whereof maye tende to
Gods glorye, and the good of his children, we
ſhould ſimply propound it, for God hath not gyuen
men talents to the end, that they ſhould lapp
it vp in napkins, and digg & hide the ſame in the
ground, as the vnprofitable ſeruaunt in the parable
Math. 25. 25. Luke. 19. 20. Neither yet
that in a proud conceit of their own eſtimation,
becauſe they alone would be counted wiſe, learned,
&c. they ſhould keepe it to them ſelues: but
laye it out for aduauntage to them ſelues by increaſe
of the ſame, and to Gods glory, who ſhall
haue praiſe in their weldoing, and to the good of
his children, who can not chuſe, but reape profit
thereby. Secondly, that howſoeuer we would
that Chriſt ſhould be glorious amongſt others,
and tenderly beloued of them, that yet we ſhould
alſo haue a care, that he might bee deare and

precious in our eyes aboue the reſt, and that we
might (if it were poſſible) more vnfaynedly loue
him than all others.
               
                  Verſ. 10. 11. 12. And ſo on forwarde, till you
come to the ende of the 15, wherin is contayned
not onely a moſt large, but alſo a moſt excellent
& true deſcriptiō, of the rare and wonderful graces
in our ſauiour chriſt, do teach vs: firſt to be in
continuall loue & liking of him, yt hath by a maner
of ſpeech, ſuch a world of ſpiritual wealth in
him. In worldly things, the name of abundance,
is argumēt ſufficiēt inough, not only to cauſe vs
to affect, but euen to ſtriue to attayne the things
that vnder yt color be ſet before vs. what a tranſgreſſion
ſhall this be, yt we ſhal not only haue aboundance,
but infinit treaſures, & that of good
things, yea & of good things concerning eternal
life, & we ſhal either with prophane perſons, as if
we were hogs or dogs, trample them vnder our
feet, or with careles mē, make no account of thē,
or with ignorante, dull, & heauy ſpirited perſons
not haue them in their due regard. It is amōgſt
others, the great ſinne of this thankles generation,
to deſpiſe Chriſt, many thinking it inough, if
they can with the lippes of their tonges talke of
him, but none ſtriuing in a ſtedfaſt perſwaſion of
a liuely faith, to feele him, & his merites effectually
in their hartes, not only to the apprehenſion
of eternall lyfe, but euen to the ſubduing of euill
in them, & the faſhioning of them to good, that
Chriſt dwelling in thē by faith, the body might

be dead becauſe of ſin, Rom, 8. 10. alſo 6. 6. & they
beeing rooted & grounded in loue, they might be
able to cōprehend wtal ſaints, what is yt breadth,
& length, & depth, & height, & to know the loue of
Chriſt, which paſſeth knowledge, yt we might be
filled with al fulnes of God.Epheſ. 3. 17. 18, &c. Oh yt it were in me,
either with a ſolid mind, in deed to imbrace him
ſelf, or yt I had the tongs of al holy angels to propound
him to others, that they might taſte & ſee,
how good the lord Ieſus is. Secondly, yt in this
large cōmendation, the lord hath not only prouided
for the manifeſtation of the wonderful glory
of his ſon, but alſo hath labored to ſtir vp ye heauines
of the harts of his children, in ſetting him
before vs, yt is ſo excellent, yea excellency it ſelf,
as alſo to take frō the wicked all excuſe of ignorance,
who can now alleadge nothing for themſelues,
ſuch Chriſt is ſo plainly & certainly manifeſted
vnto vs, yt euen all our ſenſes, may after a
ſort, be euen as it were ſatiſfied with him, and in
ſome meaſure ſay, as Iohn ſaith: that which was
from the beginning, which we haue hearde,
which we haue ſeene with our eyes, which we
haue looked vpon, and our hands haue handled
of the word of life, &c. 1. Iohn 1. 1.
               
                  Ver. 16. Teacheth vs, that the faithful labor not
only by demandes to increaſe their knowledge &
faith, but yt there is a proceeding & growth in the
ſame, ye yt more they heare of chriſt, yt more they
are inflamed wt a loue & liking of him, & that to
ſpare no labour, paines, or coſt, euen to ſeek him,

and find him alſo. See Pſalm. 84. 6. 7. Rom. 1.
17. This is liuely ſet out, in the wiſe men that
came to ſeeke & worſhip Chriſt. Math. 2. And in
the queene of the ſouth, that came from the vttermoſt
partes of the earth, to heare the wiſedome
of Solomon. Math. 12. 42. But the people
of this age are like the Iſraelites with manna,
the more plenty they haue of it, the more & ſoner
alſo they waxe weary of it, vpon ſo vnthankfull
a nation hath the Lord beſtowed his mercyes.
               
                  Verſ. 17. Teacheth vs, to acquaynt Gods children,
with all the good thinges made knowen to
vs. See the like verſe 9. of this chapter.
               
                  Verſe. 18. Teacheth vs euery day more & more
to feele the certaintye of our ſaluation in our
ſelues, and the infallible teſtimonies and tokens
of Gods loue towardes vs: which that we maye
the better do, we are not ſo much to looke vppon
our ſelues in our ſinnes, for who is it, that ſhall
not then diſtruſt or diſpayre rather, as to looke
vpon the Lord, and that not onely in his eternall
foreſight, but alſo in his vnchaungeable loue,
ther beeing not ſo much, as a ſhadow of turning
in him. Iames. 1. 17. whoſe giftes and calling
alſo are without repentaunce Rom. 11. 29. yea
in the holy ſpirit of truth that he hath gyuen vs,
which is the earneſt of our inheritaunce. Epheſ.
1. 14, and the pledge and earneſt pennye of
all the promiſes of God in our harts. 2. Corrint.
5. 5.
            
            
               
               CAP. 6. and the ſumme
thereof.
               
                  Chriſt bearing witnes or yeelding, to the earneſt
affection an loue of the church towards
him, doth highly commend, that
her ſpirituall beauty, which is knowen
& confeſſed by al to be in her ver: 1. 2. 3.
4. 5. 6. 7. He ſetteth out the earneſt affection
that he had to marrye her to himſelfe.
verſe 8. and confirmeth her in 
                        〈…〉
                     
good will towardes him: firſt by here 
                        •••
                     
                     ling
verſe 10. afterwardes by the commendation
of ſuch graces and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
things, as he had cōmitted vnto her ver.
11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. And laſ
                        •
                     y,
by an aſſured promiſe made her of h
                        ••
                     
continuall preſence and large liberali
                        ••
                     
towardes her, euen vntill the moſt de
                        ••
                     
                     red
daye, wherein the marriage ſhall 
                        〈◊〉
                     
ſolemnized and performed verſ. 18. 19.
               
               
                  
                     1 THou art beautifull (my loue 
                           〈◊〉
                        
Tirtzah: comely as Ieruſalem
terrible as an armye with man
enſignes.
                     2 Turne thine eyes ouer 
                           〈◊〉
                        
mee, that they may lift mee 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
thine heare is like the flocke of Goates, which
looke downe from Gilead.
                     3 Thy teeth are like a flocke of ſheepe, which go vp
from the waſhing, all which bring out twinnes,
and there is none barren amongeſt them.
                     4 Thy temples betweene thy lockes, are as a peece of
a Pomegranate.
                     5 Though there be threeſcore Queenes, and foure
ſcoore concubins, & no number of the damſels.
                     6 Yet my doue that is alone, my perfect one, ſhe that
is the onelye daughter of her mother, euen that
cleane one, to her that bare her, ſo ſoone as the
damſels ſaw her, they called her bleſſed, euen the
Queenes & the concubins praiſed her, ſaying,
                     7 Who is ſhe, that is looked for, as the morning, faire
as the moone, pure as the ſunne, and terrible as
an army with many enſignes.
                     8 I came downe, to the fayre dreſſed garden, to behold
the greene plants of the valley, to ſee whether
the vyne flouriſhed, and the Pomegranats
budded.
                     9 Whē I perceiued not theſe things, my ſoule ſet me
vpō the chariots of my free people, ſo that I ſaid
                     10 Returne return (O Shulamite) return, returne,
that we maye behold thee. What ſhall you ſee in
that Shulamite? Euen as a company of tentes.
                     11 O how beautifull are thy feet, with theſe ſhewes,
Oh thou daughter of the Prince: The ioynts of
thy thyes are like iewels, the worke of the hande
like a cunning workman.
                     
                        
12 Thy nauell is as a round cup, it ſhal not want liquor:
thy belly is as a heape of wheat compaſſed
about with lilies.
                     13 Thy two breſtes are like two yong roes, that are
the twins of a roebucke.
                     14 Thy necke is like a towre of Iuorye, thine eyes
are like the fiſh pooles, in Heſhbon, by the gate of
Batherabbin: thy noſe is like the towre of Lebanon,
that looketh vpon the face of Damaſec.
                     15 Thy head vpon thee, is as Carmell: and the buſh
of thy head, is as purple the king may be tyed in
the rafters.
                     19 How fayre art thou? And how pleaſaunt art
thou (O my my loue,) in theſe pleaſures.
                     17 This thy ſtature is like a palme tree, and thy
breſtes like cluſters.
                     18 I ſayd I will goe vp into the Palme tree, I will
take hold of her bowes: thy breſtes ſhall now be
like the cluſters of the vine, and the ſauour of
thy noſtrils like apples.
                     19 And the roofe of thy mouth like the beſt wine,
which goeth ſtreight to my welbeloued and
cauſeth the lippes of the auncient to ſpeake.
                  
               
               
                  AS in the former chapter, and ſpecially
towards the end thereof,Con. the
church had very highly commended
Chriſte her head and ſpouſe,
and that not only to ſtir vp others,
in ſoundneſſe of loue to imbrace him that was

ſo excellent, but alſo to raiſ vp, and increaſe the
feruency of her affection towarde him: ſo in this
chapter, Chriſte againe on the other ſide, doth
likewiſe notably praiſe her, not onely thereby to
expreſſe his harty goodwill towardes her, and
to let her vnderſtand, that no loue or commendation
beſtowed vppon him is loſt, but that it
ſhalbe required to the full: but alſo to drawe on
others in a ſounde minde to ioyne them ſelues
vnto her, whome hee both ſo tenderly loueth, and
highly magnifieth.
               In this chapter (wherein Chriſte comforteth
and confirmeth the Church, being toſſed too and
fro with doubtings,Diuiſ. leaſt Chriſt for his vnkindeneſſe,
ſhould vtterly depart frō hir, & running vp
and down to ſeeke her head and ſpouſe: In this
 chapter I ſay, ther are are three eſpeciall points
propounded vnto vs. In the firſt, becauſe in the
other chapter the church was full of mourning,
griefe and ſicknes, for her negligence and careleſneſſe
towardes him, hee comforteth her and
aſſureth her, that notwithſtanding the ſame, ſhe
is and ſhall be as deare vnto him, as euer ſhee
was before: which thing alſo that ſhee mighte
be the better perſwaded of, he doth yeelde her a
large and vnfained commendation, and this is
 contained in the ſeuen firſt verſes. In the ſecond
he ſetteth out the earneſt and vehement deſire
he had, to haue the mariage betweene him and
the church finiſhed, and this is compriſed in one

verſe onely, to wit, the eight verſe. In the thirde
part, he declareth his good will and harty affection
towardes the Churche, by a notable commendacion
of her, promiſing as it were, his continuall
preſence and aboade with her, euen vntill
the day of marriage, ſo that ſhe ſhall not need
any more to bee diſcomforted by his departure,
from verſe 9. to the end of the chapter. In which
third part notwithſtanding, Chriſt propoūdeth
foure ſpeciall thinges. The firſt is, that Chriſte
declareth what councell hee tooke when he perceiued,
that that time of the marriage, which
was hoped and looked for was not yet come,
Verſe 9. Secondly, hee earneſtlye calleth the
Church to come back againe, and to return vnto
him, ſhe in her ſeeking, hauing as it were, ouergone
him.
               
                  Verſe 10 Thirdly, there is a notable deſcription 
of the former beauty, and gorgeouſneſſe of
the church. verſe. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. And
laſtlye a promiſe made to the churche, for the
faithfull and aſſured performance of all duties
towards her, vntill the mariage ſhal be fully conſummate
and ended ver. 18. 19. And this much
beeing ſayde, both for the connexion and diuiſion
of the chapter, into his cheefe partes & members,
we come nowe to the ſenſe of the wordes
of the text, as they lye.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Thou art beautifull my loue.
                   Chriſt meeting
with the church that laboured and ſought

to finde him, doth after the maner of louers, bewraying
his great affections, maruailouſly commend
the Churche, for her excelent beutie: All
which things, as they muſt be ſpiritually vnderſtood,
ſo wee muſt know, that all the glory ſhe-hath,
how great or how litle ſoeuer yt bee, ſhee
hath it from Chriſt her ſpouſe. So that he doth
nothing as it were, but commend his own graces
in her, & yet theſe thinges are not deliuered
without cauſe, whether we reſpecte Chriſt, or ye
Church it ſelfe or others. If we reſpect Chriſt, it
propoundeth vnto vs, the manifeſtation of his
vnfained and continual loue towards the church
if we regarde others, it is done to make them in
loue and lykinge towardes the Churche, which
Chriſt himſelfe loueth ſo tenderly, and ſo highly
commendeth: if we reſpect the Church, it is don
for her comfort. q. d. Thinck not that that goodly
beuty of thine is decaied, or that I haue caſte
from mee thy loue and lyking, by reaſon of thy
former diſcurteſies and negligences, I am not
ſo ſcornefull and dyſdainfull, as to thincke thee
deformed for that ſpottes ſake, thou haſt ſufficiently
waſhed it a waye, with thy teares and repentaunce.
Wherefore as I ſaid before, chap. 4
1. 2. &c. So euen nowe I affirme the ſame
ſtill, thy fauoure and beutie is moſte acceptable
and delightfull to mee. And Chriſte doubleth
this, becauſe it is hard for the Church, and

the members thereof, to beleeue the Worde
at the firſt, and ſpecially the worde of promiſe,
and then chiefely, when wee regarde our euill
dealing with the Lorde, and oure multiplying
of it againſte him. As tyrtzah. It is the
name of a moſte pleaſaunt Citie in the coaſtes
of Iſraell, ſcituated vppon the riuer Euphrates,
where, after that the kingdome of Iſraell
was rent from the houſe of Dauid, Hieroboam
placed as it ſhoulde ſeeme, his kingly
pallace. Of this Citie you maye reade 1.
Kinges. 14. 17. alſo 15. 21. and 16. 6. &c. Neither
doubt I, but that it had the name giuen it
of pleaſauntnes (beeing deriued of a worde that
ſignifieth to accept or like of) becauſe it did by
the pleaſauntnes and beutie thereof, drawe all
men as it were to the lykinge thereof. Comely
as Ieruſalem. For the beautie and glorye of this
Cytie, beſides that wee haue the commendation
of the word, it being called therin, the praiſe
of the worlde, Iſaiah. 62. 7. See alſo Pſalm.
122. 3. Yt did euen as forraine wryters recorde,
not onelie in beautie and comelyneſſe
contende with the Cytties of the Eaſt, but
as ſomme of them doe report, was the moſte
famouſe of them all. See PLINIE lib, 5
CAP. 14. Thus wee ſee the pleaſauntnes,
Gorgeouſnes and bewty of the Church ſet out
vnto vs by earthlye ſimilytudes. And though it
bee true in deed, yt none of theſe can ſufficiently

declare the ſame vnto vs, yet we may perceiue,
that the Scripture hath taken not only the moſt
excellent thinges of the lands of Iudah and Iſrael,
but of the whole world to ſet forth theſame
vnto vs, that ſo vnder theſe earthly reſemblaunces,
he might the better make vs, (who are very
groſſe and dull) to conceiue of heauenly and ſpirituall
thinges. It followeth. Terrible is an army
with many enſignes. One woulde thinke, that this
ſhould be no great commendation, ſpeciallye
ſith reſembling the church to a woman, neither
doth it agree to that ſexe, neither is it prayſeworthy
in them (as ſome ſuppoſe) to ſtrike terror
into others. But we ſay, firſt euen for womā
                  kinde,
that it is, and ſhall be no ſmall commendation
vnto them. If with their grauitye and
maieſty, they ſtrike terror and fear, into impure
fellowes, euen by ſobriety and ſeuerity of countenaunce,
driuing ſuche from them, as woulde
make them diſloyall to their huſbands. Which
thing alſo, maye notably agree to the Churche,
in a double reſpect, to witte, firſte, when as in
reſpect of her excellente maieſtye, ſhee ſo terrifieth
her aduerſaries, eſpeciallye falſe teachers,
who woulde defile her with corrupt doctrine,
that they dare not ſo muche, as touche
her, otherwiſe or further, then as GOD permitteth
and appoynteth: Secondly, when as in
regard of her diſobedient children, ſhe woundeth
them by the worde and Diſcipline for a while,

that by repentaunce they may bee healed and
holpen for euer, againſt the ſubtilty of Sathan,
and the ſtrength of ſinne, ſhee not ſtriking them
thereby, to confounde them no more then God
doth ſtrike his children, by his roddes to ouerthrowe
them for euer, but to reconcile them to
their eternal comfort & ſaluation. Neither doth
the Lord meane this onely, by reſembling his
church to armies with many enſignes, but alſo to
ſet out vnto vs thereby the good order & inuincible
force of the ſame. For euen as in greate
armies, the more good militarye orders there
are eſtabliſhed and practiſed, & holye courſes
kept, the greater is their glory and comlineſſe,
and the more do they flouriſh & proſper: euen ſo
is it with the church. And as it is an impoſſible
thing to preuayle vppon an army, conſiſting of
innumerable and valiant people, ſo is it as hard
yea, altogether impoſſible, to preuayle againſte
the Churche, ſithe it is of ſuche ſtrength, power
and fayth, as, though it may bee aſſaulted, yet it
can neuer be ouercome. See the like phraſe to
this, verſ. 7. of this chapter.
               
                  Verſe. 2 Turne thine eyes ouer againſte
mee.
                   That is, looke vppon mee aud regarde
mee, q. d. Though thou bee paſt, yet turne
thine eyes backe againe, that thou maieſt beholde
mee, That they may lift mee vp, that is,
that ſo I maye receyue comfort in the ſighte of
thee. Thus Chriſte ſpeaketh to the churche,

that hee mighte giue her to vnderſtande, that
he would render to her like for like. She had
twiſe before declared, that ſhee was as it were
faint and ſick thorow loue, for which purpoſe ſee
chap. 2. 5. & alſo chap. 5. 7. The very like ſtrength
and power of loue, to be in him towards her, doth
here Chriſt declare, both that ſo ſhe might know
there was no loue loſte: and alſo that ſhe might
be cōforted, in the heauines ſhe was in. I know
that others do otherwiſe turne this parte of the
verſe: as thus: Turne awaye thine eyes, from
me, for they are ſtronger than I, or they ouercome
me, giuing alſo this ſenſe, that chriſt wold
haue the church, to caſte her eye from him becauſe
he could hardly keepe himſelfe from ſhewing
againe moſt manifeſt tokens of his loue &c.
But the other in my minde is moſt ſimple and
plaine, not onely agreeing beſt with the circumſtaunces
and occaſion of the place, and purpoſe
of Chriſt, but alſo ſtanding well with the meaning
of the Hebrue worde, which maye and doth
as wel ſignifie to turne to, as to turne from, and
in this verſe rather to turne to, becauſe afterwardes
in this chapter alſo verſe. 10. The Lord
calleth the Church vnto him. This is then the
meaning, that I take this firſt part of the verſe,
to containe in it, the wordes of comfort and conſolation.
q. d. bee of good comfort, and in an
aſſured fayth looke vp to me, yt ſo I my ſelf alſo
whoe am in ſome ſorte caſte downe with thy

heauines, may receiue both comfort and glorye
by thy faith and conuerſion for no doubt but ſith
ther is ſo great & ſtraight a coniunction betwixt
Chriſt & his church, as the apoſtle ſpeaketh of 1
Cor. 12. 12. There is alſo a ſympathy & fellowlike
feeling, or ſuffering together as it were,
Chriſte beeing ſeaſed with ſadneſſe (as a man
would ſay) in the greefe of the church, and reioycing
again in the gladſomneſſe and ioy thereof.
Thine haire is like the flocke of goates, which looke
downe from Gilead. This is alreadye expounded
before, chapter 4. 1. Spirituallye by this may
bee meant, either the multitude of beleeuers, or
the aboundance of Gods graces beſtowed vpon
the church: or elſe he meaneth that the beauty of
the church, is ſtayed and ſure, and cannot decay
by any infirmity of hir own, becauſe it is whollye
ſtayed and vphelde, by the grace and power
of Chriſt. For as it coulde not fall out otherwiſe,
but that the flockes in Gilead, muſt thriue
and proſper: ſo it could not otherwiſe bee, but
that the church, and graces of God in the ſame,
muſt needes continue and increaſe, becauſe it is
vnderpropped and nouriſhed, with the aboundaunte
bleſſinges of Chriſte, the heade and huſbande
thereof.
               
                  Verſe 3 Thy teeth are like a Flocke of Sheepe,
which goe vp from the waſhing,
                   that is, white, pure
and clean: All which bring out Twinnes, That is,

they are alſo euen & equall, as commonly twins
are: And there is none barren amongeſt them. He
meaneth that they were all full, and none wanting
as I take it: for as teeth aunſwearing euenly
one to an other, as in reſpect of the vpper
and nether iawe is comely: and as when either
inche one iawe or in the other, one ſtandeth not
further out then an other, but all are of an equal
height or euennes, it is ſome beuty many times
to yt countenance, ſo was it in the church. See al
this expounded before chapter 4. verſe. 2. where
Chriſte ſpeaketh euen the ſame thinges of the
church, vſing it here, not as a vaine or idle repetition,
but as hauing regarde to the church, and
that in a double conſideration. The firſt is, to
ſhew her, that notwithſtanding her offence hee
loueth her ſtill as before, which alſo cauſeth him
to vſe the ſame wordes here that there. Secondly,
becauſe he knew how hard a thing it was for
the church, to beleeue the promiſes, and therfore
for the ſtrengthening of her weakneſſe, he doubbleth
them and trebleth them, as you woulde
ſay.
               
                  Verſe. 4. Thy temples,
                   vz, of thy head, betweene
thy lockes, he ſpeaketh of the church, according to
the manner of women, who were wont to laye
their lockes out, yet ſo that their temples notwithſtanding
the ſame, and the beauty thereof,
might be ſeene. Are as a peece of pomegranate,
that is, of a ruddy and beautifull colour, and that

ſo as no doubt, but there was holines and chaſtity
meant vnder the ſame. All this is expounded
before chap. 4. 3.
               
                  Verſe. 5. Though there be threſcore Queenes.
                  
As before Chriſt had commended the church, for
ſingular beautye in her ſelfe, ſo now hee proceedeth
to commend her, by comparing her with others:
q. d. put the caſe that euen there were
innumerable Queenes, for he putteth a number
certaine for an vncertaine, and thoſe moſte fayre
and beautiful, as Queenes were wont to be choſen
in that reſpect. See Heſter 2. 2. 3. 4. And
foureſcore concubines, that is, innumerable, a certaine
number for an vncertaine as before. The
Hebrue worde turned here concubines, doth as
the learned note, ſomtimes ſignifie wyues, thogh
not iuſt and lawfull wyues, which were maried
without any ſolemnity, or betrothing of matrymony.
And no doubt but he ſpeaketh this according
to the corrupt cuſtome, both of the age
wherein he liued, and of former and ſubſequent
times alſo, manye taking it as a thing lawfull,
(whereas it was indeed altogether wicked and
vngodly) not only to haue many wyues, but concubines
alſo, as we maye ſee by the continuall
practiſe of the fathers expreſſed in the worde,
though not commended, but condemned therein
rather, as Malach. 2. 15. Some maruaile why
Solomon mentioneth onelye threſcoore Queenes
and foureſcoore concubines, whereas 1. Kin. 11. 3.

                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
It is ſayde that he had ſeuen hundreth Wyues
that were queenes, & three hundred concubines,
wherevnto though we might aunſwere, as ſome
learned men do, namely that it is likelye that he
wrote this, before he burſt foorth to take ſo infinit
number as it were, yet me thinketh the more
plaine ſenſe is as before, that he putteth a number
certaine for an vncertaine, which is not onely vſuall
in other ſcriptures, but euē in this book alſo,
chap. 3. 7. where he maketh mention of threeſcore
mightye men of Iſraell, that ſtand about
Salomons bed. Some allegorize here one way,
ſome an other. Some think that by the queenes,
there is ment the famous peoples of the world,
and mightye congregations, and by the concubines,
ſuch as be leſſe famous: but me thinketh
heere, that the plaine litterall ſenſe is the beſt.
And no number of the damſels: q. d.
                   Suppoſe
that they and their maides of honour attending
vpon them, were as a man woulde ſaye, without
number or innumerable: yet ſhoulde they not
be able to match the church for beautye, comelines
& glory, but ſhoulde euen of their owne accord,
giue her place before them all, Queenes,
concubines, waiting gentlewomen, and al other
whatſoeuer.
               
                  Verſ. 6. Yet my doue that is alone.
                   In what ſenſe
the church is compared to a Doue, hath been oftentimes
declared before. chap. 2. 14. & chap. 5. 1
ſo yt we ſhall not need to ſtand vpō it here. She

is ſayd to be alone, or as we ſay in our ſpeech, an
odde one, both becauſe ſhe was choſen by God,
out of all the people and nations of the worlde,
and was moſt deare vnto him: and alſo becauſe
compared with other, none of them coulde come
nigh her to match with her. My perfect one.
See this expounded cha. 5. 1. She that is the onely
daughter of her mother. An other title attributed
to the church, by which the holye Ghoſte meaneth
both that ſhee was moſte tenderly beloued,
as onely children are. See Iudg. 11. 34. Luke.
8. 42. and alſo that ſhee had or ſhoulde haue, a
moſte rich and precious portion, as the onelye
childe or heyre of her mother: all this muſte bee
ſpiritually vnderſtood, the meaning whereof is,
that ſo long as the church remayneth here vppon
the earth, and is not gathered into her huſbands
houſe, ſhee cleaneth whollye to her mother, that
is the heauenlye Hieruſalem. Galath. 4. 26. by
meanes wereof ſhee glittereth with ſuch exceeding
great glorye, that the worlde wondereth
at her, for the heauenlye gyftes and ſpirituall
excellency, that God hath beſtowed vppon her.
See Deut. 4, 6. Euen that cleane one, to her that
bare her. An other title attributed to the
Churche, the commendation thereof, to witte
that ſhee is Cleane, or as ſome reade it Pure, others
elect, all which tende to one thing, ſhee hauing
not theſe, or anye of theſe graces from her
ſelfe, or of her ſelfe, but off and from the Lorde.

                  So ſoone as the damſels ſaw her. He meaneth by
this ſpeech, that the beautye of the church was
excellent, for euen at the firſt ſight and beholding,
they were conſtrayned to confeſſe her, to
be the moſt excellent and beautiful of the world.
They called her bleſſed, that is, they accounted her
as indued with rare and wonderfull graces, euen
for the thinges which they ſawe at the firſte
ſight and bluſhe in her. See for the phraſe Luk.
1. 48. Euen the Queenes, and the concubines, vz,
mentioned before verſe 5. Prayſed her, vz, for the
excellent partes that were in her q. d. high and
low, mighty, and meane, of honorable eſtate and
baſe condition, were conſtrayned to cōmend her,
and therfore ſhee muſt needes be more excellent
that was prayſed of them al. Saying. Now he ſheweth
what forme they vſed or ſhoulde vſe, in the
commendation of the church.
               
                  Verſ. 7. Who is ſhe.
                   They propound this queſtion,
not ſo much as though they eyther doubted, or
were ignoraunt, what ſhee was, as by that maner
of ſpeech, the rather to note her excellencye.
See the like demaund, Pſalm. 24. 8. Alſo Pſal.
77. 13. where they demand thus, who is ſo great
a god, as our god? q. d. She is ſo beautiful & glorious,
yt we know not what to reſemble her vnto.
That is loked for as the morning. Vnder this maner
of ſpeech, the holy Ghoſt, doth not onely note, the
earneſt deſire of the faithfull, to ſee and beholde
the glory of the church, but alſo her great glory

it ſelfe, which is inlarged not only becauſe it is
deſired, yea greatly wiſhed and looked for, euen
as watch men looke for the day breake, of which
ſee Pſal. 130. 6. but alſo becauſe it is reſembled
to the morning, which, as we know by experience,
is not onelye freſhe and comfortable, but
glorious alſo and beautifull, as in reſpect of the
liuelye and cleare colours thereof, and deth as a
man woulde ſaye, more and more increaſe in
light, in which reſpect alſo it is to bee marked,
that ſhee is not reſembled, neither to the night,
nor to the dawning of the day, or day breake, but
euen to the glorye and beauty of the morning it
ſelfe. Fayre as the moone, vz, in her full, or moſte
glorious ſhew, at which time ſhee ſeemeth a very
beautifull and fayre creature indeed. Pure as
the ſunne, He meaneth not onely ſimply, and of it
ſelfe, as the ſunne hath not her light from any other,
but glorious alſo and full of wonderful maieſty:
ſo in Chriſtes tranſfiguration it is ſayde,
that his face did ſhine as the ſunne. Math. 17. 2.
and Reuel. 1. 16. it is ſayd, that his face ſhonne,
as ye ſun ſhineth in his ſtrength. In a word vnder
theſe ſpeeches, the holy Ghoſt woulde not onely
note the growth of ye church, by comparing it to
the morning, but the excellency & glory of it, by
reſembling it to the moone, yea to the ſunne, the
moſt excellent and glorious of all the heauenlye
creatures that we doe beholde. And terrible as an
armie with many enſignes. This is largelye expounded

before in the firſt verſe of this chapter.
Ver. 8. I came down to the fair dreſſed gardē.
                   Many
turn it the garden of nuts, with what reaſon let
thē ſee. This rather ſtandeth both wt the etimology
of ye hebrue word (as good expoſitors note) &
alſo more agreeth with the circumſtance of the
place, becauſe afterwardes he mentioneth vines
pōgranates & ſuch like, with which mē are wōt
to plant their gardens, & not wt nut trees, which
beſides yt they are cēmō, & euery wher to be had
are of no precious accoāt or eſtimation. I omit
ye miſtical reaſons yt the iewes alledge, why they
thēſelues ſhold be cōpared to nuts, as ful of childiſh
toyes and conceites. No doubt but for the
clearing of the ſenſe, this is to bee noted, as before,
that heere beginning the ſeconde parte of
the chapter, in which Chriſte laboureth to comfort
his church, he ſayth, that he did not of lothſomneſſe
or wrath, depart from her, but rather of
a very earneſt deſire that he had to finiſh ye ſame
moſt holy mariage, & that therefore indeede hee
went away for a while, yt ſo he might be ye more
aſſured of the time. And in yt he reſembleth the
church to a fayre dreſſed garden: he ſpeaketh after
the maner of mē, who in ye beginning of ye ſpring
prune, purge & dreſſe ther gardens, & orchards, yt
ſo it may bear more fruit: & when he ſaith, he cāe
down to the ſame, he ſpeaketh yt alſo according
to ye maner of men, who in the ſummer time come
to ſee how their hādy works thriue and proſper:
ſo yt al is as much q. d. Thou ſhouldeſt not haue

bin diſmaide. (O church) y• I departed frō thee,
for therin I dealt but with thee, as good gardeners
& vine-dreſſers deal wt their orchards, gardens
& vineyards, who cōming (perhaps before yt
time of fruit) to look for fruit & finding none, depart,
not for euer, but til another more conuentēt
ſeaſon, when they may receiue fruit. And beſides
yt this agreeth wel wt chriſts purpoſe. q. d. think
not not yt I wil any more loſe my labour & coſt,
beſtowed vpō thee, then owners of their gardēs
& orchards, ye words folowing alſo in this ver. do
help to ſtrengthen & vphold this ſenſe. To behold
the green plants of the vally, yt is, things newly plā
                  ted
& ſet, & to ſee alſo how they did thriue & grow
& he vſeth ye word vally, which in ye hebrue tong,
ſignifieth both a riuer & a brooke, & a vally alſo,
thorow which a riuer or brook, did or might run
becauſe men commōly plant ther, as which they
take to be more plētiful & fruitful. To ſee whither
the vine floriſhed, & the pomgranates budded. By 2.
wordes he meaneth one thing, namely, yt as men
look not onely to ſee the growth of their grifts
& plants: but alſo their fruits, whither they were
then ripe: ſo he did wait, whether yt time appointed
for ye mariage were come, wherof alſo he had
forerunning ſignes, euen as the flouriſhing of ye
vine, & budding of pomgranates, were tokens of
ye ſpring paſt, & of the ſommer comming on. See
for this purpoſe cap. 7. 3. of this book. Which order
& courſe our ſauior him ſelf obſerueth, Mat.
24. 32. ſee alſo for this end & purpoſe. Iſa. 5. 1. 2

                  Verſ. 9 When I perceiued not theſe thinges.
                   Vz.
The Vine to flowriſh, the Pomgranate to bud,
&c. Which are mentioned ver. 8. meaning therby,
that when he perceiued the time of the mariage
was not yet come, as men know y• ſummer
is not come, when theſe thinges ſprout not out:
to which alſo may be added, that when hee perceiued,
howe greeuouſly the churche tooke his
abſence then. My ſoule, my louing affection and
tender hart: for now hee goeth about to declare,
what councell hee tooke, when he perceiued that
the long looked for time of mariage was not yet
come, namely that he made great haſt backe againe
as it were, to comfort his Church, which
he expreſſeth by the metaphors following. Set
mee vpon the chariots, that is, yeelded mee good
and ſure meanes to bee caried: neither doth hee
onely note hereby, the meanes of his comming
to the Churche, but in the wordes following, the
ſpeede that he made. Of my free people. q. d.
                   As
they they that be willing and free hearted people,
do the things that they doe cheerefully, and
therefore alſo with more expedition and ſpeede
then others: ſo came I cheerefully, and with a
readye minde, after I had once reſolued vppon
the matter, to ſee & comfort the churche, for this
free harted and willing people, ſee. Pſal. 110. 3
I know other giue other ſences of theſe words,
but me thinketh this is moſte plaine and ſimple.
So that I ſayd. As before hee had declared his

purpoſe and reſolution of his returning to the
church, to the great comfort of the ſame: ſo now
hee ſheweth what hee ſpake when hee came to
her.
               
                  Verſe. 10 Returne, returne.
                   Theſe are the
wordes of Chriſte vnto the Churche, who in ſeeking
of him, had as a man wold ſai, gone beyond
him. And this calling of her backe again, is expreſſed
vnto vs vnder the ſimilitude of an earthly
man, who as it were a farre off, whooteth and
ſhouteth euen as lowd as he can, by wordes and
ſpeech, to bring ſuch back, as wander out of the
right way. O Shulamite. No doubt but vnder
this terme, hee meaneth the church: which ſome
thinke ſignifieth, made moſte perfect, thorough
the eternall purpoſe and calling of her, by God
to himſelfe. Me thinketh alſo it may be deriued
of Salem, by which name Hieruſalem was called
in former time as appeareth. See Pſal. 76.
2. Genſ. 14. 18. Heb. 7. 7. 1. 2. and though perhaps
it may rather bee ſayde Schelemite, than
Schulamite, yet it may be of another forme, as
in the ſcripture we reade Schunanite of Schomem.
2. King. 4. 8. 12. And the rather I would
referre it to Hieruſalem, becauſe that worde is
often vſed in the ſcripture for the church it ſelf.
Returne, returne. This is no vayne repetition,
but profitable to expreſſe Chriſtes earneſtneſſe
and vehement loue twardes the Churche, and
the ſaluation thereof, as alſo to note, howe hardly,

euen ye church it ſelfe is reclaimed from ſtraiyng,
yt muſt haue ſo many & ſo earneſt cals to pul
her back. That we may behold thee. Chriſt ſpeaketh
this in his owne name, & the name of his friends
whom he had mentioned verſe. 9. before: for hee
woulde haue them alſo to bee partakers, of the
beauty and glory of the church, this beeing ſpoken
alſo according to earthlye cuſtomes, as the
bridegrome hath his friends, whō he wold make
partakers of the glory of his Bryde, ſo the bryd
hath hers, whō ſhe would be glad to haue beholders
of hir excellency & glorye likewiſe. The
brydes friends may be ſayd to be all yt ſound particular
mēbers of the church whom ſhee woulde
gladly haue not onely to behold, but to be partakers
of the maieſtye and magnificence of Chriſt
her head and ſpouſe. The Bridgromes friendes
maye be ſayde to bee the ſame, not that they are
friendes to Chriſte or his churche of nature, but
by grace, whome he would haue to beholde the
infinite riches, and inward beauty of his church,
that they might in the holy loue of the ſame, liue
and dye therein. Others thinke the friendes of
Chriſt to be the holy angels, but me thinketh the
former ſhoulde bee better, becauſe Chriſte ſaith
Iohn. 15. 14. 15. that the faithful are his friends.
What ſhall you ſee in that Shulamite? Chriſt turneth
his ſpeech vnto his friendes, by aſking of
whom this queſtion, he mindeth not to bewraye
in him ſelfe anye ignoraunce, or doubting of the
great graces, that were to bee founde in the

Church: but the rather thereby to ſtirre them
vp, to bee faythfull beholders and witneſſes of
that great glorye, which is in the church, and
which hee coulde not otherwiſe expreſſe, but by
a wondrous demaund made of it. See verſe 7.
of this chapter. Euen as a company of tentes. It
is an aunſweare to the former queſtion: which
whether Chriſt make or his friendes, we will
not ſtand much vpon, though we rather thincke,
that as Chriſte propounded the queſtion, ſo hee
was beſte able for his ſkill, as beeing beſt acquainted
with the graces of the church, and readieſt
alſo for his good will to aunſweare, and ſatiſfie
the ſame. The meaning is to ſet out the
excellent order, glory, and power of the church,
comparing the ſame to a comelye order of pitching
of tents, & innumerable & inuincible people
in the ſame: others turne it as ye company of
Mahanaim: q. d. you ſee how glorious the church
it ſelfe is, by yt which hath beene ſpoken before,
but if you woulde beholde with what a notable
troupe it is accōpanied, you ſhall doe well to cal
to mind that notable number, and that ſame ioyful
day alſo, wherin the people returning to Dauid
did receiue him with ye great ioye & cōfort of
them all, as he did comfortably entertaine them,
and all this was done at Mahanaim, as appeareth
2. Samuel. 19. but I leaue it to the godlye
to approue, whether hee liketh and liſteth to receiue:
in truth they both tend to one end.
               
                  Verſe 11. Oh howe beautifull are thy feete!
                  
                  
Chriſt reioyceth at this comming of the church,
nigh vnto him, and his approching to her, euen
as one, tht would ſay to his freend, whome her
hath not ſeen of a long ſeaſon. O howe good and
excellent are theſe feete of thine, that broughte
vs now at the length to the beholding one of another.
For the phraſe, ſee Iſai. 52. 7. alſo Rom.
10. 15. And heere hee beginneth in a liuely deſcriptiō
to commend the church, in euery particular
member, euen as a man woulde ſay, from
the ſole of the foote, to the top of the heade. With
theſe ſhewes, which thou meaneſt, and which no
doubt Chriſte as a loue-token beſtowed vppon
her. This may be referred, eyther to the miniſters
of the word, or elſe to the ſound affections
of the Church, which are ſometimes ſignified by
Feete. as Eccleſ. 4. 17. or to the good workes,
which the thurch is inabled to perform through
Chriſte. O thou Daughter of the Prince, That
is, thou moſt noble and excellent Damoſel, who
art as it were ſprong from a moſte famous and
honourable ſtocke: Thus Chriſt compareth the
churche to ſuche, becauſe ſuche eyther are or
ſhoulde bee according to their highe place,
more excellent, then thoſe of more baſe condition.
And thus wee ſee, that the Church is thorough
Chriſte become the Daughter of God
almighty, who gouerneth the whole earth, and
who maketh her famous, noble and glorious, by
the giftes and graces of his holye ſpirite beſtowed

vppon her. The ioynts of thy thies. From
ye feet he aſcendeth vpward, meaning as it may
appeare by that which followeth, that they
were very cunningly and artificially made. We
muſte imagine heere nothinge but ſpirituall,
namely, that there was & is a moſt cunning framing
and making of the whole churche, and
all the partes of the ſame, euery part hauing in
it, comelineſſe, beauty, glorye, ſtrength, Other
turne it thus: the compaſſing of thy thyes, Meaning
therby ye girdle wherwith ſhe was girded,
which they did vſe to weare in old time, lower
by much then we do, euen vpon their thighes, as
it ſhould ſeeme, Pſal. 45. 3. Or about the Loyns,
as Math. 3. 4. But I thinke that the former (ſo
it bee ſoberly and chaſtly read and regarded,)
is better and commeth neerer to the purpoſe of
Chriſte, who maketh heere as it were a ſpeciall
enumeration or recital of ye parts of the church,
Are like Iewelles, That is, very fine and coſtly: if
wee reade it as referring it to the girdle, which
in deed Brydes were wont, and are yet accuſtomed
to weare, very ſumptuous and fine: otherwiſe
neat and comely, if we referre it to the
thighs, The worke of the hand of a cunning workman.
This is added to note the excellencye:
q. d. moſte workmanly or cunninglye made, euen
like vnto iewelles that haue the moſte cunninge
and curious workmanſhippe beſtowed
vppon them that canne bee. Some vnderſtande

this of that ſpirituall begettinge of children,
which the churche continuallye bringeth foorth
vnto Chriſte by the miniſtery of the worde, and
working of the ſpirite, but I rather referre it
to the ſtrength, beauty, & comlineſſe of ye church
it ſelfe, & the particuler members thereof.
               
                  Verſe, 12 Thy nauell is as a round cup.
                   That is
very comely and bewtiful to the ſhew, as we ſee
globe glaſſes, or ſtāding cups, made after yt faſhiō
are. It ſhall not want liquor. q. d.
                   it ſhal alwaies be
plentifull as a cup yt is full to the top, ſee Pſal.
23. 5. Some read it thus, Let not the liquor therof
fail, as though in earneſt affection he had cried
out or wiſhed rather, yt the womb of ye church
compared to a round cup (in which ſimilitude he
perſiſteth ſtil) might neuer haue bin decaied, or
conſumed rather, but might alwaies haue bene
as the pors widowes pitcher of oyle mentioned
1. King. 4. 2. 3. But mee thinketh the other is
more ſimple. Thy belly is as a heap of wheate, that
is, moſt fruitful & aboundant, hauing great ſtore
like a wheat heape. Compaſſed about with lillies: q.
d.
                   Beſides yt it is fruitfull, it ſmelleth well and
is moſt ſweete, as thoſe places and things are, yt
are beſet with Lillies. There is ment vnder all
this, the great fruitfulneſſe of the churche, and ye
plenty of Gods graces vpon the ſame, furniſhing
it, not onelye with aboundance of waters, which
in thoſe hot cuntries were much drunke and very
ſcarſe, but euen with aboundaunce of verye

neceſſary and ſweete foode, meant by wheat ſet
about with lillies: all which Chriſt ſetteth forth
here, not only to expreſſe his own loue towards
the church, but as we haue ſayd before, to draw
on other men to do the like.
               
                  Verſe 13. Thy two breaſtes are like two young
roes,
                   that is, freſh and luſty, whoſe milke is not
conſumed with age or yeares. That are the Twins
of a roebuck. that is, they are equall, and euen one
of them is not greater then another. Equalitye
in womens breaſtes, that is to ſay, when one of
them exceedeth not another in greatneſſe, is a
thing much ſet by amonſt men, and it is a comlineſſe
to women them ſelues: let vs remooue
hence all earthly thoughtes, and applye this humain
ſimilitude, to ſpirituall thinges. See the
words of this verſ alſo expounded before, cap. 4.
5. wher ther is but very litle differēce in words.
& in ſenſe none at al, Chriſt vſing yt ſame ther as
here, in the cōmendation of his church, ſauing yt
he deſcendeth frō yt higheſt to the loweſt parts,
whereas here keeping another courſe, he aſcendeth
from the loweſt to the higheſt.
               
                  Ver. 14. Thy neck is like a tower of iuory.
                   By cō
                  paring
it to a tower, he meaneth yt it was ſtraite
& vpright: & by ſaying it was of iuory, he meneth
yt it was moſt white, & pure. Before cha. 4. ver. 4
he cōpared it to the towre of Dauid built for defēce,
ther cōmēding it for ye ſtrēgth therof, & here
reſēbling it to iuory, be cōmēdeth ye beauty of it.

Some vnderſtand hereby the Preachers of the
word, who indeed are aloft in the church, and are
in the ſame inſteed of watch towres, or towres
of defence, they beeing of notable equalitie, and
wonderfull concorde among them ſelues, in
whoſe doctrine alſo, there is nothing but that,
which is vpright and euen, nothing but that
which is well poliſhed, and nothing but that
which is ſweet and pleaſaunt. Some think, that
amongeſt other notable workes which Solomon
made, he builded a towre of Iuory, and that
hee ſhoulde reſemble the church thereto in this
verſe. But for as much as yt ſtandeth, vppon no
ground of the word, and it ſeemeth in reaſon impoſſible,
for where ſhoulde men prouide ſo much
iuorye, I rather approoue of the former ſenſe.
Thine eyes are like the fiſhpooles in Heſhbon, by the
gate of Bathrabbin. In that he reſembleth the
eyes of the church, to fiſhpooles, yea to the the fiſhpooles
in Heſhbon, he doth not onely note out the
pleaſauntneſſe of the ſame, as in reſpect of the
colour and beautye, but alſo commendeth them
for the neceſſarye vſe of them, euen as fiſhpondes
or pleaſaunt waters were in thoſe hot and drye
countries. For Heſhbon was a citie beyonde
Iorden, in the country of Sihon king of the Amorites,
wherein Sihon him ſelfe raygned as
appeareth. Ioſh. 9. 10. Alſo Ioſh. 13. 10. 21. And
in that he addeth by the gate of Bathrabbin, which
ſhould ſeeme to be ſome of the gates of Heſhbon.

and is put downe for the more certaintye of the
thing, I ſuppoſe that thereby hee meanethe the
multitude that ſhoulde repayre to the church, euen
as great numbers came to theſe fiſh pondes,
which yet I am more confirmed in, becauſe hee
vſeth the worde gate, alluding no doubt to the
cuſtome vſed in thoſe dayes both of the Iudges
and people, who did ſit in the gates, and repayred
thither for iudgement, as appeareth in many
places of ſcripture. Others read it otherwiſe,
but for as much as in other places of this chapter,
and namely verſ. 1, he reſembleth the church
to certaine beautifull places, yea and in the ende
of this verſe alſo he doth the like, I ſee no reaſon,
why we ſhoulde leaue this reading or ſenſe,
ſpecially ſeeing it is very 
                     〈◊〉
                   for the place, and
ſtandeth wel with the proportion of fayth. Some
vnderſtand by the eies and fiſhpondes, the Doctors
of the church, who are ſayde to be eyes, becauſe
they looke to the guiding and conducting of the
reſt, and fiſhpondes, to whome people may repayre
to fetch aboundaunce of water, yea who ſhoulde
bring out of their treaſures, both olde and new
thinges. See math. 13. 52. Thy noſe is like the
tower of Lebanon. By the tower of Lebanon, I
ſuppoſe hee meaneth that towre that Salomon
built in that houſe, which he builded in the forreſt
of Lebanon, of which we reade a large deſcription.
1. King, 7. 2. 3, &c. And the noſe of the
church is compared vnto that towre, becauſe it

was fayre and beautiful as it: becauſe alſo it was
ſtraight, and of equall proportion, like the towre
for ſtraightnes: and good proportion in noſes, is
a good grace of comelines, euen to the countenaunce,
That looketh vpon the face of Damaſec. He
meaneth not as ſome haue fantaſtically imagyned,
that from Solomons towre, men might behold
the citye of Damaſcus in Syria, but that
Lebanon it ſelfe, and therfore the houſe & towre
builded there, lay as it were ouer againſt Damaſec,
or Damaſcus, the holy Ghoſt vſing this diſcription
heere not ſo much for anye miſterye, as
ſome imagine, and ſpecially the Iewiſh rabbins,
as to note the certainty of the former things, vz,
that he ſpeaketh not of an vncertaine, or of an
vnknown thing, for Lebanon, Damaſcus, and other
places, were of common fame and notice.
By the noſe, ſome vnderſtande as before by the
eyes, the miniſters of the word: which we ſhould
not think ſtraunge, becauſe that they are reſembled
to theſe ſundry thinges, by reaſon of ſundry
parts of their offices, as beeing eyes to looke to
them, noſes, euen after a ſort, to ſmell and prouide
for them, ſweete and pleaſaunt thinges, &c.
And one thing more is to be marked here, that in
theſe commendations & praiſes attributed to the
church, the holy Ghoſt choſe to compare and reſemble
her, by ſuche places of the lande of Iuda
and Iſraell, as had ſome excellent and notable
thing in them, that ſo the compariſons expreſſing

her beauty, might be the more excellent, and
her glorye reſembled by the ſame, the greater:
and therefore alſo we ſhould not thinke them either
hard or ſtraunge: to which alſo we may add,
that euen to this ende likewiſe, he taketh vppon
and laieth out the affections of louers, who choſe
for the expreſſing of their affections, towardes
their louers and friendes, great and excellent
things, as who would ſay, that they are of mind,
that the beauty & good qualities of ſuch as they
affect, can neuer be ſufficientlye commended or
ſet foorth.
               
                  Verſ. 15. Thy head vpon thee,
                   that is, that which
is vppon thy head, meaning thereby, either the
hayre of the head, or ſome kind of precious tyre
or ornament, worne vpon the head. is as Carmell.
This was the name of a very high mountaine in
Phenicia. Now becauſe that this was moſte
fruitfull (for the worde commonly is taken for a
place full of paſtures, ſet alſo with trees, whereof
it is lykely too, that this place had his name)
hee doth therefore reſemble the heade of the
Church, (which indeed properly is Chriſte him
ſelfe, Epheſ. 1. 22): or it maye bee heere vſed,
for the graces, wherewith hee hath adorned the
Church, to Carmell: which as it is excellent
for the heyght, ſo are the graces beſtowed vppon
the Church: and as it is a verye fruitefull
and plentifull place, ſo are the graces of God

in great aboundaunce powred foorth vppon the
church. Others read it thus, is as ſcarlet, meaning
coſtly and full of maieſty, as that colour is,
but mee thinketh the other ſhould bee more
ſimple, both becauſe Chriſte had compared the
church to places before, and alſo becauſe immediately
after hee maketh mention of purple,
which ſome thincke doth not much differ from
ſcarlet, many affirming ſcarlet, to be a kinde of
purple, in which reſpect alſo they reconcile the
Euangeliſtes: Math. Affirming chap. 27. 28.
that they put vpon Chriſt a ſcarlet robe, & Iohn
chap. 19. 2. as alſo Mar. 15. 17. calling it a purple,
or a purple garment. And the buſh of thy head
is as purple, that is coſtly and deare, as which did
not belong to anye, but mightye men and Magiſtrats,
ſee Luk. 16. 19. alſo Daniel. 5. 16. which
no doubt alſo they did wear as an attyre of great
comelineſſe and beauty. By buſh or lockes of the
head. the holye Ghoſte meaneth the multitude or
number of faithfull and beleeuing people, as by
reſembling the ſame vnto purple, hee meaneth
the glory and comelineſſe thereof, when they are
decked with the ritches of Gods graces. The
king may be tied in the rafters. q. d.
                   There is no
king in the world ſo glorious, or maieſtical, that
could if he did beholde thee with a right eye, be
ſatisfied with the ſight of this thy great glorye,
but beeing perſed, and as it were amazed thereat,
ſhould ſtill be held, and bound as it were, with

a continuall deſire to looke vpon thee, ſo highlye
woulde hee eſteeme thy great glorye, before his
owne, and all the glory of the world els. That
which we turne rafters here, otherſome turne galerries,
and ſome one thing, ſome an other, by reaſon
of the doubtful ſignification of the word, but
the ſenſe commeth all to one end▪ 
                  q. d. as a great
perſonage, beholding the beautifulleſt houſe in
the worlde, woulde after a ſort wiſhe as it were,
that he might be tyed to the rafters, beames, galerries,
&c. of ſuch gallant places, that ſo as it
were, by his continuall abode there, he might be
ſatiſfied with the ſight thereof: ſo there is not
the mightieſt Prince in the world, but if he did
looke vpon the beautye of the church, with the
eye of fayth, he would deſire to be bound to anye
part of peece of it, thought it were neuer ſo baſe,
that ſo he might continually looke vpon the inward
and ſpirituall beautye thereof. See this
performed by Dauid. Pſal. 27. 4. Alſo Pſam. 84.
thorow out.
               
                  Verſe 16. How fayre art thou?
                   As before verſe
11. when he begun to commende the church in
her ſeuerall partes, hee had vſed a vehement exclamation,
thereby to ſet out, both his great loue
and liking of them and the excellency thereof: ſo
hauing finiſhed that particular prayſe, and beginning
heere generallye to commend her, he vſeth
the like: q. d. Thou art ſo beautifull and
fayre, both in euery part of thee, and in the whol,

that I know not what words to vſe to expreſſe ye
ſame, neither in deed cā it be ſufficiētly declared.
And how pleaſant art thou, ye word alſo ſignifieth
ſweet, as wel I as pleaſāt he meaneth nothing els
but yt ſhe was wholly & altogether delightfull. O
my loue, that is, thou whome I loue, or yu that art
beloued, the ſubſtantiue for the adiectiue; to note
both the exceeding great loue of Chriſt towards
her, as alſo the good graces and partes in her to
mooue loue and affection in others to her. So
Galath. 3. 13. Chriſte is called a curſſe for vs:
and the church giueth this title of loue to Chriſt
before. chap. 2. 7. In theſe pleaſures, vz, reckoned
vp before in her particular commendacion. The
meaning of Chriſte is, that the church her ſelfe
wholly, and euerye part and peece of her, togeather
with all her ornaments and attayres, or what
ſoeuer did generally or particularlye belong vnto
her was glorious, excellent, ſweet, pleaſaunt,
beautifull, comely. delightfull, &c.
               
                  Verſ. 17. This thy ſtature,
                   vz, which hath been
before deſcribed particularly, & by peecemeale.
Is like a palme tree, that is, freſhe and flouriſhing,
and ſtandeth vpright, yea notwithſtanding all
ye weight that is layd vpon it, the waight it ſelfe
being remoued, it ſtandeth ſtraight again as before.
For this we know, both by experience and
the wrytinges of authors, that haue vndertaken
to declare the natures of thinges, is the nature
of the palme tree: ſo that in reſembling the ſtate
of the church, to a Palme tree, ſhe meaneth that

it is ſtraight and vpright (which alſo is commendable
in womankind) and that notwithſtanding
affliction, ſhe ſtill lifteth vp her ſelfe. So
that he meaneth in a word, yt the church was of a
moſt ſtrong & ſtreight bodye. See Pſal. 92. 12.
Alſo if any liſt to read of the nature of the palme
tree, looke vpon Aul. Gell. lib. 3. Hoct. Attic. Alſo
Problem. Ariſt. & others. And thy breſtes like cluſters,
vz, of grapes, meaning by this manner of
ſpeech that ſhee had moſt comely, moſt firme, and
moſte plentifull breſtes, as thoſe cluſters of grapes,
that are thicke ſet with grapes, are indeed.
If we vnderſtande by the breaſts heere as before
chap. 4. 5. the two teſtaments, they are cluſters of
grapes indeed, both to alay hunger, and to ſlake
thirſt, yea they are both meat & drinck vnto vs, &
yt not only to vphold vs, in ſom deformed or weak
eſtate, during this life, but alſo to make vs comely,
beutiful, and ſtrōg, to liue ye life of God here,
yt afterwards we may liue eternally in yt heauēs.
               
                  Verſe. 18. I ſay.
                   Here beginneth ye third part of
the chap. which is alſo the laſte part of Chriſtes
ſpeech vnto his church, as we haue ſhew before,
& containeth in it a certaine promiſe of ſuch duties,
as Chriſt will performe vnto his church, til
the mariage day come, & alſo a repetition of ſuch
effects & fruits, as Chriſt ſhall receiue from the
church. And there is in this word I ſay a vehemē
                  cy,
cōtaining as it were, in ita graue ſentēce: q. d.
I giue thee my promiſe, & looke what I promiſe
thee, I wil perform. I wil go vp into the palmetree.
                  
He meaneth by this ſpeech, that he will bee preſent
with his church, whom before verſe 17. he
had reſembled to a palme tree. I will take holde of
her bowes: hee meaneth by this ſpeech, that hee
will purge it, and ſo not onelye perceiue, but receaue
notable fruites of her, euen as in Palme
trees the teader braunches, are ſpecially pruned
and trimmed, becauſe that they yeelde flowres
and Buds for fruite. By which it ſhould ſeeme,
they were not ſuch trees as ours are. He that liſt
to read more then this, ouer and beſide all that
which is ſpoken before, let him ſee Plinie lib. 13.
cap. 4 Otherſome alſo affirming, that they beare
a certayne fruite, both pleaſaunt and profitable
which we call Dates and of this mind are manye,
wryting of the nature of Plantes and trees,
both olde and new, and particularlye Dodineus.
And by the worde which is turned heere bowes,
which properlye ſignifieth the higheſt bowes in
the tree, and is not vſed in any other place of the
old Teſtament but heere, this may yet appeare,
becauſe the palme tree, that the Philoſophers
wryte of, doth at the toppe, ſend foorth ſuch long

                     ••
                  wes, and there it is alſo, whereas (they report)
the fruite it ſelfe groweth. In ſumme, this is
Chriſtes meaning, that ioyning him ſelfe vnto
the church, and beeing preſent with her, he will
doe it to this ende, that hee maye ſee, how they
thriue in the fruites, that is, in the graces and
bleſſings he hath beſtowed vpon them, and that

he may gather the ſame, and ſo enioy them, and
be as it were, partaker of them. Thy breasts ſhall
nowe be, q. d.
                   whatſoeuer they haue beene heretofore
to me (and yet we may not thinke, but yt
the Lorde hath alwaies graciouſly regarded his
church) now at this time, and for euer hereafter
they ſhall be delightfull and pleaſant vnto me:
and that he meaneth by the wordes following,
Like the cluſters of the vine, See for this, ver. 17
And the ſauour of thy noſtrells, that is, the breath
that commeth from thee Like apples, that is, like
ſweete and pleaſaunt ſmelles, that come from
apples: ſee before chap. 2. 5. By all which wee
muſt note, that Chriſt doth not onely mean to
deliuer vnto his church, the comfort of his continuall
preſence, but withall to note the effectes
of the ſame, becauſe where Chriſt is indeede he
is not in vaine: q: d. I will not onely be preſent
with thee, ſatiſfying my ſelfe as it were in thy
breaſtes and beauty, and delighting in thy loue
continually. Prou. 5. 19. But alſo I will make
thee ſtrong, freſh, liuely, yea ſweet and pleaſant
to all ſuch as ſhall come vnto thee, by meanes of
ſuch graces, as I ſhall indue thee withall, and
to the ſame end, tend to words of the verſe following.
               
                  Verſe. 19. And the roofe of thy mouth,
                   vz, ſhall
nowe both vnto mee and others, bee like the beſt
Wine, vz, both for colour, ſtrength, taſte, & ſweetnes,
for all theſe concur together in wine, meaning

that it ſhall ſmel well, and be moſt ſweete,
and mighty in operation: to which end, namelye
the commending of the Wine for the goodneſſe
thereof, tend al the words following, which goeth
ſtraight to my welbeloued. q. d.
                   It is ſuch excellēt
wine, as I woulde wiſh it, or ſend it euen to the
deareſt and beſt freend I haue, euen to her that
I loue, as my ſelf, if not before my ſelf. And cauſeth
the lips of the ancient to ſpeake. Another commendation
of the wine. Old folks many times
be dull and heauy of ſpeeche, but this wine hath
ſuche force in it, that it will euen open theire
mouths, and cauſe them vtter a voice as a man
would ſay, whether they will or no. The worde
that is here turned Ancients, may alſo in the hebrue
tong, be deriued frō a worde that ſignifieth
to ſleepe: q. d. the wine is ſo ſtrong, that it ſtirreth
vp the heauy ſenſes, and doth after a ſort as
it were, refreſh the mind, in ſo much that it maketh
them that ſleepe to ſpeak. Which manner
of ſpeeche, though, as we reſpect the ſimilitude,
it may ſeeme hiperbolicall, or verye exceſſiue,
yea, more then true, yet if wee reſpect the ſpirituall
meaning we ſhall finde it is the trueth
it ſelfe: For what is Chriſtes purpoſe heere,
but amongeſt other Graces giuen to the
Churche, to ſhewe, that this is one excellent,
that hee will indue her with ſuche power,
and delightfulneſſe of ſpeeche, (which hee vnderſtandeth
by Roofe of the mouthe, becauſe

without it nothing canne bee vttered, it beeing
one of the principall inſtrumentes of nature,
giuen vs to frame our voyce by, ſee Chap. 5. 15)
yt it ſhal euen as it were raiſe vp men, not only
frō natural ſleep, but from y• ſleep & death of ſin,
ſee Ioh. 5. 21. 25. This being perfourmed ſpecially
by the preaching of the goſpel, which is the
power of God to ſaluation, to all that beleeue.
Romans 1. 16. and is not mortall, but immortall
ſeede. 1. Peter. 1. 23. By which
wee are quickened and rayſed vppe together,
and made to ſit togeather in the Heauenlye
places in Chriſte Ieſus. Ephe. 2. 1. 6. &c.
               
                  Verſe. 1. Dothe teache vs that there are
many thinges in the Churche, that may make
vs in an vnfeigned affection to loue and to like
the ſame, as the ſpiritual & inward glory, beauty
and comelines thereof. Yea, it ſheweth vs yt the
Lord hath furniſhed the ſame with maieſtye and
might, not only for ye comfort and defence of the
ſound members thereof, but alſo both for the
correcting of ſuch as wold be ſtraying and ſtragling
from that ſame holy fellowſhip, as alſo for
the withſtanding and ouercomming, of ſuch as
wold without aſſault anoy theſame. O the deepnes
of the riches both of the wiſdome & mercy of
God: of his mercy towards his own ſonnes and
ſeruaunts, and of his wiſdom, in intrapping the
vngodly in his own ſubtilties and force. If the
Churche hadde beene beautifull and amiable
onely, howeſoeuer many of her owne children

might in a reuerent regard of her, haue dutifully
behaued them ſelues towardes her: yet ſome
Nimrodes of the earth, woulde haue ſuppoſed,
with their giantlike force, to haue defloured and
defaced her, but the Lorde hath gratiouſlye prouided
meanes againſte both extreames, that as
there is in her many thinges to mooue her vnfained
friendes to loue and like her, ſo there is alſo
many things in her againe, to terrifie either her
counterfeited friendes, or her open and knowne
enemies.
               
                  Verſe. 2. Teacheth vs in Chriſtes example
ſpeaking comfortablie to the church diſtreſſed,
not onely his great loue towards the ſame, who
as a man woulde ſaye, can not endure the heauineſſe
and griefe thereof, which ought to bee no
ſmall conſolation to the church, and the particular
members therof, ſith he that is both able and
willing to helpe them, doth pity their caſe. (See
Heb. 2. 17. 18): but alſo teacheth vs kindneſſe of
hart, and tendernes of affection, towards the afflicted,
for which ſee Rom. 12. 15. 16. yea to vſe
comfortable ſpeeches, towardes thoſe that are
diſtreſſed. See Iſaiah 40. 1. 2. &c. leaſt otherwiſe
we adding bitterneſſe of wordes to griefe
and anguiſh, eyther of the body, or mind or both,
we doe not onelye adde to their affliction, but to
our owne tranſgreſſion alſo, the Lorde condemning
vs iuſtly, not onely for hardnes of hart, but
for churliſh wordes alſo.
               
                  
                  Verſe. 3. Teacheth, that the often repetition of
one, & the ſelf ſame thing in the word of God, is
not only idle or ſuperfluous, as ſome curious ears
deeme, but profitable, pleaſaunt, and altogeather
neceſſary, whether we reſpect the Lorde him
ſelf, who therby teſtifieth the wonderful hunger
and thirſt as it were, that he hath of our ſaluation,
while hee doth ſo often vrge it vpon vs, or we
regarde our ſelues, who are not onely heauie to
learne good thinges, but dull and ſlow of hart to
beleeue the ſame, and maruailouſly backewarde
to performe them, or conſider the poſteritye, who
by that meanes are put in minde, of their owne
corruption to good thinges, which alſo maye
mooue them, more and more to fight againſt the
ſame. See for this doctrine, and the proofe
thereof. Phillip. 3. 1. Alſo 2. Pet. 1. 12. where he
ſayth, that though they haue knowledge, and be
eſtabliſhed in the preſent truth, yet hee will not
be negligent, to put them alwayes in remembraunce
thereof.
               
                  Verſe. 4. Is no warrant for women, to lay out
their lockes, howſoeuer ſome out of this place,
and ſuch like, haue gone about to iuſtiſie it. Firſt
becauſe that this is to be ſpiritually vnderſtood,
and not in the letter, and therefore they do iniury
ſo to abuſe the word. Secondly, becauſe the
holy Ghoſt hath condemned it in the new teſtament,
as 1. Timoth. 2. 9. where he condemneth
broidred hayre: as alſo 1. Pet. 3. 3. where the ſelf

ſame thing is forbidden, but eſpecially 1. Cor.
11. where he will haue a woman eyther to couer
or hide her haire, or elſe if ſhee graunte not
that, to yeelde to this, to haue it ſhorn or cut off.
And thirdly, becauſe the manner of laying out
of hayre in thoſe dais, was much more modeſt, or
at leaſte nothing ſo gariſhe, as it is now. And
therefore comparing vnequall thinges together,
they muſt learne to conforme them ſelues,
to the ſobrietye and modeſtye of holy matrons,
and ſuche as haue vnfeinedly profeſſed godlineſſe.
               
                  Verſ. 5. 6. Teacheth vs, that the inward glory
and beauty of the church, is highly to be preferred,
before all the outward pompe and glittering
of the world whatſoeuer: for the outwarde
thinges, bee not onely tranſitory and vaine, but
many times are baits layde by ſinne and Sathan,
both to deceiue vs in this life, and to deſtroy
vs in the life to come: whereas the glory of
the church, is not onely pleaſaunt and profitable
for this preſent world, giuing vs directions alſo
howe to walke in the ſame, both towardes God
and men, but an inſtrument and a meane, to
bring vs to the hauen of Heauen, and euerlaſting
bleſſedneſſe at the laſt, Godlineſſe it
ſelfe being profitable vnto all thinges, and hauing
the promiſe of the life preſente, and of
that that is to come. 1. Tim. 4. 8. By this alſo
wee maye ſee, that the Church it ſelfe is to be

diſcerned, by better eyes then theſe of the body,
yea, by better iudgemente then the lighte of
reaſon. For if our reaſon not reformed bee enemye
generallye to all religion, why not alſo to
the Churche it ſelfe, the mother and Nurſe of
all ſounde Faythe: and that is it alſo wee ſaye
in the Confeſſion of our fayth, that we beleue
there is a holye Vniverſall Churche, which is
the companye of all Gods elect, which alſo is
ſometymes Viſible, and yet then rather to bee
deſcerned, as in reſpecte of vs, by the eye of a
ſounde Faythe, and yet in reſpect of it ſelfe,
by the holye exerciſes thereof, as the Worde,
Sacramentes, and Diſcipline, than by antiquitye,
Vniuerſalitye &c, Or anye other
Marke which the Papyſtes canne giue. Laſtlye,
wee learne by the ſame Verſes, that
the LORDE will haue euen the myghtieſt
of the People, that ſhall ſubmitte them
ſelues vnto the CHVRCHE, and highlye
extoll and commend the ſame. See Iſaiah.
Chapter 60. Verſe 10. Alſo Chapiter 49.
Verſe 23. Wherein alſo GOD prouideth,
as on the one ſyde for the comforte of his
owne, while hee giueth them Kinges and
Magyſtrates, not onelye to mayntayne them,
but alſo to profeſſe the Truethe togeather,
with them for theire better incouragemente:
So on the other ſyde hee meeteth with the
mallyce of the wicked, who manye tymes

ſpare not to thinke, but to ſpeake alſo, that the
Churche is but the raking of the earth, and the
off-ſcoure of the whole world, which yet appeareth
falſe by this practiſe of the Lorde.
               
                  Verſ. 7. Doth not onelye ſet out the inwarde
glory and beauty of the church, vnder many excellent
earthly ſimilitudes and compariſons all
which ſhold make vs as it were inamored with
the ſound and holy loue thereof but alſo ſheweth
the glory and excellency of it to be ſo great, that
it cannot wel be either reſembled by any thing
but in part, or expreſſed by wordes but in part.
And therefore we may ſee that they are fowlye
out of the way, that either conceiue baſely of the
church, or ſpeake contemptuouſly of it, as a number
of prophane people do, who going no further
then their outward eye, or carnall reaſon, will
leade, do with Eſau preferre baſe and contemptible
things, before the glory and beauty of the
whole earth. See Iſaiah. 62. 7.
               
                  Verſ. 8. Teacheth vs not only Chriſts great
care towards the church, he dreſſing it and pruning
it, as a good huſbande doth his Orchard &
garden, of which our ſauiour himſelfe ſaith, that
the father purgeth euery braunche that beareth
fruite, that ſo it may bring foorth more fruite.
Iohn. 15. 2. By which alſo wee maye ſee,
that the Church without Gods manuring and
huſbanding of it, yeeldeth not, nor bringeth
forth fruite: See 1. Corin. 3. 6. 7. 8. 9: But alſo

that he will come to viſite the vine, that his own
hand hath planted, and to ſee what fruite it beareth.
Iſaiah. 5. 1. 2. &c. And that therefore the
church had need alwayes to be fruitfull, not onely
becauſe the Lord will certainly come, but becauſe
he will come ſodainely. See Math. 25. in
the parable of the virgins, and ſpecially verſ. 13.
Alſo Math. 24. verſe. 44: and ſo forwarde to the
end of the chapter.
               
                  Verſ. 9. Amongſt other thinges, deliuereth vnto
vs this doctrine, that in all duties that we are
to performe, whether we reſpect God or men, we
ſhould alwaies do the thinges that we doe, willingly
and cheerefully. The Lord was well acquainted
with the dulneſſe and lumpiſhneſſe of
our hartes, which maketh him ſo often in his
worde to vrge this, and we know amongſt men,
how ſlenderly we regarde thoſe thinges that are
done for vs, yea though they be done for vs, with
an heauie and vnwilling minde, many men wiſhing
that ſuch vnchearefull doers, ſhould rather
ſurceaſe doing, then performe the ſame. But
ſpecially before God, this is a foule fault, as we
maye perceiue by manye places of ſcripture, and
particularly in that the Lorde appointeth a free
will offering by his law. See Leuit. 22. 23. Exodus.
35. 5. 29. Alſo Exod. 25. 2. Alſo 2. Cor. 8.
3. 12, and many other places where he requireth
cheerefulneſſe of vs.
               
                  Verſ. 10. Where Chriſt ſo earneſtlye ſeeketh

the conuerſion of his Churche, and laboureth in
the ſpirite of gentleneſſe, not onely to reclaime,
but alſo to receiue the ſame, after hir error to
fauour, we do not only ſee the great and tender
loue of our Sauioure to penitent ſinners, who
ſayth, Come vnto me all ye that labour & be
heauy laden, and I will refreſh you, Math. 11.
28. And who alſo therfore came into the world,
that hee might ſaue ſinners, yea, the cheefeſt of
ſinners. 1. Tim. 1. 15. But alſo he by his owne
example teacheth vs, in the ſpirite of loue, to
reſtore ſuch as are fallen Galath. 6. 1. and to labour
their conuerſion, vnleſſe they bee hardened
in their iniquities, rather by meekneſſe then by
extremity, and ouer hard handling of them. But
as this belongeth vnto all generally, ſo doth it
particularly concerne the Churche gouernors,
and amongeſt them, eſpeciallye the miniſters,
who of calling and conſcience ought to doe it.
Luke. 15. 4. 1. &c. Alſo Ezech. 34. 4. &c.
               
                  Ver. 11. Setting out vnto vs the glory, comlines
and ſtrength of the church, teacheth vs, to ioyne
our ſelues in an vnfeined affection, to that holy
body, that is indued with ſuch excellent graces.
For though it be true, that theſe thinges are attributed
to the churh, as ſeruing for the ſinguler
prayſe of the ſame, yet the end whereat the holy
ghoſt aimeth, is to draw men by the ſame, euen
inſeperably to be ioined thereto: to which end alſo
tend al the particulers, afterward and reckoned

vp in the verſes following.
               
                  Verſ. 12. Commending vnto vs the continuall
increaſe and ſweete delights of the Church, is
alſo an argumēt very effectuall, & as a man wold
ſay, framed to ye humor of mans nature, to moue
men to loue & like of the church. Nothing many
times diſcourageth men more from doing good
things then to ſee yt they are or ſhal bee left poſt
alone as we ſay, which though it ſhold fall forth,
we ſhold yet labor notwithſtāding to ouer come ye
ſame, becauſe God wil not haue vs to follow the
multitude, ſpecially to do euil. Exo. 23. 2. & Ioſ.
his exāple teacheth vs yt ſame. Ioſh. 24. 15. And
yet how great is Gods care ouer vs, yt for ye hartening
of vs on in yt wayes of righteouſnes, leaueth
vs not alone, but giueth vs the holy ſociety
& fellowſhip of many of his ſaints, not as thogh
we meant, the multitude of the church, or glorious
increaſe of the number thereof, to be ſo great
(no though the Lord do extend it, from one ende
of the earth to the other) as though it were able
to match and compare with the wicked, for we
know Gods number to be the leaſt, as appereth
in the generall floud, wherein only eight perſōs
were reſerued. See for this purpoſe alſo Iſa. 41
14. Math. 7. 13. 14. Luk. 12. 32. By which alſo
we may ſee, that multitude or vniuerſalitye of
perſons, as they ſaye in poperye, is no good,
ſure and ſufficiente note of the true Churche of
Chriſte▪
               
               
                  
                  Verſe 13. Propounding vnto vs, the iuſte proportion
and holye conſent that is in the church,
and particular members thereof, contayning in
it an other reaſon to lead vs to the liking of it:
for euery particular praiſe, is as it were a ſpeciall
reaſon that Chriſte alleadgeth to gaine that
at our handes by. The ſtrength of this good order
and bleſſed vnity in the church, ſtandeth not
vpon men, as the members thereof, for we know
by corruption of nature, they are alwayes vnſtayed
and contentious, but firſte vpon God him
ſelfe, whoſe houſe the church it ſelfe is. 1. Tim.
3. 15. who beeing alſo the God of order & peace,
and not of confuſion. 1. Cor. 14. 33. it is reaſon
his houſe ſhould be conformed, and made like to
him ſelfe. And ſecondly, vpon the vnity of thoſe
ſpirtuall graces, that God hath bleſſed it withall,
there beeing but one bodye, one ſpirite, one
hope of our calling, one faith one Baptiſme, &c.
All which are notable inſtrumentes to cauſe vs
to indeuour to keepe the vnitye of the ſpirite,
in the bond of peace, Epheſ. 4. 3. 4. 5. Neither is
there ment hereby, either a perfect vnity or conſ
                     •••
                  
o
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ndes in all thinges, becauſe that neither
hath beene, is or ſhall bee performed vppon
this earth, not for that there is anye want in the
thing it ſelfe, but by reaſon of the remainders of
ſinne in men, God hauing reſerued that excellent

                     〈◊〉
                   to the life that ſhal be reuealed, there
beeing here varietie of iudgement in the matters

of ſmalleſt waight, though the foundation
it ſelfe, ſhall be alwayes vnſhaken: or approuing
of vnitye to be an eſſentiall note, to diſcerne the
viſible church by: becauſe eyther it muſt be vnity
in verity, (which is the life and ſoule of the
church,) or elſe it will not ſerue, and vnity it ſelf,
howſoeuer it may be very profitable for the preſeruation
of the whole, yet it is no ſure marke,
to know the whole by, no not in naturall bodies,
much leſſe in this ſpirituall body of the church.
               
                  Verſ. 14. Propoundeth vnto vs two good leſſons.
Firſt, the excellēcy of the miniſtery, in that
it is reſembled to eyes, fiſhepooles &c. the Lord
by the meanes of them, conuerting men vnto
him ſelfe, and bringing foorth moſte notable effectes,
both for his owne glorye, and the good of
his ſeruauntes, of which we may read in manye
places of the ſcripture, and particularly. Rom. 1.
14. 15. &c. 2. Cor. 2. 14. 15. &c. Epheſ. 4. 11. 12.
13. 14. So that whoſoeuer they are, that doe not
verye highly eſteeme the ſame, they offer great
diſhonor to almighty God, and tread vnder foot
the meane of their owne ſaluation. Secondly, in
that hee reſembleth the church, and the particular
members, yea and if you will alſo the miniſters
eſpeciallye, to the towre of Lebanon, that
looketh Damaſcus in the face; we learne therein
the courage and conſtancye of the ſame, that
feareth not the faces, nor flattereth the perſons
of any, no not of their greateſt enemies, we knowing

that Damaſcus was an vtter enemy to ye
people of God. Whereof alſo wee may yeelde
this reaſon, that if the good children of godlye
parents, ſhall not bee aſhamed nor afrayde to
ſpeake to their enemies, either in the gates of
the City, where magiſtrates ſit in iudgement,
or in the gates that enimies do beſiege, of which
Dauid ſpeaketh, Pſal. 127. 5. Much leſſe ſhall
the Churche or children thereof bee ouertaken
there with, howſoeuer they may ſomtimes haue
their feares. And this we may ſee performed particularly
in Sephen, Acts. 6. 15. And generally
thorough the whole ſeuenth chapter of the ſayd
booke of the Actes.
               
                  Verſe. 15. Commending vnto vs the excellency
and aboundance of Gods graces beſtowed vpon
the church, is another argumēt propounded
by the holy ghoſt, to drawe vs on more and more
to loue the ſame. Al which is put down, not only
for the high & exceeding commendation of the
church of God, as which is indued with al manner
of louely graces from the Lord: but alſo that
ſo he might win that at our handes, eyther by
ſome one of theſe ſundry reaſons, or by all of thē
ioyntly together, that otherwiſe coulde not bee
gayned of vs. We learn alſo, that not mean men
onely, but euen the mightieſt of the earth, ſhould
make this their ſpeciall crowne and glorye, to
delight in the church of God, yea to take delight
in the very ſtones therof, as Gods ſeruants

are ſaid to doe. Pſalme. 102. 14. For what could
it or can it boote them to liue, and not to liue,
as the principall members or at the leaſt ſound
members thereof, ſithe all of them muſt confeſſe.
that without the church there is no ſaluation?
And the rather they aboue others ſhould
ſtriue hereto, becauſe their examples, are manye
times forcible, to fetch that from men, eyther for
feare or fauour &c. that other mens works can
not winne.
               
                  Verſ. 16. Deliuereth vnto vs this doctrine:
namelye, that the Churche contayneth in it, not
only more glory and beauty, then can bee ſeene
with the outward eie, but than can either be conceiued
in heart, or expreſſed with mouth. Which
alſo ſhold moue vs vnfeinedly to affect the ſame.
Wherof alſo me thinketh we may yeelde a dubble
reaſon: the firſt becauſe of the narrowneſſe
and ſtraightneſſe of our owne vnderſtanding,
we being not able ſufficiently, either to thinke
or ſpeak of the leaſt of Gods graces, much leſſe
of the church, vppon whome the Lorde hath beſtowed
euen the very treaſures of his goodneſſe:
ſecondly, becauſe of ye excellency of ye graces thē
ſelues, whether we conſider them generallye or
particularly: they beeing as in reſpect of themſelues,
euen of his nature from whom they flow,
yt is to ſay, altogether infinite & incōprehenſible.
Ver. 17. Teacheth vs, yt howſoeuer the church,
both in the whole and in the partes thereof, may

be greatly, by the burthen of afflictions oppreſſed
for the time, that yet notwithſtanding it ſhall
riſe vp againe, doe the wicked what they can.
Which as we know to be truelye performed in
Chriſt our ſauiour the head therof, whom it was
impeſſible yt the ſorrowes of death ſhold altogether
hold down. Act. 2. 24: ſo was it alſo verefied
in the Apoſtle, and other beleeuers, who ſayth of
him ſelf and thē: we are afflicted on euery ſide,
yet not in diſtreſſe, perſecuted, but not forſaken,
caſt downe but periſh not. 2. Cor. 4. 8. 9.
which indeed ariſeth in them, from the ſtrength
of Chriſtes ouercomming, we being in him, become
more then conquerors, Roma. 8. 37. Oh
whom would not this comfort and incourage to
ſuffer any thing, yea euery thing, for the profeſſion
of Chriſt, and the keeping of a good conſcience
before God and men.
               
                  Verſ. 18. Teacheth vs, that the greateſt matter
of ioy to the church, ſtandeth eſpecially vpon
theſ two points, to wit Chriſtes continuall preſence,
and his making of the ſame fruitefull, in
the ſeueral duties, that the church is to perform,
to God and men. One of theſe maye not, nor can
not bee ſundred from other: becauſe where
Chriſte is, hee is not there idelly or in vaine,
(though we muſte confeſſe alſo, that the force of
Chriſts grace appeareth not a like at al times,
becauſe it is darkned many times, with the myſtes
& cloudes of our owne corruption) but dwelling

in their harts by faith, he maketh thē fruitfull
in all good workes, and inableth them to
comprehend with all ſaints, what is the bredth
and length, and depth and height, that is, all fulneſſe
as it were of fayth and obedience. See for
this purpoſe Epeſ. 3. 17.
               
                  Verſ. 19. Doth notably commend vnto vs, the
excellency & gracious effects of the word of god.
Whereof, who ſo liſteth to read, may ſee a large
diſcourſe pſal. 119. And if they ſuppoſe that to be
to tedious, they maye more ſhortly ſee it compriſed
Pſal. 19. verſ. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. which the holye
Ghoſte doth ſo much the more highly extoll, becauſe
men are wont to haue it in very ſmall regard
& accoūt. And yet in ye praiſing of it, he doth
not as mē, (who to win men to the loue & liking
of ſuch things as they propoſe) giue exceſſiue or
vnture commendations thereof, but in all truth
and ſimplicitie, exalteth the ſame: & if he come
ſhort any waye, it is becauſe the Lord is too ſparing
in it, not that hee wanteth wordes to expreſſe
the praiſe of it, or that the thing it ſelfe is
not moſt high & excellent, but becauſe hee is for
our weakneſſe ſake contented to ſtoupe downe,
commending it ſo farre foorth, as we are able
thorow his ſpirit to conceiue of it, and not otherwiſe.
Is it not then a pitifull thing, that this
word ſhall receiue ſo great a commendation, and
that we ſhall be ſo backewarde in intertayning
the ſame?
            
            
               
               CAP. 7. and the ſumme
thereof.
               
                  The church hearing of the earneſt affection
and loue of Chriſt hir ſpouſe, towardes
hir, whollye reſigneth vp her ſelfe vnto
him. verſe. 1. and afterwardes doth not
onelye ſeeke, to know the ſignes of the
day ſet for their mariage, but doth wiſhe
from hir hart, that the time therof were
come. ver. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. She admoniſheth
her Damſels, handmaides or friendes, of
their dutie, that they ſhould not hinder
hir, being now conuerſant with hir huſband
Chriſt: verſ. 8. And laſtly ſhe declareth
her moſt ardent and earneſt loue
towardes him, deſiring euen for euer, to
be beloued of him againe. ver. 9. 10. 11.
               
               
                  
                     1 I Am my welbeloueds, for his deſire
is towardes me.
                     2 Come my welbeloued, let vs goe
foorth into the fielde, let vs remaine
in the villages.
                     3 Let vs riſe vp earely to the vines: let vs ſee whether
the vine flouriſh, and whether the ſmall
grape, hath opened it ſelfe, & whether the pomgranates

floriſh: ther will I giue thee my loues▪
                     
                     4 The mandrakes haue giuen a ſmell: and in our
gates are all ſweet thinges: new and olde: I haue
kept them for thee.
                     5 O that ſome woulde giue thee, to be as a brother
vnto me, that ſucked the breaſtes of my mother:
though I found thee in the ſtreat, I woulde kiſſe
thee, neither would they dispiſe me.
                     6 I would lead thee, I woulde bring thee into the
houſe of my mother that teacheth me: I would
cauſe the to drinke ſpiced wine, yea ſweete wine,
made of my Pomegranate.
                     7 His left hande ſhoulde be vnder mine head: and
his right hand ſhould imbrace me.
                     8 I charge you by an oth, O yee daughters of Ieruſalem:
why ſhould yee ſtirre vp, or why ſhould ye
awake, this my loue, vntill he pleaſe?
                     9 Who is ſhe that commeth out of the wilderneſſe,
leaning vppon her welbeloued? Vnder the apple
tree I raiſed thee vp: there thy mother conceiued
thee: there ſhe conceaued that bare thee.
                     10 Set me as a ſeale on thy hart, & as a ſinget vppon
thine arme: for loue is ſtrong as death, iealouſie
is harde as the graue: the coales therof
are coales of fire, and as a flame from the lord.
                     11 Many waters cannot quench this loue: neither
can the floudes ouer-flow it: if a man woulde
giue all the ſubſtance of his houſe, for this loue,
in contemning they would contemne him.
                  
               
               
                  
                  OUR Sauiour hauing in the former
chapter graciouſly comforted
his poore diſtreſſed church,
partlye by giuing her, an high
and excellent commendation, &
partly by promiſing her, his continuall
and gracious preſence, euen vntill the
time of the ſolemnization of the marriage betweene
them,Con. be come. The church in this chapter,
ſheweth what notable effectes theſe comfortable
wordes of Chriſte, brought foorth in her,
namelye they did continuallye ſtrengthen her
fayth in the truth of thoſe promiſes, and made
her euery day more and more, in earneſtnes and
vnfayneones to wiſh the approching of the mariage
day, that ſo they might be inſeperably ioyned
together for euer. Which thing as Chriſte
had done before in the other chapter, ſo doth the
church here, thereby to let the Lorde, as it were
vnderſtand, that there was no want of loue and
affection, both towardes him, and towardes the
thinges alſo, that he him ſelfe affected.
               In this chapter, and the next following (for in
both are principallye contayned the wordes of
the church of Chriſte) the church labouring according
to her power, to render lyke for lyke unto
Chriſt, doth ſet out her moſt earneſt deſire, towardes
that ſame wiſhed day, of their ſpirituall
mariage.Diuiſ. But in this chapter, ſhe doth principally
propound two thinges.
               
                  
1 The firſt is, that the church doth generallye
declare her good minde, towardes Chriſte
her Spouſe: and this is contayned in the
firſt verſe.
               2 In the ſecond, (becauſe there are two principall
members of this church that is in ſubiection
to Chriſt, that is, the fulnes of the
Iewes, and the fulnes of all the Gentiles
(as the Apoſtle ſayth, Rom. 11. 25.) the old
church, that is to ſaye, ſpecially and principally
the church of the Iews, doth declare
that ſhee did very earneſtlye wayt for her
ſpouſe, and diligently performe her duties,
and this reacheth from verſe 2. to the ende
of the chapter. For as for that part of the
church, which conſiſteth in the fulneſſe of
the Gentiles, mention is made of it in the
next chapter, as you ſhall ſee by the church
of the Iewes.
               
                  Verſe, 1.Senſe. 
                  I am my welbeloueds, that is, I do certainelye
and aſſuredlye in the right of affiaunce
and mariage belong vnto him: q. d. I am no others
but his. And theſe are ye churches wordes,
manifeſting what great good the comfortable
ſpeeches of Chriſt, mentioned in the other chapter,
did her, and declaring what aſſurance and
certaine perſwaſion ſhee had of his holy graces
towardes her and in her, and of her conſtauncye
and continuaunce, in all ſounde affection towardes
him. For his deſire is towardes me, that is,

he doth deſire me, and in this affection moſt tenderly
loue me, q. d. There is a mutuall loue
betweene vs: as I loue him, ſo hee loueth me,
and as I belong to none, but to him alone, ſo hee
belongeth to none other but to me onely, whereof
I haue amongeſt manye other graces, this as
a ſingular pledge, that he loued me, when I was
his enemy, that when I was ſtraying awaye, he
called me backe, that hee forgaue mee when I
had ſinned, and did continuallye powre his benefites
and mercyes vppon mee, yea that he offered
and gaue him ſelfe vnto mee (as appeareth by
his dealinges in the other chapter) and therefore
I can not chuſe but loue him, and belong
vnto him alone. So that wee ſee, that the
Church, maketh the teſtimonies and tokens of
Chriſtes fauour, ſure proppes vnto her owne
continuance in good thinges, and obedience of
his holy will.
               
                  Verſ. 2. Come my welbeloued.
                   Here beginneth
the ſecond part of the chapter, in which the
church, but ſpeciallye that of the Iewes (which
in the dayes of Solomon was in flouriſhing eſtate)
doth by turning her ſpeech vnto Chriſte,
(whereas in the former verſe he had ſpoken, as it
were to ſome others) ſtirre him vp by common
affection as well as ſhee, to wayt for and obſerue
the time of their holy mariage, and this is contayned
in this and the third verſe. Secondlye,
ſhee yeeldeth vp all the good thinges that ſhee

had, to the glorye of her Huſbande and head,
verſe 4. yea euen her ſelfe, for the wonderfull
loue that ſhee bare towardes him, verſe. 5.
and ſo on forwarde to the ende of the chapter.
So that theſe wordes, Come my welbeloued, are
woordes of exhortation, and prouoking as it
were, taken alſo from the loue of the church, towardes
Chriſt, more effectually to perſwade the
thing ſhe deſireth, becauſe men willinglye commit
them ſelues to the companye, and eaſelye
yeelde to the requeſtes of ſuche, as they take to
bee their vnfayned friendes. Let vs goe foorth
into the fielde. Shee ſpeaketh it after the maner
of men, inhabiting cityes, and hauing their
farme houſes abroad in the country, will walke
they and their people to the ſame for recreation,
and to ſee how forwarde the ſpringe is;
and whether the tyme of Sommer and harueſt,
doe drawe nigh: but all this muſte bee vnderſtoode
ſpirituallye, as though the Churche
ſhoulde ſaye, I beſeeche thee, doe not aloue
and by thy ſelfe, imploy thine affection in ſearching
out the wiſhed tyme of oure marriage,
as thou ſeemeſt to ſaye before. chapter 6. 8.
but let vs both togeather imploye our common
diligence thereto, for I likewyſe deſyre
to haue that Marriage daye drawe yeare,
and the thinge it ſelfe perfourmed alſo. Neither
muſte this exhorting of CHRISTE
bee vnderſtoode, eyther as though hee were

of himſelfe vnwilling to it, or needed the prouocations
of the Churche, for wee knowe hee is
moſte ready to all good thinges, yea and ſtirreth
vp the church, to the dooing of the ſame,
or elſe they would neuer be performed: but the
churche requeſteth it for euer, for the ſtrengthning
and incouragement of her ſelfe thereby,
that ſo hauing his continuall preſence and felllowſhip,
ſhe may the more cheerfully go forward
Let vs remaine in the Ʋillages. This part of the
verſe is diuerſely reade, by reaſon of the diuers
ſignifications of the words vſed therein, as that
worde which we turne remaine, ſignifieth alſo to
lodge all night, which acception of the word I
rather incline to in this place, bicauſe the church
ſeemeth to exhorte to it, as it were of this purpoſe,
that ſo the next morning, they mighte bee
more ready to looke vpon and behold the vines,
and other thinges mentioned in the next verſe:
and that which is turned here 
                     Ʋillages, others
turne Cypres trees, which ſome take to bee a
buſhe or tree, growing in Egypt, Syria, and
the countries thereabout, much like to that we
call Priuet, Yea ſome haue taken it to bee the
very ſelfe ſame. See Pliny lib▪ 12. cap. 24. Alſo
chap. 1. of this book, verſ, 14. And indeede the
word is vſed in ſcripture, both to ſignify Villages
and little towns, and alſo the Cypres. But
whatſoeuer it bee the meaning is all one. q: d. I
will nowe no more be found vnprepared (which

was the fault of the Churche, mentioned before
chap. 5, verſe. 1. &c.) I am aſhamed of that careleſneſſe,
negligence and ſlouth: it is my duty to
watch with thee, and therefore I will indeuor
the perfourmaunce of it, yea I will day & night
wayte for the aſſured ſignes of thy glorious appearing,
and the rather becauſe that as thy glorye,
ſo my chiefe good ſtandeth in the perfourmaunce
of this duty: and ſo the church perfourmeth
that vnto Chriſt him ſelfe, as ſhee her ſelfe
affirmed in his perſonne before chap. 2. 10. had
performed vnto her.
               
                  Verſe. 3. Let vs riſe vp earely to the vines,
                   that is,
to viſite and looke vpon the vines. The church
ſheweth what commodity ſhe and her ſpouſe ſhal
get, by remayning or lodging all night, in the
country villages, or amongſt the ſweet Cypres
trees, out of the citye, namely that they ſhall bee
ready earelye, to make triall of that, that they
come and look for. Let vs ſee whether the vine floriſhe,
that is, what likelyhood there is, of the approching
of the time of mariage, for to this ende
tendeth this, and all the ſimilitudes and compariſons
following. And whether the ſmall grape, or
as you would ſaye, The firſt grape: which is called
firſte, becauſe of the firſte ſprowting thereof,
and ſmall not onely becauſe of the littlenes, but
alſo becauſe it wareth greater and greater. Hath
opened it ſelfe, that is, hath declared it ſelfe vnto
men, that it is now become a grape and groweth,

which at the firſt appearing of it, or as it
were in the bud, can hardly be diſcerned. And
whether the Pomgranates flouriſh. The budding
of this fruite, (wherof alſo there was good ſtore
in thoſe countries) was a ſigne of the ſpring
nowe, and the flouriſhing thereof, as it were of
the ſummer at hand. By all which as hath bene
ſayd before, the church laboureth to come to the
vndoubted ſignes of the daye of her marriage
with Chriſt. I know others otherwiſe expound
it, as though the church ſhould intreat Chriſte,
and ſtirre vp her ſelf, to looke vpon the ſignes of
ſaluation, and Gods grace amongeſt his owne
people, which are manye times compared to
Vines. Indeede I deny not, but that Gods people,
is Gods vine, and that the bringing foorthe
of flowers and fruites, may well reſemble good
works, and the outward manifeſtation of Gods
graces, wherewith he inwardly adorneth his
Seruauntes, and that they may well bee compared
to Pomgranates, which fruite is of it
ſelfe, moſte pleaſaunte and delightfull to the
taſte alſo: but yet me thinketh the former ſenſe
is more playne and ſimple, except wee will
ſaye thus, that the more aboundaunce of good
fruite, that Gods people yeelde and bringe
foorthe the more nighe is the marriage, but
becauſe the perfection and fulneſſe of oure
Fruite, cannot bee in this life, but in the
lyfe to bee reuealed, that therefore the perperfection

and conſummation of the marriage,
ſhall not be till then. It followeth. There will I
giue thee my loues, that is, there will I make manifeſt
and open declaration of my vnfained affection
towardes thee. And ſhee ſpeaketh of loues,
in the plurall number, thereby to ſet out, both
the excellency of the ſame, and the aboundaunce
or plenty thereof likewiſe: which indeed moſte
properly is to bee referred, to the great and laſte
daye, at what time we ſhall not onelye by ſignes
moſt certainly perceiue, that the marriage daye
draweth nigh, but ſhall in moſt perfect loue, bee
moſt perfectly knit, vnto our head and huſbande
Chriſt.
               
                  Verſe. 4. The mandrakes haue giuen a ſmell.
                   Before
we ſpeake anye thing of the ſenſe of this
verſe, we will a little looke vppon the wordes.
The worde that is heere turned Mandrakes, is
not vſed in all ye old teſtament, but onely in this
place, and Geneſ. 30. 14. 15. in which almoſte
all interpretours both Iewes and Chriſtians,
doe turne it Mandrakes: but if the circumſtances
eyther of that place of Geneſ. or this heere
maye be waighed, it will be found, not to bee ſo
rightlye tranſlated. For the place of Geneſis,
if we weigh Rubens childhood, we ſhall perceiue,
that he was drawen and mooued towards
them, rather by ſome pleaſaunt ſhew, and colour
of them (the Her boriſtes agreeing, that the

leaues of the Mandrake, ſpeciallye of the male,
are of a whitiſh greene colour, and the apples of
it fayre, yellow and round) then by any vertue or
ſtrength, he either thoght or knew to be in them.
Beſides that they ſhould not be Mandrakes, me
thinketh there are yet two circumſtances more,
the one taken from the place, where it is ſayde
Reubens flowres did grow, namely in the plain
and open field as it were, wheras they that write
of Mandrakes, affirme that it groweth moſte
gladly, in darke & ſhadowie places: an other is
from the time, vz, that theſe flowres were ripe in
the dayes of wheat harueſt, wheras the Herboriſtes
affirme, that Mandrakes can not be ſo
ſoone ripe: whereof alſo this maye bee one reaſon,
becauſe they delight in darke and colde places,
we knowing by experience and reaſon, that
thinges growing there, can not be ſo ſoone ripe,
as they that grow abroad, and haue the power of
the ſunne to ſet them forward. Concerning this
place it ſelfe, mee thinketh there is one ſpeciall
reaſon to lead me, why it ſhoulde not bee turned
Mandrakes here: namely becauſe a ſweet ſmel
and ſauour is attributed vnto it, whereas they
that be experienced in Mandrakes, wryte and
affirme, that they haue no good ſent or ſauour at
all. Me thinketh rather, that both in Geneſis,
and in this place, the circumſtances being conſidred,
and namely that Rahel was there drawn
to a liking of them, by the ſight of them, rather

than by their vertue: and heere preparation is
made and offered in the ſweeteſt maner that can
bee, to entertayne the Brydegrome, that therefore
it ſhoulde be turned, as Immanuel turneth
it well (Theſe louely flowers, yeelding a ſauour) vnderſtanding
by louely flowres, the delight that
for their colour and pleaſaunt ſhew, they offer to
the eye: and by yeelding a ſauour, meaning the
ſweet ſent they giue to ſmelling: q. d. Chriſte
ſhould haue all ſweet thinges to ſmell to, & pleaſaunt
to looke vpon, prouided for his intertaynement:
and yet me thinketh I am more confyrmed
in this iudgement, becauſe the word here vſed,
is deriued from a worde, that ſignifieth loue
or to loue. If anye man ſee more, or better, let
him humbly thanke God for it, and laye it out to
the benefite of the church, And in our gates are all
ſweet thinges. The word ſignifieth precious alſo.
And when the church ſayth, They are in the
gates, ſhe meaneth not onely that they were readye,
but alludeth alſo vnto cuſtomes and orders,
obſerued on mariage daies, men beeing went to
ſtraw the houſes, entries, doores, yea and ſtreets
and all, with ſweet ſmelling herbes as we ſee, in
vſe amongſt vs. New and old. q. d.
                   There is great
ſtoore and plentye of them, for this is an vſuall
thing, by theſe termes to expreſſe aboundaunce.
See for the phraſe Math. 13. 52. where Chriſte
affyrmeth that the Scribes which are taught of
God, bring out of their treaſures new and olde

thinges. I haue kept them foorth. The church proteſteth,
that as ſhee had carefullye reſerued theſe
thinges againſte the marriage daye, ſo that time
beeing come, ſhe will plentifully powre them abroad,
that ſo Chriſt her ſpouſe maye take pleaſure
in the thinges, that ſhee willinglye offereth
for his intertainment. Many miſtically expound
theſe thinges, for the ſweet ſauor that the godly
yeelde in the churche by their good workes, and
holy conuerſation, and I doubt not but it maye
bee ſo taken: how be it I ſuppoſe this to bee the
more ſimple meaning, that the church, alluding
to the outward maner of men in worldly marryages,
doth meane thereby, the great preparation
that both ſhe had in former tymes, and preſently
made againſt the marriage day, and would then
plentifully powre the ſame abroad, for the greater
manifeſtation of her vnfayned loue towardes
Chriſt.
               
                  Ver. 5. Oh that ſome would giue thee.
                   The church
hauing ſhewed ye great preparatiō ſhe had made
for the marriage daye, beginneth to declare the
earneſt affection ſhee had towardes Chriſte, wiſhing
(as many doe in the earneſtneſſe of their
minde, ſpecially when they eyther feel the want
of good thinges, or are moued with the excellency
thereof) that ſhee might continuallye enioye
him, as a moſte faithfull friend. Now in that
ſhee mencioneth none, to whome ſhee powreth
foorth this wiſhe, ſhee meaneth not that euerye

one could graunt this, or that ſhee did at all aduentures
ſpeake it, but knowing that it was only
in God to graunt the ſame, ſhee doth vnder
this exclamation or wiſh, expreſſe the feruent deſire,
ſhe had to haue this performed vnto her. See
Iere. 9. 1. To be as a brother vnto me, that is, moſt
faithfull, friendlye and louing, ſee Geneſ. 13. 8.
Alſo Pſal. 133. 1. That ſucked the breaſtes of my
mother. She is not contented onely to haue him
as a brother, but as a moſt naturall & kinde brother,
becauſe many times it falleth out, that brethren
alſo are at great iarres, thorow the neglect
or forgetfulnes of thoſe bondes, wherewith they
ſhould be tyed moſt ſtraitly together▪ ſhe wiſheth
that ſhe might finde Chriſt, as louing towardes
her, and as continual with her, as one moſt natural
and kindharted brother is to & with another,
that ſo ſhe might both continually, and moſt familiarly
alſo, enioye his loue & comfortable both
preſence and ſpeech. Though I found thee in the
ſtreet, that is, in ſo open and publicke place as it
were. See Luk. 14. 21. I would kiſſe thee, that
is, I woulde neither be aſhamed nor afrayde, to
performe the dutyes of a holye loue, and ſound
good will towardes thee. See chapter 1. verſe
2. Alſo Luke 15. 20. Neither would they despiſe
me, vz, that knew what it meant, otherwiſe perhaps
there might be miſiudging. We know it is
an immodeſt and vnſeemly thing, to kiſſe women
and maydes openly, as many do: but if thou wert

my brother (as though ſhe ſhoulde ſaye) no bodye
would diſlike me for it, though I did it openlye,
becauſe of a holy affection I carry towards thee.
So here we ſee, that as ſhee propoſed her wiſhe
and deſire, ſo here ſhee beginneth to ſhew, what
ſhe would do, if that might be graunted, proceeding
in reckoning vp of other thinges that ſhee
ment to performe, meaning onelye heere, that in
the performance of thoſe holy dutyes, ſhee would
ſet feare and ſhame aſide, and not regarde the
ſcornes and reproches, wherwith the wicked are
wont to exerciſe her, and will ſtill exerciſe her,
till the mariage day indeed come.
               
                  Verſe. 6. I woulde lead thee, I woulde bring thee.
                  
Shee doubleth the worde as it were, to note not
onely the ioyfulneſſe of her hart, to thinke vppon
this (which if it were ſo delitfull now, that ſhee
coulde not tell with what wordes to expreſſe it,
what would it be then, beeing performed in full
meaſure) but alſo the certaine purpoſe, that indeed
ſhee had to execute the ſame, binding her
ſelfe by the means of this maner of ſpeech, more
ſtraightly to the performaunce thereof. Into the
houſe of my mother. Shee alludeth no doubt to
the cuſtome in thoſe dayes, which was to bring
the Bryde and the Brydegrome alſo into the
houſes of eyther of their parents: ſee chap. 3. 4.
and Geneſ. 24. 97. where Izhac is ſayde to haue
brought Ribkah, into the tent of Sarah his mother.
And no doubt but here vnder the name of

                  mother, the whole vniuerſal church, which riſing
vp togeather into one body, ſhall in good time as
a pure virgin, be preſented glorious, and vnſpotted
to Chriſt. See 2. Cor. 11. 2. Ephe. 5. 27. For
the better vnderſtanding of this point, we muſte
well weigh two thinges: the firſt is, the maner
of the Hebrues in their ſpeech, which vſe to call
ſome whole thing or body, by ye name of father or
mother, and the partes deryued from the ſame,
by the names of ſonnes or daughters, whereof
alſo there is ſome reaſon, becauſe as children be
as it were chippes hewen from their parentes,
ſo are other things, when they are diſioyned one
of them from an other. The ſecond is, the conſideration
that wee muſte haue of the church,
which in the holye ſcripture, is to bee conſidered
after two ſortes, to wit, either generallye or particularly.
The church generall or vniuerſall, is
likewiſe to be conſidered after two ſortes. For
ſometimes there is contayned, vnder the name
or word of the church, Chriſt with all his elect
people, which therefore by reaſon of the ſtreight
and narrow coniunction, that is betweene him
and them, is alſo called the Brydegromes mother,
as ver. 9. of this chapter: and in which regard
alſo, the church is called his ſiſter chapter
4. 9. and alſo chapter 8. 1. Sometimes vnder
the ſame word, there is ſignified the elect onely,
as in this place, and before in this booke. chapter
3. 4. alſo chapter. 6. 6. and ſuch like. Where

we muſt marke, that the very ſelfe ſame diſtinction,
muſte bee obſerued in the new Teſtament
alſo, where the church, conſidered together with
her heade Chriſt, is called Chriſt. 1. Cor. 12. 12
Eph. 3. 4. that is to ſaye miſticall Chriſt, as the
Fathers were wont to ſay, or Chriſt in a miſterye:
but when wee conſider the church, ſeuered
from Chriſte, then it is called Chriſtes church,
or his bodye. Now concerning the particular
conſideration of the church, or the regarding of
it in ſome part, it is to be waighed, either as it
is diſtinguiſhed by occaſion of times or of place.
In reſpect of times, it is diſtinguiſhed thus,
that one part is called the old Church, and that
is it which was before Chriſtes comming: the
other is named the new, and that is that which
hath beene reuealed ſince Chriſte was manfeſted
in the fleſhe, he caſting downe the partition
wall, and making of the olde and the newe, but
one ſheepfold. See Epheſ. 2. 14. 15, &c. Alſo
Iohn. 10. 16. In reſpect of place, thus: the
Church of Ieruſalem, the Church of Antioch:
the Church of Corinthe, of Rome, &c. Now
which way ſoeuer wee conſider it, as in parte, it
is indeed Chriſtes Siſter, euen as if it were
the Daughter of one and the ſelfe ſame mother.
But all this is performed and brought to paſſe,
thorow the election of God, Which teacheth me,
vz, all godlyneſſe, and euerye good thing, eſpeciallye

in my duetyes towardes thee, and how
to intreat thee, and behaue my ſelfe towardes
thee, in all ſuch thinges, as maye pleaſe and delight
thee. I woulde cauſe thee to drincke ſpiced
Wine, Shee meaneth ſuch Wine or Wines,
as we call Ipocras, which beſides the nature
and ſtrength of the Wine it ſelfe, hath by the
compoſition and confection of menne, mingling
manye Spices with the ſame, great power in
it, and pleaſauntneſſe alſo by the ſmell of the
Spices, that as the heart is ſtrengthened, and
warmed thereby, ſo the ſent might bee ſatiſfied,
with the pleaſaunt ſmell thereof. Yea
ſweete Wine made of my Pomegranate. The
worde turned heere ſweet Wine, ſignifyeth muſte
or newe Wine, yea generallye all moyſture,
which eyther by expreſſing or treading, is fet
from anye fruite: For it is deriued of a worde,
that ſignyfieth to expreſſe or tread downe, but
becauſe hee addeth Pomegranates, we maye
ſee that he meaneth ſpeciallye the mayſture,
iuyce or liquor, that is or maye bee wronge
from them. In a worde, ſhee meaneth that
if ſhee might indeede bee partaker of him and
his graces, ſhee woulde moſte comfortablye
and ioyfullye intertayne and receiue him. For
vnder theſe metaphors, taken and borrowed
from an earthly banquet, ſhee meaneth nothing
els, but the ſpirituall intertainement of him.

Some thinke theſe to bee the wordes of the Iewiſh
ſynagogue, wiſhing for Chriſtes comming
and manifeſtation in the fleſh, and promſing a
meruellous intertainment of him: but I extend
it more largely, that it ſhould be the voyce both
of the olde and new Churche, wiſhing the continuall
coniunction of Chriſt her ſpouſe with her,
that ſo ſhee might neuer bee pulled from him,
which indeede ſhall bee fully performed in the
life that is to come, but yet ſo farre foorth, as it
is lawful, ſhee deſireth to haue it perfourmed
in this life, that ſo they maye neuer bee
ſundred one of them from another, that in that
holye coniunction alſo wherein ſhee cleaueth
whollye and altogether, to CHRISTE
her heade and ſpouſe, ſhee maye freelye and openly
ſerue God, without the feare of tyrantes,
or the infamy and ſlaunder of worldly men. See
Luke. 1. 74. Neither is this to be taken, as contrary
to that which was ſayde before in the diuiſion
of this chapter, touching the church of the
Iewes, becauſe that the verification of it in thē
is no hinderaunce, to haue it verified likewiſe in
the church of the Gentiles, and ſo by conſequent
alſo in the whole bodye of the Churche, and ſo
muſt we vnderſtand that, which is in the beginning
of the next chapter: namely that look what
the Gentiles were vnto the Iewes, in as much
as the Iewes were called befor them, the ſame
are they that are of the Churche, and are not

yet called as in reſpect of them, that are alreadye
called, but of this matter, more in the beginning
of the next chapter.
               
                  Verſ. 7. His left hand ſhould be vnder mine head.
                  
As before ſhe had ſet out how ſhe would receiue
and entertayne him: ſo now for the ſtrengthening
of her ſelfe in the aſſured perſwaſion of his
vnfayned loue towardes her, ſhee ſheweth howe
he woulde comfort her, namely that for her eaſe,
he woulde put his left hande vnder her heade, as
men commonly do, to ſicke and infirme perſons.
And his right hande ſhoulde imbrace me, vz, moſte
comfortably and louingly as deareſt friendes do
one an other. See this whole verſe expounded
before chap. 2. 6. there beeing no other difference
but this, namelye that there ſhee affyrmeth the
thing in preſent action, and heere by waighing
the earneſt loue of Chriſt towardes her, ſhe ſtirreth
vp her hope, aſſuring her ſelfe, that if ſhee
may enioye his comfortable and continuall preſence
it ſhall be done indeed.
               
                  Verſ. 8. I charge you by an othe, O yee daughters
of Ieruſalem.
                   vz, yt ye moleſt or grieue not this my
head and ſpouſe, yt either may hinder our cōming
togeather, or may break of our comfortable company
one from an other: and this ſhee ſpeaketh
vnto her handmaydes as it were, or friends. See
this expounded before. chapt. 2. 7. alſo chap. 3. 5.
Why ſhoulde yee ſtirre vp, or why ſhould yee awake?
q. d.
                   there is no reaſon or cauſe, why you ſhoulde

deale either ſo vncourteouſly, or malepartly with
him, ſpecially ſith in his reſt, ſtandeth your own
good. This my loue, yt is, he whom I ſo dearly and
tenderly loue. Vntill he pleaſe, yt is, till he himſelfe
will: and the Church vſeth this as a reaſon to
diſcourage them from awaking him. q. d. Be
not carried away with a fond affection, thinking
that it will be good for you and him, that hee
ſhould be rayſed vp or awaked: no, no, he knoweth
what and when it is better for you and him
ſelfe alſo then you can either think or declare.
               
                  Verſ. 9. Who is ſhe.
                   The church going about to
declare the loue ſhee carried towardes her head,
and huſbande Chriſte, both in this verſe, and in
the firſt part of it, by the way of a demand, ſpeak
of her ſelf: and in the latter part, taking vpon her
the perſon of Chriſt, ſhe ſheweth what great graces
ſhe had receiued from him. That commeth out
of the wildernes, vz, of this wide worlde, and her
owne corruption. Leaning vpon her welbeloued.
She vſeth this ſpeech, not onely to note her loue
towardes him, men vſing to leane vppon them
whom they like. See 2. King. 5. 18. but alſo to
ſet out the ſtrength and comfort ſhee had from
him, without whome by reaſon of their owne
weakeneſſe, ſhe had neuer beene able to get out
of the wilderneſſe: and all this is ſpoken by the
way of compariſon: q. d. was there euer anye
Bryde, that tooke ſuch great paines, and vnderwent
ſo many dangers, for the obtayning of him

whom ſhe loued? Take therefore theſe thinges
following, as aſſured teſtimonies, and pledges
of my vnfayned good will, namelye that I haue
laboured to laye aſide the olde man, denying my
ſelfe, & the whole world alſo, which ſomtimes in
ſcripture, is called a wilderneſſe. Iſay. 4. 3. and
by fayth haue ouercome all difficulties, that ſo I
might at the length come to the heauenly houſe.
Hebr. 12. 22. Neither ſpeaketh ſhee this as
boaſting of her ſelfe, for ſhe confeſſeth that ſhee
was fayne to leane vppon Chriſte, and he as it
were to vphold and vnderproppe her in all good
thinges. Yea and by the wordes following
ſhee ſheweth that ſhee had the beginninges: by
laying both which togeather we maye ſet, that
ſhee gyueth all vnto him, euen as the Apoſtle
doth. Phillip. 2. 13. ſhee beeing but the inſtrument
of Gods power and goodneſſe in the performaunce
of the ſame. Vnder the apple tree Iraiſed
thee vp, that is gaue thee life, and being, euen
as men that are in a heauye ſleepe, and are thorowly
waked, ſeeme to be rayſed vp from death
to lyfe. And by the Apple tree, he meaneth here
not onely Ieruſalem, from whence the Lorde
brought foorth a people vnto him ſelfe, but euen
all the places of the worlde, in which it pleaſed
God to beget and bring forth a people vnto him
ſelf: all which and euery one of which, may rightly
be compared vnto an Apple tree, not onelye
becauſe vnder the ſhadowe thereof, there is

comfort and refreſhing, but alſo becauſe that the
good, profitable, and plentifull fruit of that tree,
may very aptly reſemble, the good workes of holy
obedience, that the faithfull yeeld to the Lord,
in which reſpect alſo the Prophet calleth them,
the trees of righteouſneſſe. Iſaiah. 61. 3. There
thy mother conceiued thee. How and in whatſenſe,
the church is called a mother. See verſ. 6. of this
chapter. There ſhe conceiued thee that bare thee. A
deſcription of a mother, and this is repeated, not
as a vaine word, but to ſhew that the church, can
not bring forth ſpirituall children to God, but
with as much both paine and daunger, if not
farre greater, than earthly and worldly mothers
bring foorth theirs.
               
                  Verſ. 10. Set me as a ſeale on thy hart.
                   As thogh
the church ſhould ſay. Seeing thorow thy goodneſſe
and ſtrength, I haue vndertaken and performed,
all theſe labours and toyles to attyre
thee, I beſeech thee, let me not be caſt off, or loſe
my labour, but let the remembraunce and loue
of me, take a deepe impreſſion in thee, yea euen
in thy hart and minde. And as a ſignet vpon thine
arme, that is, let mee bee as deare and precious
vnto thee, as the ſignet that thou carryeſt about
thee: which how precious it was, and highlye eſteemed,
may appeare, in that Zerubbabell, hath
a promiſe made him, that the Lorde will make
him as a ſignet. Hagg. 2. 24. and on the contrary
ſide, in that Iehoiakim is threatned, that if he

were as the ſignet of Gods right hande, yet the
Lord woulde plucke him from thence. Iere. 22.
24. The ſumme is, that it is a requeſt full of affection
and earneſtneſſe, which the church maketh
vnto Chriſt. q. d. Seeing I haue yeelded
thorow thy goodneſſe ſuch teſtimonies and tokens
of an vnfaygned heart and loue, I beſeech
thee againe on the other ſide, to carry me continually
in thy mind to haue mee alwayes in thy
ſight, and in thy handes, euen as men weare iewels
about their neckes, and vpon their breaſtes,
and put ringes, ſpecially their ſignets and ſeales
vppon their fingers, both to haue them alwayes
in a readineſſe, and to ſhew the ſpeciall account
they make of them. For loue is ſtrong as death, that
is, the loue that I carry to thee, is moſt earneſt,
vehement and mightye, and will ouercome all
thinges, ſo it maye bee partaker of thee, euen as
death it ſelfe. Others expound it thus, that ſhee
had rather chuſe death, than want him that ſhee
loued: but the former ſenſe is moſte plaine and
ſimple in my minde, ſhe vſing this & the wordes
following, as reaſons to perſwade him to loue
hir againe, and to continue with her for euer,
ſeeing ſhe had ſo earneſtly ſet her minde and affection
vpon him. Iealouſie is hard as the graue.
By iealouſie, ſhee meaneth not an ill humor of
ſuſpition, but the ardencye and feruencye of her
loue towardes him, who coulde not abyde as it
were, that he ſhould loue any but her. For iealouſie

of it ſelfe is not euill (ſpeciallye ſeeing
the Lorde ſayeth hee is iealouſe ouer vs. Exod.
20. 5. But when it is carryed into the extreamitye
of a ſuſpicious minde. And when he ſaith,
It is hard as the graue, ſhe meaneth yt it wil not be
conquered no more then yt graue which as it deuoureth
all bodyes caſt into it, whereof alſo it
hath the name: ſo doth ſhe deuour all difficulties
& diſtreſſes, that might hinder her from her loue.
The coales whereof are coales of fire. Shee compareth
her vnfayned loue to an other thinge,
namelye to fire, not onelye becauſe it warmeth
and maketh hotte, but alſo becauſe it kindleth
and increaſeth, yea and is the meane to conſume
and purge, the church meaning by this, that the
fire of vnfayned loue in her hearte towardes
him, ſhoulde not onelye be euerye daye more
and more increaſed, and ſhyne foorth as
light vnto others, but alſo conſume all curſed
corruptions, that might hinder her affectition
towardes him, euen as fire ſhould licke
vp ſtraw or ſtubble before it: and that is the
reaſon alſo, why ſhee addeth, And as a flame
from the Lorde, or as it is in the Hebrue, a flame
of the Lorde, meaning by that a moſt excellent
fire, for the Scripture is wont to aſcribe great
and excellent thinges to God, as Pſalme 36. 6.
Thy righteouſneſſe is like the mountaynes of
God: Others take it as a flame of fire ſent
foorth from the Lorde, to deſtroye the wicked:

but no doubt ſhee meaneth to magnifie the
greatnes of it, as which God, by the moſt mighty
light of his ſpirite, doth not onelye begin in
thoſe that bee his, but alſo ſo kindle and encreaſe,
that it endureth euen for euer and euer.
               
                  Verſ. 11▪ 
                     Many waters can not quench this loue.
                  
Shee proceedeth in ſetting foorth the earneſtneſſe
of her affections towardes Chriſte: ſhewing
that ſith her loue was as a mighty and excellent
fire within it, it coulde not bee put out,
but with manye troubles, afflictions and perſecutions.
It is an vſuall thing in the Worde,
to compare both the troubles of the godlye, and
the troublers of them alſo, to Waters, ſee for
this purpoſe Pſalme. 69. 1. Alſo Reuel. 17.
15. Neyther can the Flowdes ouerflowe it. Thogh
ſhee meane the ſame thinge in other wordes
yet it is no vain repetition: for it is as much, as
if ſhee ſhoulde ſaye, no perſecution, no not the
greateſt, ſhould preuayle vppon mee, to quenche
out or drowne vp my loue towardes mee. And
that the worde Floudes is ſo vſed in manye places
of ſcripture maye appeare, by Pſalme
124. 5. 5. Alſo Math. 7. 25. 27. By which hee
meaneth as the apoſtle ſayth, that neyther trybulation
nor anguiſh, nor perſecution, nor famin
nor nakednes, nor peril nor ſword, ſhall ſeparate
vs from the loue of Chriſte, as Romans 8. 35.
If a man woulde giue all the ſubſtance of his
houſe for this Loue.
               
               
                  
Shee meaneth that though a man woulde giue
al that he had, either to buy this loue of her, or to
get it from her, it were nothing, it were but labor
loſt, and therefore ſhee addeth, In contemning
they would contemne him, that is, they would certainly
contemne him, and all that he offered to,
making no account neither of him, though hee
were neuer ſo great, nor of the thing offered,
though it were neuer ſo precious. For this the
maner of the Hebrue tongue, when they highlye
praiſe, to duble the word, and when they greatly
diſpraiſe, to duble the word likewiſe. See chap.
1. verſ. 1. In ſumme, this is it that ſhe meaneth
by this verſe, namelye to declare, that her loue
was ſo firme and faſt to him, that it could not be
rent or pulled from him to anye other, either by
anye force, or by anye fraud, or by any flattery, or
fayre promiſes, which are not onelye the ſtrongeſt,
but the onely way alſo, that the Deuill and
his inſtruments vſe, to pull men away, from the
loue and obedience of God.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Teacheth the whole church, and euery
particular member of the ſame, to be thorowly
aſſured and perſwaded of Gods election, and aſſured
fauour towardes them for euer and euer.
For if it be true in the whole, as againſt which
the gates of hell ſhall neuer preuaile, why ſhould
it not be true, in euery part and peece of ye ſame.
The knowledge whereof, is not onelye comfortable
in the dayes of a diſtreſſed conſcience, we

hauing nothing ſo ſtrong to leane vppon, as the
mightye foundation of God, which remayneth
ſure, hauing Gods ſeale ſet vpon it: but alſo profitable
to beat back, that point of Popery, which
teacheth men to doubt of their ſaluation & continuaunce
in good thinges, euen vnto the ende.
Neither ſtandeth the ſtrength and ſtaye of this
perſwaſion vpon our ſelues, for then how quickly
ſhould we forgoe it, ſith our firſt parents kept
not their excellent eſtate, in the time of innocency:
nor vpon any good thing either within vs, or
without vs, for all our righteouſnes before God,
is as a filthye and ſtayned cloath, but vppon the
vnchaungeable nature and purpoſe of the Lorde
our God, as alſo vppon thoſe infallible and ſure
notes that he hath giuen vs of his fauour, in
which reſpect alſo we ſee, that the church heere
vpholdeth her ſelf, becauſe ſhe was aſſured of his
ſound and vnmooueable affection towardes her.
Indeed if we looke into our ſelues, and into our
great ſins and manifold vnwoorthines, who can
then finde any hope, either of ſaluation, or any other
good grace? but if we will feele and beholde
this, we muſte caſt our cogitation from our ſelues,
and by the eye of faith, regarde the Lorde in
his eternall loue and mercye, chuſing vs alſo in
Chriſte his ſonne, and that vnto eternall life, before
the foundations of the world were layde. As
for that which is obiected by Papiſtes againſte
his truth, namely that it fauoureth of preſumption,

is moſt falſe, not only becauſe we renounce
all thinges in our ſelues, and diſclaime from the
ſame, both in whole and in part, but alſo we
cleaue vnto God in the truth of his promiſe, in
not abuſing his mercye, nor turning his loue into
wantonneſſe, but making them more forcible
meanes, to holde vs alwayes in the awe of a
good conſcience, and ſtrength of fayth towards
him. And if anye doctrine, ſauor of pride, and
be intollerablie preſumptuous it is that of Popery,
which teacheth men to truſt in the vertue
and goodneſſe of the thinges they haue perfourmed,
as auaileable and ſufficient, not onelye for
them ſelues, but for others alſo: and yet we may
ſee the iuſte iudgement of God further vppon
them, not onely while that they them ſelues are
iuſtly tainted with that cryme, which vniuſtlye
they caſt vpon others, but while they are founde
faulty in croſſing their owne aſſertions: for how
can that doctrine of doubting which is deliuered
in their wrytinges, and mayntained in their
Schooles, ſtande with the matter of mens meryring
and deſeruing: becauſe if there bee deſert,
and that not only of congruitie, but of condignity
and worthines as they ſaye in their ſchooles,
yea and that there be works of ſupererogation
alſo, what need they to feare clayming onelye of
fauour, but of that they haue deſerued. But
this we ſee▪ that the Lorde hath ſo ſtriken them
with the ſpirite of giddineſſe, that as they

ſwarue from the truth, ſo they agree not with
them ſelues. As for vs, we doe ſo according to
truth and godlineſſe, remooue doubting from
men, that we eſtabliſhe no preſumption before
God, but rather teach them ſtayedneſſe, and
ſtrength of perſwaſion, and that not ſtandinge
vpon them ſelues, but vppon God, the author of
all certainty and truth, and vpon that infallible
verity of his will, which he hath reuealed in his
word. For which ſee Iohn 13. 1. Alſo Iohn. 1.
               
                  Verſe. 2. Teacheth vs, in the ſpirite of all holy
loue, to exhorte and prouooke one an other, and
that by all the argumentes and reaſons we can,
to the perfourmaunce of good and holye duties.
Wherevnto that we may be the better drawen:
it ſhall be good for vs to conſider, that this doctrine
is not onelye ſanctified vnto vs in the examples
of good people, but alſo by the verye
commaundement of God in his worde, and by
that duty of charity which is layde vppon vs towardes
other, as towardes our ſelues, we furthering
their ſaluation by all meanes poſſible
and lawfull: and if there bee anye other reaſon
or reaſons beſides theſe rehearſed, to vſe them al
alſo, as knowinge that all is little inough, both
by reaſon of our owne corruption, as alſo by the
peruerſneſſe of them, that wee are to deale
with. See for this: Leuiticus. 19. 17. Math.
18. 16. Coloſſians 3. 16. Heb. 3. 13. Secondlye,
we learne by that verſe, not onelye with ſpeed

and earneſtnes to purſue good thinges, but euen
as a man would ſay, to preuent the time. It is
ſtraunge to ſee, the quickneſſe and liuelineſſe of
men, about atchieuing of worldlye thinges, how
they toyle and moyle very ſore, and breake their
ſleepes as we ſay, and how dull and heauie they
be in and about ſpirituall and heauenly thinges.
No doubt but this carefulnes in the one, which
are matters of nothing in compariſon, and careleſneſſe
in and about the chiefeſt thinges, ſhall
not onely make them voyd of excuſe before men,
but pull vppon them more heauye iudgement, in
the lyfe that is to come, in ſo much as they haue
beene buſilieſt occupyed about ſuch thinges, as
they them ſelues know to haue no durablenes,
and haue neglected others, of whoſe perpetuity,
they could not chuſe but be perſwaded.
               
                  Verſ. 3. Teacheth the whole church, and euery
particular member thereof, euen with earneſtneſſe
to looke for, and hearty deſire to wiſhe. the
glorious appering of the ſonne of God, for the
perfecting of that betrothing & mariage, which
is begunne betweene him and vs. We ſay many
tymes in the Lordes prayer, Thy kingdome
come, but who ſpeaketh it, eyther with an vnderſtanding
or a feeling heart? By an vnderſtanding
heart, I meane one, that conceiueth
and perceiueth the true ſenſe and naturall meaning
of that petition. By a feeling heart I
meane ſuch a one, as in an earneſt deſire that hee

hath of eternall glorye, or of holye loue, that hee
hath to al wel doing, & to ceaſe from ſin, wiſheth
euen the glorious appearing of our Lord Ieſus,
and the ending of the dayes of theſe miſeries. It
is lamentable to conſider, that neither the glory
of God, nor the loue of our owne ſaluation, nor
the ending of our miſeries, nor the attayning of
vnſpeakable ioyes, nor the practize of Gods ſeruants,
can bring vs on vnto the performance of
this duty, but as though we were glewed to this
world, in a perpetuall obliuion of eternall bleſſedneſſe,
or as though the cordes of our own corruption
were ſtronger, than all the graces of
God, or examples of good men, ſo we ſpend the
dayes of our pilgrimage here, and are very likely
ſo to ende them, to the hazarding of our owne
ſoules. See 2. Cor. 5. 1. 2. &c. Alſo Phillip. 1. 23.
Luk. 2. 29. and ſundry other ſuch like.
               
                  Ver. 4. Teacheth vs, euen carefully to imploy
all that we haue to the entertainment & receiuing
of Chriſt. And therefore looke what graces
ſoeuer God hath beſtowed vpō vs, we ſhould labour
the continuaunce and increaſe of the ſame
in vs: for they alone, are the thinges that make
Chriſte to take delight to come vnto vs, and to
dwell with vs. See Reuel. 3. 20.
               
                  Verſe. 5. Teacheth vs, in heartye ſort and maner
alwayes to intreat the Lorde for the feeling
of his wonderfull fauour and rich mercye. No
doubt, but if we vſed this meane of prayer often

times & earneſtly, drawing nigh alſo vnto the
Lord in the faith of his promiſes, for he that wil
come to God, muſt beleue that God is, & that he
is a rewarder of them that ſeeke him Heb. 11. 6.
and in vnfayned repentaunce for our former euils,
for God heareth not them that continue in
ſinne. Iohn. 9. 31. See alſo Prouerb. 15. 8.
and Prouerb. 28. 9. no doubt I ſaye, but if we
perfourmed theſe dutyes as before, God that giueth
liberallye to all men, and reprocheth none.
Iames. 1. 5. woulde giue vs his ſonne Chriſte,
& together with him all good things alſo. Rom
8. 32. yea euen his holy ſpirite. Luke 11. 13. to
lead vs into all truth and weldoing. And herevnto
we ſhould be ſtirred vp, as well by the effectuall
ſenſe and feeling of our preſent wants
both bodely and ſpirituall, as alſo by the excellencye
of the graces to be found in God, which
reacheth not onelye to this preſent life and
worlde, but to that alſo which is to bee reuealed
to the ſonnes and ſeruauntes of God. Secondly,
we maye learne out of that verſe, for no
ſhame in our ſelues, nor yet for no miſiudging
or euil ſpeech of the wicked, to neglect the performaunce
of any dutye, that may teſtifie either
our loue, or obedience towardes Chriſte: for if
we will doe ſo, we ſhall not finde the want of anye
lettes in our ſelues, nor lacke ſtumbling
blockes caſt in our wayes by the wicked to hinder
vs therein, but we muſte by honour and diſhonor,

by euill report and good report, yea in all
thinges approoue our ſelues, as the ſeruauntes
of God. 2. Cor. 6. 48. vnto God and men, and
doe as our Sauiour him ſelfe hath done before
vs, that is, for the ioye that was ſet before him,
he hath indured the croſſe, and deſpiſed the
ſame, and is ſet downe at the right hande of the
throane of God, that ſo wee conſidering him
that indured ſuch ſpeaking againſte of ſinners,
maye learne not to bee wearied and faint in our
mindes. Heb. 13. 2. 3. aſſuring our ſelues that
if we ſuffer anye thing with him, or for him, we
ſhall alſo raigne and bee glorified with him. 2.
Timoth. 2. 12. for the perfourmaunce of worldly
thinges, touching our owne pleaſures or profitees,
yea that though ſometimes they bee vnlawfull,
we neither are aſhamed nor afrayde of
men, and why ſhoulde we bee ſo in the doing
of ſpirituall dutyes, and that to our God? It
is worthye the noting, that manye that will
not bluſh at any thing before men, will be aſhamed
to performe holye duties to God, either of
Prayer, confeſſion of faith, Catechiſing or ſuch
like: and on the other ſide manye afrayde to performe
euen honeſt thinges before men. will not
bluſh to do holy things in the preſence of God: &
Let theſe latter people make much of this work
of the ſpirite in them, and labour to increaſe in
the ſame before God and man, that it maye bee a
notable and continuall pledge vnto their fayth:

but let the other feare and tremble, who haue a
dubble note of great vngodlineſſe in them, the
one that they are not aſhamed of euill before
God and man: the other that they are aſhamed
of good dutyes, in the preſence of God & man:
and let them labour the amendment of it, or els
it will goe hard with them both before God and
man, and that in this lyfe and the life to come
alſo.
               
                  Verſ. 6. Teacheth vs in all reuerence and regard,
to eſteeme the Church, becauſe there is in
the ſame, the aboundaunce of all treaſures, fit to
furniſh vs in the execution of our duties both towardes
God and men, and to make vs able in al
ſweet and delicate ſort, to entertayne the Lorde
of life, to his glorye and our eternall comfort
The prophane and worldly people, cannot poſſibly
behold theſe thinges, becauſe they looke no
further, than the eye of fleſh and bloud directeth
them, or the line of their owne reaſon, will lead
them: they onelye the eyes of whoſe vnderſtanding
God hath opened by his worde and ſpirite,
perceiue theſe excellent miſteries, for it is the
ſpirituall man that diſcerneth all thinges, yea euen
the deepe thinges of God. 1. Cor. 2. 10. 15.
which is not onely true in the miſteries of faith
and religion, but euen in diſcrying and diſcerning
the church of God alſo: for if a man haue
no beter loades man, than the light of his owne
witte, it is more likely that he ſhall imbrace the

ſynagogue of Sathan, by reaſon of the outward
glory, and glittering of it, inſteed of the church,
than the Lordes church indeed.
               
                  Verſ. 7. Teacheth vs, that we can neuer haue
ſpirituall eaſe, nor ſpirituall comfort, till we be
aſſured of, and doe effectuallye feele Chriſte and
his merites, and doe plentifullye taſte of the louing
kindneſſe and fauour of God towardes vs
in him. They that are diſtreſſed in body & ſoule,
and looke for reſte and conſolation elſe where,
than in him, we may perceiue by this, are fouly
deceiued, as they alſo that haue their onely ioye,
felicity and contentment in the outwarde, either
pleaſures or profites of this life. Notably ſayth
Dauid, Pſalm 4. 6. Many ſay who will ſhew vs
any good? But Lorde lift thou vp the light of
thy countenaunce vpon vs. Thou haſt gyuen
me more ioy of hart, than they haue had, whē
their wheat & their wine did abound: wherof
alſo he ſeemeth to render a reaſon. Pſalm. 30. 6.
ſaying, that In the Lordes fauour, there is life
euen for euer more.
               
               
                  Verſ. 8. Teacheth vs, not onelye to haue care
and conſcience in our ſelues, to do nothing to the
annoyaunce or diſpleaſing of our Lord and Sauiour
Chriſte: but alſo to labour what we can,
that others doe not diſquiet him. By which we
maye ſee, that the loue and care we carrye towardes
him, ſhoulde not bee contayned within
the compaſſe of our owne boſome, but bee extended

to others, as wel as to our ſelues, y• by yt
means alſo we may not only prouide, for ye pleaſure
& profit of him, to whom we belong or wiſh
wel to, but further and aduance to the vttermoſt
of our poore powers, the ſaluation of other men.
Secondly, we may learne to beware of preſcribing
any thing or time to the Lord, not only becauſe
it argueth intollerable preſumption and
boldnes in vs, we ſeeing by experience, yt ſuperiors
will not bear it at their hands, to bee controlled,
no not in thinges vnlawfull or wicked (&
then what a ſinne muſt it be in vs, to vſurp vpō
the Lord, who can appoint nothing but yt which
is good and lawful?) but alſo becauſe it ſecretly
accuſeth ye Lorde as inſufficient in foreſight, to
determine or doe, whatſoeuer he ſhall ſee to bee
good for his own glory, and the benefite and behoofe
of thoſe that belong vnto him.
               
                  Ver. 9. Teacheth vs two ſpeciall things, firſt
the whol church & euery particuler mēber therof,
yt will vnfeinedly come vnto Chriſt, muſt vtterly
remoue frō them all impediments and hindrances
yt may hinder thē in that excellent race,
caſting away euery thing that preſſeth downe,
and the ſinne that hangeth faſt on. Hebrewes
12, mortyfiyng the old man continually, with
the luſtes and concupiſcences of the ſame, that
ſo Chriſt may take delight and pleaſure to dwel
in vs.
               Secondly, yt whatſoeuer graces we haue, either

outward, or inward we haue thē only frō ye Lord
by chriſt: who is not only the mean to conuey thē
ouer vnto vs, but to continue, increaſe & ſtrengthen
the ſame in vs, for in him are hid all the
treaſures of wiſdom and knowledge: Col. 2. 3
And of his fulneſſe haue wee receiued euen
grace for grace. Ioh. 1. 16. So that we may ſee
heereby, that not onely preuenting grace (as papiſtes
ſay) is his, but euen all graces ſubſequent
or following the ſame. For what haue we that
we haue not receiued. 1. Cor. 4. 7? Speciallye
ſith we are not ſufficiēt to think a good thought.
2. Cor. 3. 5.
               Verſe. 10. Teacheth vs, that the thing wee
ſhould eſteeme moſt precious, yea pray and wiſh
for, is the aſſured feeling of Gods fauoure and
loue towardes vs in Chriſt. Of this ſome thing
hath bin ſaid before. verſ. 7. of this chapter: And
this is that alſo which our ſauiour ſpeaketh in
Luke vnto his diſciples: Chapter. 10. 20. Reioyce
not in this, that the ſpirits are ſubiected
vnto you, but rather reioyce becauſe your
names are written in heauen. Ieremy alſo
ſpeaketh excellentlye of it chap. 9, 23. 24. Let
not the wiſeman glory in his wiſedome, nor
the ſtronge man in his ſtrength &c: but
let him that gloryeth, glorye in this that
he vnderſtandeth and knoweth me ſayth the
Lord: For I am the lorde which ſhew mercye,
iudgement, and righteouſneſſe in the earth:

for in theſe things I delight. See alſo 1. Cor.
1. 31. Alſo 2: Cor. 10. 27. Secondly that our
loue to the Lord, ſhoulde be no colde affection, or
ſome meane meaſure of a good minde, but that
it ſhould be feruent, earneſt, continuall, and as
a man woulde ſay fyery to conſume all lets eyther
within vs, or without vs, that might hinder
vs from expreſſing the ſound affection that wee
carrye towardes the Lorde Jeſus. This
doth Chriſte notably expreſſe by ſundrye particulars.
Math. 10. 37. 38. But yet more plainlye
in Luke chap. 14. 26. When he ſayth, He that
hateth not his father and mother, & wife &
children, brethren & ſiſters, yea, and his own
life alſo, cannot be his diſciple, but moſt effectually
in the abridgement of ye law. Luk. 10. 27
Thou ſhalt loue the lorde thy God with all
thine heart, and with all thy ſoule, and with
all thy ſtrength, and with all thy thoght, meaning
that al that we haue both inward and outward,
ſhoulde bee imployed in and about, the
vnfained loue of Gods maieſty.
               
               
                  Verſ. 11. Teacheth vs, that no feare or flattery
of the aduerſaries, ſhould cauſe vs to fal from ye
holy loue that wee carry and ought alwayes to
carry to Chriſt our head and ſauiour. It is the
nature of the wicked to aſſay, by fawning and
fauour offered, to fetch that from vs, that otherwiſe
perhaps they could not get from vs, What
ſoeuer they do, we muſt be reſolute, being aſſured

of this, that as we will holde and defend nothing,
but the Lordes vndoubted truth, ſo wee
will againe in nothing feare our aduerſaries, becauſe
that all that they doe, or can do againſt vs,
is to them a ſure token of deſtruction, but to vs
a pledge of ſaluation and life euerlaſting, and
that from God. Philip. 1. 28. Notable for
the ouercomming of this aſſault, are the wordes
of the Apoſtle Paule, in the latter end of the
eight to the Romans. Who ſhall ſeperate vs
from the loue of Chriſt? Shall tribulation or
anguiſh, or perſecution, or famine, or nakedneſſe,
or perrill or ſwoord? As it is written: for
thy ſake are we killed all daye long, we are
counted as ſheepe for the ſlaughter: neuertheleſſe
in all theſe things, we are more then
conquerours, thorow him that loued vs:
for I am perſwaded that neither death nor
life, nor Aungels, nor principalities, nor powers,
nor thinges preſent nor thinges to come,
nor height nor depth, nor any other creature
ſhall bee able to ſeparate vs from the loue of
God, which is in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord. Rom.
8. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. In which wordes and
names, ver. 35. 36. 37. the Apoſtle ſheweth, that
no terror of the wicked, ſhould cauſe him, or the
reſt of the faithfull, to fall awaye from a ſound
minde towardes Chriſt, and in the other verſes,
vz, 38. 39. hee declareth that no ſhew of good
things offered beeing either preſent or to co
                     ••
                  
                  
ſhould pull vs from, or ſhould pul from vs, either
that loue, wherewith God in his ſonne Chriſte,
hath loued vs, or wherewith we in ſome meaſure
of a ſound mind, do affect and loue him. Oh that
men woulde duely regarde theſe thinges, that ſo
they might come indeed, not onelye to the faith
and feeling of the ſame, but alſo to the ſound obedience
and performaunce thereof, that so God
might receiue glory at their handes, their owne
ſoules might be ſaued in the daye of Chriſte, and
other men be builded vp by their examples to do
the like.
            
            
               The 8. and laſt Chapter and the ſumme
thereof.
               
                  The olde Church or Church of the Iewes,
conſulteth with Chriſte her heade and
ſpouſe, concerning the calling of the
Gentiles, declaring that it is one part euen
of her ſpirituall ioy, to ſee that they
ſhall be choſen into Chriſtes flocke. verſes
1. 2. 3. Chriſte againe on the other
ſide, ſetteth out his affection to the
church, and wiſhed ſtill to be commended
and prayſed of her, verſes 4. 5. 6.
Which the Church taking euen as it
were out of his mouth, ſhee deſireth his
continual preſence, and fauourable aide
for euer.
               
               
                  
                     
                     1 WE haue a little Siſter and ſhee
hath no breaſtes: what ſhall
we do for our ſiſter, in the daye
wherin ſpeech ſhal be had concerning
her?
                     2 If a wall is to be builded, we
will build in it, a pallace of ſiluer, & if the gate
is to bee defended, wee will fence it about with
boordes of Cedar.
                     3 When I my ſelfe ſhall be as a wall, & my breſtes
like Towres, then ſhall I bee in his eyes, as one
that findeth peace.
                     4 Shelomoh hath a vine in Baulhamon: he gaue
the vine it ſelfe, vnto the keepers: a man bringeth
for the fruite thereof, a thouſand peeces of
ſiluer.
                     5 My vineyard which is mine is before my face: to
thee O Shelomoh a thouſand, and two hundred
to them that keepe the fruit thereof.
                     6 O thou that dwelleſt in theſe gardens: the companions
harkening vnto thy voyce, cauſe mee to
heare.
                     7 Flye thou O my welbeloued, and be like vnto the
roe, or to the young hart, vpon the mountains of
ſpices.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THe Church eſpeciallye of the
Iewes, hauing before made
mention of her unfayned loue
towardes Chriſte, as we maye
perceiue by the latter end of the
other chapter, doth now manifeſt
the ſound affection that ſhe carrieth towards
him, euen by an other circumſtance, to wit that
ſhe taketh wonderfull care, for the inlargement
of the glory of her ſpouſe, not onely by deliberating,
but alſo after a ſort wiſhing the calling of
the church of the Gentiles, yea making as you
would ſay large and great offers, for the accompliſhment
of the ſame. Which though indeed it
did at that time moſt properlye belong vnto the
people of the Iewes, who in thoſe dayes were in
outwarde profeſſion the onelye people of God, it
doth now concerne the whole church, who are
the ſame now, becauſe the partition wall is taken
away, that the Iewes were, & ought to carry
the ſame ſound mind towards them yt are not
yet called, that the Iewes did to the Gentiles,
that were then without, the Lorde vnder the
church of the Iewes, reſembling no doubt, the
congregations that ſhould be gathered of all the
nations of the worlde, and by the Gentiles ſetting
out ſuch, as hauing not hearde the worde,
were yet notwithſtanding in good time, by the
miniſterye of the worde and working of the ſpirite,
to be effectually called to the Lorde: whereof

of alſo this me thinketh maye ſeeme to be a good
reaſon, becauſe yt as the Lord will alwayes haue
his church, vpō the earth, ſo he wil haue yt means
continually vſed, not only that therby, they that
bee conuerted, maye be ſtrengthened, but alſo
that others may by the ſame meane, be mightely
reclaymed: otherwiſe as Gods worke ſhould
appeare for a time, and his glory manyfeſted in
ſtrengthening them: ſo his power ſhould bee
hazarded and glory alſo, yea the Church it ſelfe
might quicklye come to an ende in this lyfe, if
there were not as a dayly remoouing of ſome of
them to eternall lyfe, by the meanes of death
naturall, to triumph with the reſt that are gone
before, ſo a continual drawing of otherſome theron,
by the exerciſes of the worde, to partake
with the reſte, in that ſpirituall warfare, that
they are to vnder-goe in this life. And this I
woulde haue to bee marked as good, profitable,
and neceſſary, both for the ſenſe and doctrines of
this chapter, ſpeciallye for the three firſt verſes
of it, that we maye not be conſtrayned hereafter,
to repeat the ſame againe.
               This chapter conſiſteth of three partes, or
doth eſpeciallye propounde vnto vs three
thinges. The firſt point is as it were, a
conſultation of the old Church, with her
head and huſbande Chriſt, concerning the
choſing and calling of the Gentiles, into
the ſelfe ſame ſtate and condition of eternall

grace & fauor with her: & this is contained
in the three firſt ver of this chapter.
               2 The ſecond thing is, a notable manifeſtatiō
& declaration, of the ſound affection of our
ſauiour Chriſt towardes the whole church
conſiſting both of Iewes & Gentiles, or of
all nations as you would ſaye, this beeing
ſet out vnto vs, not onely by commending
the church, but by commending it, by comparing
it with Solomons vineyard, yea by
preferring it before the ſame, & by ſtirring
vp the ſayde church, to the holye duetye of
praiſing him, from whō, if he did not highly
affect her, he would not deſire that commendation,
ver. 4. 5, 6.
               3 The third thing is an earneſt requeſt or praier,
that the church beeing moued with the
loue of hir huſbande, & care to obey his cō
                  mandements,
maketh vnto him for his continual
preſence, comfort, and aſſiſtance, to
lead her & to guid her, into all truth & weldoing,
and this is contained in the 7. and
laſt ver. of this chapter.
               
                  Ver. 1. We haue a little ſiſter.
                   She beginneth to
propound the matter touching the vocation and
calling of the church of the Gentiles. Whē ſhe
ſaith we, ſhe meaneth it of Chriſt & her ſelf. q. d.
O huſband & ſpouſe, thou & I haue & by ye worde
ſiſter, ſhe vnderſtandeth ye church of the Gentiles:
which ſhe calleth her ſiſter, & the ſiſter of Chriſt
Ieſus alſo, becauſe they haue both one cōmon father,

vz, the Lorde, of whom is named the whole
family, in heauen & in earth. Epheſ. 3. 15. yet ſo
yt we alwaies obſerue this true & holy diſtinctiō
that Chriſt, eſpecially as in regard of his Godhead,
is the verye naturall ſonne of God indeed,
wheras we are his ſons & daughters, whether we
be Iewes or Gentiles, thorow adoption & grace
Rom. 8. 16. & 2. Cor. 6. 18. in what reſpect further
either ye whol church, or the particular churches
of Iewes & Gentiles, maye be called Chriſtes
ſiſter, or ſiſter one of them to another, ſee before
chap. 7. 6. She addeth that ſhee is little, yt is
not ripe or growen to any greatnes, or as a man
would ſay, not come to the yeeres of mariage or
mariageable (vnderſtand it alwaies ſpiritually)
becauſe ye fulneſſe of ye time for their mariageꝭ as
you wold ſay or calling was not come Gal. 4. 4.
euen til Chriſt him ſelf was aſcended, & had ſent
forth his Apoſtles, giuing thē cōmiſſion for that
purpoſe. Mat. 28, 19. Mark. 16. 15. the miſterye
wherof, thogh it were prophecied of long before,
and euen ye very angels did after a ſort, deſire to
beholde ye accompliſhment of it, yet was it reſerued
to be made moſt manifeſt, & performed by ye
Apoſtles in their daies, as appeareth 1. Pet. 1.
10. 11. 12. And ſhe hath no breaſtes. This is added,
euen to expreſſe her littlenes or ſmalnes as
before: q. d. She is not yet mariageable, or
fitte for Chriſte, no more then as a man woulde
ſaye, a very young Damoſell is ſit for a man, becauſe
they are not apt to conceiue, bring foorth,

or nouriſh children, and euen ſo was it with the
Gentiles: for neyther were they fit for Chriſte,
and to receiue or imbrace the Lorde, becauſe
they wanted that yeeres and ripeneſſe, that the
Lord had appointed wt him ſelf for them, as alſo
the meanes wherby they ſhould haue come to it,
for vnto the Iews, and not vnto them then, was
the adoption, the glory, the couenauntes, and the
ſeruice of God committed, Rom. 9. 4. If any
man wil ſay, there were diuerſe of them called,
I anſwere that that was as a man woulde ſay,
but the addition of one day, or ſome ſmall time,
to a naturall life, in reſpect of the fulneſſe of the
age that they grew too afterwardes in Chriſte.
See Epheſ. 4. 13. What ſhall we doe for our ſiſter.
The Church and Chriſt are brought in here, as
it were a man and a wife, or a brother and a ſiſter,
debating what were beſt to bee done, with
their yongeſt children or kinred, and which way
they might moſt labour their preferment. Wee
know by the practize of the world, that not onely
godly, but naturall brethren and ſiſters, will
vſe all the means yt they can, for the preferment
and good beſtowing of ſuche of their kinred, as
be vnmatched. The ſelfe ſame affection doth the
Church and Chriſt put vpon them here, the better
to reſemble the care and conſultation yt they
had, for the calling of the church of the gentiles.
In the day. She putteth day a part of time, for ye
pre
                     •••
                  ed & ſet time wt God, whither it were moneth,

year, &c. Wherin hee woulde accompliſhe
the calling of the gentiles. Wherein ſpeeche
ſhall bee had concerning her, that is, concerning
her calling into the church, that ſo there may be
one ſheepefold, euen as there is indeede properly
but one ſhepheard. Ioh. 10. 16. and one church
as there is but one heade of the ſame Ieſus
Chriſte. Epheſ. 5. 23. In effect in this interrogation
or demaunde the churche meaneth this
much, q. d. When I ſhall propound thy worde
for the winning of the gentiles, and thou ſhalt
giue a notable increaſe vnto the ſame effectuallye,
and enlarge it mightilye with
wonderfull bleſſinges, in ſo muche that the
myſtery of that holy marriage, which was kept
ſecret ſince the world began, but ſhall now thorough
the ſoueraigne authoritye of the eternall
God be declared vnto all nations. Rom. 16. 25.
26, That ſo they may by fayth bee ioyned vnto
thy body; then and at that time what ſhall we do
for this our ſiſter the Churche of the Gentiles?
Hitherto reacheth the queſtion propounded as
it were, in the way of conſultation or aduiſe.
               
                  Verſe. 2 If a wall is to be builded.
                   This verſe
contayneth an anſwere vnto the former queſtion,
in which is ſet out vnto vs, yet metaphorically
and vnder figures, the reſolution of Chriſt
and his churche, what they will doe, and what
waye they will take, when the fulneſſe of the
gentiles ſhall come in. And heere they are

brought in, as men conſulting and taking aduiſe,
to place and to plant great ſtore of people,
and fearing that the roomes they haue prepared,
or the city that they haue appoynted, will not be
large inough to contein and hold them, they ſay
thus: if the olde walles be to be razed and pulled
downe, and newe, to incloſe a larger circuite of
ground, for the intertainment of our friends, be
to be erected and ſet vp, let vs do it. We will build
in it a pallace of ſiluer: q. d.
                   we will not onelye inlarge
our wals for their ſakes, prouiding by that
meanes things neceſſary & fit for them, but that
they may know they ſhal be indeed moſt hartely
welcome vnto vs, they ſhall perceiue that as we
our ſelues will ſpare no paines or coſt, for their
holy intertainment, ſo they ſhal haue al thinges
that may indeed be delightful vnto them. And
all this is donne to drawe on the Church of the
Gentiles with willingnes and ſpeed to come to
the Lorde. Siluer is a precious thing as we
know, and much ſet by amongeſt men, but when
they ſhall haue it in ſuch plenty, that pallaces as
a man woulde ſaye, ſhall be built with the ſame,
that is ſtrong and mighty to draw. And that is
the reaſon, why vnder ſuch earthlye thinges of
great delight, the Lorde ſetteth out ſpirituall
matters. See before chapter 6, 14. of the Iuory
Tower. Alſo Reuel. 21. in the deſcription
of the heauenlye Ieruſalem. And if the
gate is to be defended, that is, the entraunce that

they muſt haue, is to be ſtrengthened. We will
fence it about, that is, make it ſtrong and mighty
With bordes of Cedar, that is with thinges that
ſhall laſt: for Cedar will not rot or worme eate
as Writers affirm: for the durableneſſe whereof,
ſee 2. Sam. 7. 2. 7. &c. The meaning is, that
if they feare any thing to hinder their entrance,
or ſtande in doubte when they are entred, of
ſome annoyaunce from abroade, they ſhall not
need either to fear or doubt, either the one or the
other for they ſhall haue ſtrong and pleaſaunt
walles, and mightye and durable Gates ſafely
to defend them. And as all this is done, to
incite and prouoke the Gentiles, in ſome
meaſure of a ſounde minde, to ioyne them ſelues
to the Churche, ſo it is not without cauſe,
that hee mencioneth both Walles and Gates,
notinge indeede thereby, that Gods fauoure
to his Folcke ſhall bee all in all to them,
more ſafelye defending them, then in the
ſtrong Citye. Pſalme. 31. 21. The meaninge
of this Verſe is, that at what time the Church
of the Gentiles ſhall bee called in (whiche indeede
by reaſon of theire infinite multitude,
coulde not bee contayned within the narrowe
Boundes of the Citye of IERVSALEM,
euen as the Prophettes them ſelues
Propheſied and foreſhewed, of which you
maye reade Iſaiah. 49. 20, And Zechariah

24. not within the boundes of Iudea it ſelfe,
that then they ſhall bee conſtrained by reaſon of
ſuch infinite number, yea that they will be willing
to, rather then the Gentiles ſhoulde bee ſecluded,
to bring in a new forme, and order as it
were of a city, yea to pul downe the old walles,
and to ſet vp newe walles and newe gates for
the inlargement thereof, for by the terms walles
and gates, there is by the figure Synecdoche, that
is a parte or partes put for the whole, meante
the city, which alſo is vſuall in the ſcriptures,
See Pſalme. 18. 29. Alſo Amos. 1. 7. And
for the worde gate ſo taken, ſee Geneſ. 22. 17.
Alſo Geneſ. 24. 60. Deutr. 16, 5, All commeth to
this end, as though Chriſt ſhould ſay, ſeeing the
increaſe ſhall bee ſo great, wee will imploye, euen
our common trauayle and payne together
in this building vp of the whole churche together.
               
                  Verſ 3 When I my ſelfe ſhall bee as a wall.
                  
The olde churche hauinge before declared her
good minde, towardes the churche of the gentiles
doth not ſo ſtay therein, that ſhee neglecteth
her ſelfe: but ſheweth that howſoeuer ſhee
hath receiued as yet more graces from GOD,
then the poore churche of the gentlles had, that
yet notwithſtanding there was muche to bee
added vnto her beauty and ſtrength, which alſo
ſhe did look ſhould be perfourmed to her, euen
by the vocation of the gentiles: and that maketh

her alſo to adde, And my breaſtes like towers,
that is fayre and comely, by which allo ſhe
noteth, that thogh ſhee were then to be diſcerned
from the churche of the gentiles, which as
was ſayde before, had no Breaſtes, and ſhee
had ſome, yet there ſhoulde bee an increaſe ſtill
of that comlineſſe and ſtrength. Then ſhall I bee
in his eyes, that is, in the iudgemente and accounte
of Chriſte, For becauſe that the iudgemente
of the eye, is in moſte thinges certayne,
and it is a notable inſtrumente to conueyghe
to our vnderſtanding the trueth and certainty
of thinges, ſhe putteth therefore the eye for
the Iudgemente that Chriſte ſhall haue of
her. As one that findeth peace, that is, very deare
and precious, and full of delight and contentment.
For euen as that man, that hath liued in
long and greate diſquietneſſe, ſeeking notwithſtanding
for peace, and finding it at the length,
hath obtayned his heartes delighte and ioy,
yea, that whiche hee preferreth before all
that hee hadde: ſo was it and ſhoulde it bee
with the Churche. All in effect is as muche,
as if the Churche ſhoulde ſaye: when a greate
companye of the gentiles beeing ioyned together
with mee, ſhall growe vp togeather with
them, and they with mee, and ſo wee both
make but one Citye, I ſhall not bee farre
from that ſame quietneſſe of Spirite and
bleſſedneſſe, for whiche I trauayle ſo ſore now.

I do in deed perſwade my ſelfe now, that I am
not onely entring therinto, but haue made ſome
good proceedinges therein, howbeit the time of
my perfection and full ſtrength therein, is not
yet come. Nigh it is in deede I confeſſe, but
when the time ſhall come, that I ſhall by the
glorious appearing of my ſpouſe Chriſte, bee
taken vp into the perfect communion and fellowſhippe
of peace, then ſhall the marriage indeed
bee thorowly finiſhed, and that is it, which
in ſo manie places of ſcripture, is called the laſt
daie.
               
                  Verſe. 4. Shelomoh hath a vine in Baulhamon.
                  
Heere beginneth the Second part of this
Chapter, which is Chriſts ſpeach to the Church
Wheerin he doth propound two ſpeciall things.
Firſt by comparing it to a vine, yea to a moſte
excellent vine, hee ſheweth how deare and precious
the Churche it ſelfe is vnto him ver. 4. 5.
Secondly, hee prouoketh and ſtirreth her vp, to
publiſhe his praiſe, and the great graces that
bee in him, verſe 6. Concerning the wordes.
The vine is commended in this verſe, firſt by
the perſon of the owner, to wit Solomon, whoe
if euer any man liuing, might haue moſte excellent
thinges, hee aboue others (as a man would
ſaye) might haue them, both for the wonderfull
aboundaunce of his wealth, as alſo for the
excellencye of his wytte. Secondlye, it is
commended for the ſituation or place wherein

it was, vz. Baalhamon: whiche if wee take as
the proper name of a place, as ſome of the
Hebrewe writers doe, and particularlye Alen
Ezra: no doubt but it was famous, not onelye
for good Vyneyardes, but alſo for greate
ſtore of the ſame, from whiche alſo as it ſhould
ſeeme, it tooke the name: for Hamon ſignifyeth,
a multitude: and if Baal maye bee interpreted,
as Rabbi Shelomoh thinketh it maye,
namelye to ſignifye a playne: to whiche ende
hee aleadgeth Ioſhua 12. 7. Of Baalgad,
then no doubte but it was ſo muche the more
plentifull, becauſe playnes and Vale countryes,
are moſte commonlye accounted moſte
Fruitefull. But if wee take it as a Nowne
appellatiue as wee ſaye, or common, and turne
it as ſome doe, and as alſo the Worde maye
well beare it in the Lorde, of the multitude
to witte of Wyne, meaning thereby as ſome
alſo doe render it, in a fruitefull place, the
ſenſe and meaning commeth all to one, namelye,
that the Vyne is commended for the
fruitefulneſſe of the place wherein it grewe.
Hee gaue the Ʋine it ſelfe vnto thee keepers,
That is, hee lette it foorthe to hyre, or for a
Rente, to ſuche as ſhoulde keepe, Dreſſe,
prime, cut and trimme the ſame.
               
                  A man, That is euery one of thoſe, that
hired it, or all they togeather, for ſo haue

you this word vſed in ſundry places of ſcripture.
ſee 1. Cor. 11. 28. Bringeth for the fruit therof, vz,
that hee hath reaped & receiued from the ſame, or
for the rent thereof as we ſay. A thouſand peeces
of ſiluer, that is a verye great ſumme, for hee
putteth a number certaine for an vncertaine:
ſome read ſickles, meaning no doubt common
ſickles which was halfe as much as the ſickles
of the ſanctuarye, and did amount as ſome ſuppoſe,
to the valew of our twenty pence. He that
luſteth to ſee or read more of this matter, maye
view the moſt learned annotations of M. Beza.
vpon Math. 17. 28. whatſoeuer it be this is the
third commendation attributed to the Vine,
namely that it was hyred or let for a very great
rent, which alſo is an argument of the great
fruitfulnes therof: and in this verſe is contained
the firſt part of the compariſon.
               
                  Ver. 5. My vineyard which is mine.
                   He beginneth
here to put downe the ſecond part of his cō
                  pariſon,
namely to ſhew how much Chriſts vineyard
which is his Church, differeth from Solomons,
euen as much as Chriſte who is greater
then Solomon. Mat. 12. 42. differeth from him,
and as much as ſpirituall thinges exceed bodely.
And this difference is not onely noted in the
word my vineyard, but alſo in the words following.
Which is mine. Chriſt by dubling the words,
nothing both the excellency and the certaintye of
it, as we haue ſundrye tymes declared heretofore:

                  q. d. It is an excellent vineyard, euen as I
my ſelfe, and belongeth to none other but to me
alone: no man ſhal ſucceed me in this, becauſe he
is the eternal Lord & heyre of all things. Heb. 1.
2. and therefore of the church alſo. Is before my
face, yt is, I do continually looke vppon it, & haue
an eye ouer it, or watch ouer it alwaies for good,
noting not onelye his perpetuall preſence, in his
church by this phraſe, of which ſee Math. 28. 19.
but his continuall dreſſing and pruning of the
ſame (as the huſbandmen do vineyards) yt it may
bring foorth more fruit. See Iohn. 15. 2. And
this is the ſecond thing for which Chriſtes vine
is preferred before Solomons, namelye becauſe
he is inforced to put ouer his, to the labour and
dreſſing of other men: but Chriſte doth as it
were, with his owne handes, prune and keepe
his owne. To thee O Shelamoh a thouſand, vz, peeces
of ſiluer or common ſickles doe in right appertayne,
as a rent belonging to thee. And two
hundred, vz, peeces of ſiluer or ſickles, for all this
muſt be repeated out of the fourth verſe. To
them that keepe the fruite thereof, that is, to them
that labour to dreſſe it and make it fruitful. And
al this is ſpoken by the way of conceſſiō or graū
                  ting.
q. d. I yeeld to this that thy vineyarde is
worth a thouſand ſickles a yeare, yea I conſent
to more than that, that the laborers in it, and
the dreſſers of it, are worthy for their paynes, to
haue ouer and beſides two hundreth peeces of

ſiluer, and yet for all that this vine of mine ſhall
far exceede the ſame, in the reſpects aboue mentioned.
To be ſhort: The force of this reaſon, taken
from compariſon or the argument it ſelfe,
is this much in effect. King Solomon himſelfe
not for all his wit & wealth, though hee haue a
moſt fruitful vine, and ſuch a one as yeeldeth excellent
and good ſtore of wine, can not prune it,
and dreſſe it himſelfe, or receiue the whole fruit
of the ſame, but is faine to let it out vnto others
to dreſſe (and this is the ſumme and meaning of
the forth verſ) but as for I my ſelf (ſaith Chriſt)
I haue a far more excellent and fruitfull vine,
hauing many branches in it, (and euery branch
bearing many cluſters of graps) than Solomōs
hath grapes, as a man would ſay: yea ſuch care
and loue do I my ſelfe carrie to this, as that I
will not let it out to others to dreſſe it, nor ſuffer
any thing of it to bee taken from me (which Solomon
can not chuſe but graunt to the dreſſers
of his vyneyarde) becauſe I am alwaies preſent
with it and haue myne eye ouer it cōtinually for
good. And yet the truth and worthineſſe of this
compariſon may the better appeare, if wee will
well looke, either into the perſons, or the things
compared. Solomon muſt of neceſſity, by reaſon
that he was a man and weake, haue others
to labour for him, and to dreſſe the vyneyarde to
his vſe: but Chriſt as the eternall God & head

of his church needeth none of thoſe aydes: for
though he vſe men as his Miniſters, that is
not done ſo muche to derogate from his power,
who canne without their helpes worke the
ſaluation of his elect, as for theire weakeneſſe
ſake, hee ſpeaking vnto them in perſons
like to themſelues, that ſo they mighte without
feare as it were, imbrace the truethe. Beſides,
they that laboure in Solomons Vyneyarde,
muſt becauſe it was worldlye, bee recompenſed
with a worldely wages, and eate as
you would ſay, parte of that yt they trauelled
for: but neyther CHRISTE nor his miniſters
if wee ſhoulde ſpeake of them (but indeede
wee are not ſo muche to weighe that
in this place) eateth anye bodelye thinge that
commeth from the Churche, but hee giueth
them all their laboure, and receyueth as a
man woulde ſaye, nothinge in compariſon
from them agayne. If any man liſt to purſue
this further, hee maye, ſo bee keepe himſelfe
alwayes, within the compaſſe of the
place, and the Analogye or Proportion of
fayth.
               
                  Verſe. 6. O thou that dwellest.
                   After
that CHRISTE had extolled the excellencye
of this Vyne, that is of his Churche,
hee turneth his ſpeeche vnto the ſame, giuinge
her therebye as it were to vnderſtande,
that all this he had done, not onelye for her comfort

but alſo for her inſtruction. For her comfort
in that ſhe was ſo highly, yet truly commended.
For her inſtruction, yt ſhe might learn therby to
extoll him indeed & truth, that had beene ſo liberall
in her cōmendation. In theſe gardens. Hemeaneth
the particular Churches vppon the earth, in
which the vniuerſall church is after a ſort, reſident
and a continuall dweller, Chriſte yet notwithſtanding
hauing care, both ouer the whole,
and ouer euery particular one, and pruning and
dreſſing them with a ſingular affection towards
them, as appeareth by the particular churches
mentioned. Reuel. 1. 2. 3. chapters. The companions
harkening to thy voyce, cauſed me to heare, So
it is word for worde in the Hebrue text: but the
meaning is, make me knowne by ſetting abroad
my prayſes to ſuch as are thy companions and
fellowes, and eyther harken to thy ſpeeches, or
ſhould harken thereto. For though by the worde
fellowes or companions, there be principallye ment
the ſounde members of the church, and namely
ſuch as doe willinglye ſubmit them ſelues to
the worde and diſcipline of God. Yet all men
(becauſe of our common creation, and becauſe
of our one and common dwelling place, which
is the earth) may be underſtood thereby ſpeciallye
ſuch as will not liue, like hogges and dogges
(to whom we are not to giue holye thinges, nor
caſt our pearles before them, as Chriſte ſayeth
Math. 7. 6.) but yeeld and giue ouer their minds

to healthfull and ſound doctrine.
               
                  Verſ. 7. Flye thou O my welbeloued.
                   The third
part of the chapter, wherein howſoeuer the word
flying, maye ſeeme to inſynuate, as though the
church wiſhed the remoouing of Chriſt: yet doth
ſhee rather thereby note, the ſpeedye approch of
Chriſte towardes her, euen as they that goe to
thinges they take delight in, doe runne rather
than goe, or as we would ſay flye. And be like vnto
the roe, or to the young hart. To the end that ſhe
may the better expreſſe the ſpeede or ſwiftneſſe,
that ſhee woulde haue Chriſt to vſe in comming
towardes her, ſhee vſeth this dubble ſymilitude.
For the ſwiftnes of theſe creatures, ſee yt which
is written. Pſalm. 18. 33. To which ende alſo
tendeth the worde young, becauſe they are farre
more luſtye and freſhe than when they grow to
greater yeares. Vpon the mountaynes of ſpices. If
we referre this as ſome doe, to the roe, & young
hart, then it meaneth moſte pleaſaunt hilles or
mountaynes: but if wee referre it to Chriſte, as
indeed I take that to be the moſte true ſenſe. q.
d. thou that art in the mountaines of ſpices,
then it ſignifieth heauen, the ſame beeing reſembled
vnto vs (which otherwiſe can not bee
expreſſed) by thinges of greateſt ſweetneſſe and
delight in this life. Neither is it beſides the
purpoſe, that he ſpeaketh of ſpices in the plurall
number, by which he noteth not only the excellency
of heauenly ioyes, but the wonderful varietie

and ſtore of them, there beeing more ioyes
there by thouſandes of degrees, then there is or
can bee in the mountaynes, that are beſt ſtored
with all kindes of moſt precious & ſweet things.
In ſumme, this is the meaning of this verſe,
that the church imbracing Chriſtes commaundement,
touching the publiſhing and ſpreading
abroade of his name: and knowing how harde a
thing it is to perfourme that duetye, as well by
reaſon of the excellency of the matter it ſelfe, as
alſo by reaſon of the great difficulties and daungers
that are on the earth, for the doing thereof,
both ſue for his preſent ayde and continuall
preſence to lead her and to guide her to the performaunce
of that, & all other holy duties whatſoeuer:
as though the church ſhoulde ſaye, I am
vtterly determined to do the thinges thou doeſt
commaund me: onelye I beſeech thee to be preſent
with me, and not onely to make me ſee and
know the thinges commaunded, but alſo giue
me ſtrength to accompliſhe the ſame: yea make

                     〈◊〉
                   I praye thee, by thy glorious comming to

                     〈…〉
                   mee, and euerye ſound member of
my body▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   thy gracious promiſes, and ſpecially
eternall lyfe. See the like concluſion or ſhutting

                     〈◊〉
                   Reuel▪ 22. 20. in theſe wordes: Euen ſo,
come Lord Ieſus. Which wordes the church
both their and here vttereth, not as preſcribing
vnto Chriſt a time (for yt were intolerable pride,
thruſting themſelues into Gods office, who hath

ſet a day, wherein he will, in the perſonne of his
ſonne iudge all fleſhe) but to ſhew the earneſt deſire,
that they haue to ceaſe from ſinne, to be deliuered
out of the manifolde miſeries of this
preſent euill worlde, and to be made perfect
partakers of eternall life and bleſſedneſſe, ioyned
perpetually with their heade and Sauiour
Chriſt.
               
                  Verſ. 1. In the care of the old church, for the
calling of the Gentiles, not onelye whole churches
are taught, what they ſhould doe for the reclayming
of them that are without, appertayning
notwithſtanding vnto Gods kingdome of
grace and glorye: but alſo what particular perſons
ſhould ſtriue too in the like behalfe. Paule
longed after all the church of Philippi, and that
from the very hart root in Jeſus Chriſte. For
the more euident declaration of which ſcunde
loue of his towardes them, hee calleth God to
recorde as it were, againſte his owne ſoule, that
he did not dallye or diſſemble with them▪ Phillip.
1. 8. where is that carefull affection to bee

                     ••
                  und amongeſt men▪ Naye, where is any meaſ
                     •
                  re
of a ſound minde? That curſed canker of
ſelfe loue, hath vtterlye conſumed and eaten vp
the ſame. For euen as we ſee, that in worldly
thinges and ſtates, no man regardeth eyther
the common wealth, or the good of an other: ſo
hath God made vs to behold (but yet in his fearfull
iudgement, as the puniſhment of our former

ſinne) that no man careth either for the thriuing
of the whole church, at hoame or abroade, or for
the furtheraunce of the ſaluation of particular
people or brethren.
               
                  Verſ. 2. Teacheth vs, to ſpare no paynes or
coſt, for the winning of men vnto God, and for
the inlargement of the kingdome of Chriſt vppon
earth. Our goods, yea our liues ſhoulde not
be deare vnto vs in this behalfe. And this matter
of action indeed, the holy Ghoſt doth adde to
the former care and affection, as a notable note
to diſcerne, who are in truth ſoundly affected to
Gods glory, & the furtherance & floriſhing of his
church. Youſhal haue many will by words, make
a goodly ſhew of a ready minde, and if it goe no
further thē ſpeech, none more forward than they
but when it commeth to iuſtifie their woords by
their deedes, then men ſhall finde them, (and
therefore much more the Lorde) to be miſerable
ſtinckers away and ſtarters aſide. If S. Iohn
ſaye, that whoſoeuer hath this worldes goodes,
and ſeeth his brother haue need and yet ſhutteth
vp his compaſſion from him, hath not the loue
of God dwelling in him. Iohn. 3. 17. how much
more may we ſafely conclude, that he is vtterly
vayde of a ſound mind to God and men alſo, that
will hazard either the ſouls of men, or the while
church, for the ſparing of his owne pelfe? Becauſe
the queſtion is not now, of the body onely,
or of one particular perſon, but of the ſoule alſo,

yea the ſoules of manye for whome Chriſte hath
dyed, and the ſtate of the church of God.
               
                  Verſ. 3. Teacheth vs, ſo to performe the duties
preſcribed in the former verſes, that is in care &
conſcience, to aduaunce and promote the good eſtate
of the whole church, & the ſaluation of euery
particular member thereof, that we do not, either
in curiouſnes towards other. or in carleſnes
towards our ſelues neglect Gods graces offred
and beſtowed vppon vs. No doubt, but the holye
Ghoſt, was well acquainted, both with mans
corruption, and ſatans malice towardes him: all
which tend, as in all other things, ſo particularly
in this, to bring vs, to two dangerous and deſperate
extremes. If he can not cauſe vs in curiouſneſſe
towardes other men, to neglect our
ſelues then he will labour, by care for our ſelues,
to neglect our brethren and to make little account
of them. But we ſee a right raſe or courſe
deliuered vs here, according to which if we ſaile
no doubt, but we ſhall eſcape, thoſe ſame fearefull,
dangerous and deadly gulfes.
               
                  Ver. 4. Teacheth vs, that Princes and mighty
men of the earth, may well and lawfully haue, euen
as it were the beſt thinges of the worlde or
land wherin they dwell, which alſo me thinketh
may appeare by this, that the Lord hath aduaunced
them, to the higheſt and beſt place amongeſt
men, and therefore good reaſon that they ſhould
haue all thinges in, in ſome meaſure of proportion

anſwering to their ſtates and callinges. Alwayes
prouided yt they come not by it by iniurious
meanes or oppreſſion, as Ahab did, by Naboths
vineyard. 1. King. 21: or vſe it as a mean,
to grow either in pride or forgetfulnes towards
God, as Nebuchadnezzer did. Iſaiah. 14. 12. 13
&c.Dan. 4. 27 a thing alſo which god hath forbidden, Deut.
6. 12: or in preſumption and tyrannye ouer the
people. Deut. 17. 20. but yt they refer it to Gods
glorye, the giuer thereof, the good of his people,
for whoſe ſake God beſtoweth it vpon thē, & the
ſaluation of their owne ſoules, in the ſanctified
vſe thereof, they beeing led therby, as it were by
the hand, to heauen and heauenly thinges, ſith it
pleaſeth the Lorde by ſuch to reſemble vnto vs,
ſpirituall and heauenly graces.
               
                  Verſ. 5. Containing an excellent deſcription of
the church, and the continual care of Chriſt ouer
it, doth teach vs two profitable leſſons: the firſt
that we ſhold continually loue the church, which
is ſo excellent, that howſoeuer earthly things be
vſed to expreſſe the ſame, yet no one thing, nor al
the thinges together of the earth can ſufficiently
reſemble it, or paint it out vnto vs: the reaſon
is, becauſe worldly thinges are earthlye onelye,
and ſubiect vnto our humaine ſenſes: but the
Church is ſpirituall, and to bee diſcerned by
fayth: for howſoeuer it be vpon the earth, yet it
is not earthlye, and though it be viſible, yet not
ſo much viſible to the outwarde eye of the bodye,

(though that may be a meane many times
to direct vs to ye places of ye churches aſſembly)
as to the eye of faith, which muſt indeed diſcern
it euen as in reſpect of the outwarde markes, to
wit, the pure preaching of the worde, the ſincere
adminiſtration of the ſacramentes, and the
faithful executiō of Chriſts holy diſciplin: which
though they be outward, yet are they ſpiritual,
and muſt be alſo ſpiritually diſcerned or known.
The ſecond, that we ſhould always labor to ioin
our ſelues to it, and neuer to fear the faces or forces
of the wicked yt perſecute the ſame, becauſe
Chriſte continuallye watcheth ouer it for good:
who we know is greater then all, who alſo hath
made vs ſuch promiſes, yt the gates of hell, ſhall
not preuayl againſt it: Mat. 16. 18. & therfore no
reaſon but we ſhould be incouraged: for if ſatan
with all his helliſh power, cannot preuail, what
ſhall the wicked of the earth do, who are not, either
ſo mighty in power, or ſo many in number,
or ſo deepe in ſubtilty, or any way, no not in malyce
matchable wich them, though I doubt not,
but the hatred and cruelty of the wicked, is furious
as the fire to conſume, and outragious as the
hel or graue to eat vp all, if they coulde haue it?
               
                  Verſ. 6. Teacheth vs by al meanes poſſible to
extoll and prayſe Chriſt, and to endeuour, euen
to our vttermoſte, to haue his trueth knowne amongſt
all the people and nations of the world,
if it were poſſible. The perfourmaunce of

which duety is not only acceptable before God,
who hath commaunded the ſame, but is profitable
to the churche, as who by that meanes is
brought to the creator and father thereof, yea is
comfortable to our ſelues while we feele therby
yt we are ſound members of that holy body, both
in that wee our ſelues growe vp in the ſame, and
wold gladly haue others to do the like. In what
miſerable taking then are they, yt either haue
no care at all to pull on men to Chriſte, or elſe
diſcourage them, from drawing nigh vnto him,
by ſetting before them affliction, perſecutions,
&c. Or elſe peruert them, infecting and poyſoning
their ſouls, with falſe doctrine.
               
                  Verſe 7 Teacheth vs many good leſſons. Firſt
it ſetteth out the weaknes of man, yea and yt of yt
ſort of men which are ranged into the church, &
therefore haue regeneration begun in them, to
accompliſhe and performe the good thinges of
God. Which is not onelye profitable for confutation
of the Pelagians and free wil men, but
alſo forcible, to beat down, yt high conceit yt wee
carry, of our owne wits, willes, and ſtrength: againſt
which ſee Geneſ. 6. 5. Pſal. 14. 1. 2. 3. &c.
Ioh. 15. 5. Rom. 7. 18. &c. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Phi. 2. 13.
Secondly it ſheweth vs what wee ſhoulde do in
theſe wants, namely run vnto God, by earneſt &
heartye prayers: for our better incouragement,
wherein we haue Gods cōmandement, by which
we know, yt that duty performed in faith and repentance,

is acceptable before him, and his promiſe
alſo, by which wee are aſſured that if wee
belieue we ſhal haue our petitions granted. See
Iames 1, 5. 6. But alaſſe what do wee in theſe
caſes, either wee pray very faintly, and forſake
not our ſinnes, or elſe we neglect prayer altogether,
& ſeek ſome odde worldly ſhifts, or elſe run
ragingly to ſome one miſcheef or another, and ſo
ad drunkenneſſe vnto thirſt, and ſinne vnto ſin,
to the great diſpleaſure of almightye God, and
wounding of our own ſouls. Thirdly, that thogh
we liue in this life, and praye for Gods graces
neceſſary to paſſe our pilgrimage to his glory, &
our comfort: that yet we muſt always remember
eternall life, and to ſaye, Thy kingdome come.
For we haue not here an abiding citye, but look
for a building that is eternall in the heauens. 2.
Cor. 5. 1. And that not ſo much for any worldlye
greefe that we endure here, as yt hauing al tears
wiped from our eyes, wee may not only ceaſe to
ſin, but alſo be cōtinually occupied in weldoing,
& made partakers of eternall bleſſedneſſe, with
yt reſt of the beleeuers in heauen, whither Chriſt
is gone before to prepare a place for vs, yt where
he is as the head there might we be as the mē
                  bers:
which the Lorde bring to paſſe, and that
with ſpeede, according to his good pleaſure,
euen for his crucified
Chriſts ſake. So
be it.
            
         
      
   