
      
         
            
            
            
               ECCLESIA TRIVMPHANS:
that is,
THE IOY OF THE
ENGLISH CHVRCH, FOR THE
happie Coronation of the most vertuous and
pious Prince, IAMES by the grace of God, King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
defendour of the faith, &c. and for the
ioyfull continuance of religigion
and peace by the
same.
            With a briefe Exposition of the 122. Psalme,
and fit application to the time; wherein are declared
the manifold benefits like to grow
by these good beginnings to the
Church and Commonwealth
of England.
            Dedicated to the most gratious Ladie and vertuous
Princesse, Ioland Anna, by the grace of God,
Queene of England, Scotland,
France, &c.
            
            Prov. 28. 2.
            When the righteous are in authoritie, the people reioyce.
            Psal. 118. 23.
            This was the Lords doing, and it is maruelous in our
eyes. v. 24. This is the day which the Lord hath made, let vs reioyce
and be glad in it.
            PRINTED BY IOHN LEGAT,
Printer to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1603.
            And are to be sold in Pauls Churchyard at the signe of the Crowne
by Simon Waterson.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the most noble and
vertuous Princesse, the Ladie ANNA, by
the grace of God Queene of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland: A. W. wisheth
all spirituall comforts and encrease
of honour in this life, and euerlasting
ioy in the next.
            
               MOst gracious Ladie, and
noble Princesse) whē Zerubbabel
that faithfull
prince of Iuda beganne to
build the temple, with the
stone of tinne in his hand,Zachar. 4. 10.
the people reioyced: but
when he had finished the worke, and brought
forth the head and chiefe stone thereof, then
shoutings vvere heard, of those that cried,
grace,
               Zachar. 4. 7. 
               grace vnto it. If then the people of
God in this kingdome had great cause to reioyce,
when religion began first to be planted,
and the spirituall building of the Church to be
reared, much greater ought our ioy now to be,
when we see religion continued, and hope, if any
thing yet be wanting, that the same in good
time may be perfited.
            Others will striue diuersly to expresse the
ioy of this happie day, and to solemnize the

entrance and initiation of so religious and
much desired raigne of your Highnes louing
lord and our gracious Soueraigne: some by
pleasant pageants and shewes, some by valiant
and martiall feates of armes and iustings,
some by rich and costly presents and gifts: but
we among the rest, the Ministers of the Gospell
of Christ, both by preaching and setting
forth the great mercies of God towards vs,
and by writing to conserue a perpetuall memorie
thereof, will consecrate our tongues and
pennes to this seruice: that we may say with
the kingly prophet Dauid, My tongue is the
penne of a readie writer,
               Psal. 45. 1. 
               I will entreat in
my works of the king.
            
            Your Grace hath great reason to be glad
of this day, whose honour able estate is thereby
enlarged, according to the rule of the law,
Mulier marito concrescit▪
               
               Iustini
                     •
                  n▪ cod. lib. 3. tit. 4. leg▪ 28. 
               the ladie encreaseth
with her lord: your royall issue and
princely heire reioyceth, whose noble title of
inheritance is augmented: your Highnesse
faithfull seruants and domesticalls haue not
the least part in this common ioy, whose true
and diligent seruice, is like to be highly recompenced.
But all these ioyes, which particularly
in any of these may be singled, in the Church
and commonwealth of England doe all concurre
and are not onely dubbled, but multiplied.

God, hath giuen in his mercie to vs, both a
comfortable husband to his▪ Church, a carefull
parent to the Commonwealth, an honourable
Master▪ to all honest and louing subiects. The
first shall haue (we trust) ioyfull experience of
his Christian pietie, the second of his fatherly
benignitie, the third of his princely equitie:
that both Church may say with the spouse in
the Canticles.Cant. 1. 3. 
               We will remember thy loue
more then wine; and the Commonwealth as
the Prophet of Eliakim,Isa. 22. 21. 
               he shall be a father
to the inhabitants of Ierusalē; and▪ be whole
realme, as the same prophet saith, he shall be
called a repairer of the breach,
               Isa. 58. 
                     •
                  1. 
               and a restorer
of the decaied pathes.
            
            And now most noble Queene, seeing God
hath aduanced your H. to this great honour,
honour him againe that hath honoured you.
Forget not him that hath remembred you,
and serue him faithfully, that hath preuented
you with blessings liberally. Two Annaes are
famous in scripture:1. Sam. 1. Anna of Elkanah for her
godly posteritie in Samuel, Anna of Phanuel
for her deuout pietie in praying in the temple.Luk. 2. 36.
Elka
                  •
               ab, whose wife the first Anna was, signifieth,
the possession of God: Phanuel, whose
daughter the second was, is as much to say, the
sight of God. Anna also is interpreted, gratious,
or mercifull. Answerable vnto these

names were the effects: the first had a vertuous
sonne Samuel, a possession of God in deede:
the second saw Christ in the temple and confessed
him: and both of them were vertuous
women. God graunt vnto your Highnes the
possession of Elkanah, encrease of spirituall
sight, and knowledge with Phan
                  •
               els daughter,
and to be a right Anna, both to fin
                  •
                grace
with God, and to shew mercie and compassion
to men.
            Two other of this honourable and Christian
name, Anna, I finde in the Chronicles of
this nation, both vertuous Queenes, your
Highnes worthie pr
                  •
               decessours, one wife to
Richard the 2. sister to Wincelaus king of Bohemie;
the other, ladie Anna Bullen, wife to
king Henrie the 8. and mother to our late
gratious Soueraigne Q. Elizabeth. The first
is honoured for her studie in the Scriptures;
who had in those blind daies the 4. Euangelists
in English,Fo
                     •
                   p. 507. col. 1. and the doctors of the Church
vpon the same. The other is commended for
her excellent vertues;Fo
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  . 10▪ 
                  
                     •
                  . as her sinceriti
                  •
                in true
religion, her Christian charitie and princely
liberalitie toward the poore, whose almes giuen
that way in three quarters of a yeare, are
summed to be 13. or 14. thousand pound. And
now God hath sent vs a third Queene Anna,
which we trust in all these princely vertues as

shee continueth the Christian name, so will reviue
the honourable fame of these vertuous
matrones. That innocent ladie Queene Anna
Bullen, though by the malice of her aduersaries
traduced, yet both by her godly death, and
Gods blessing vpon her posteritie is sufficiently
cleared. At her coronation these verses were
exhibited:

                  Regina Anna, paris regis de semine nata
                  Et paries populis aurea saecla tuis.
                  As Anna Queene of princely race
doth equally descend,
                  So to her people golden daies
her offspring shall extend.
               
These propheticall verses, if I may so call thē,
had their due accomplishment afterward, in
the happie issue of this Ladie, then vnborne,
Queene Elizabeth, by whome indeede this
Church of England enioyed a golden time:
such as the like (as his Maiestie saith) hath
not been read nor heard of since the daies
of the Romane Emperour Augustus.
               Prefac
                     •
                   to the Reader in 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . And
it is the comfortable hope of this nation of
England, tha
                  •
                God hath raised your Highnes
vp another fruitfull Anna, by whose royall
offspring this lanà may long haue fruition of
like golden and happie daies, which God in his
mercie graunt.
            The Lord make your grace, vnto his Maiestie,

               
                  〈◊〉
                D
                  •
               borah to Baruch, as Huldah to
Ios
                  •••
               , as Esther to 
                  〈◊〉
                A
                  •
               ashuer
                  •
               sh: Christ
Iesus graunt you the pietie of Rebecca, that
consulted with God, the zeale of M
                  •
               riam,
that praised God,2. Sam. 14. the knowledge of the Teko
               
                  •••
               ,2. Sam. 20.
that perswaded Dauid, the wisdome of the
matron
                  •
                of Abel that deliuered the citie, the
charitie of the Shunamite,2. King. 4. that prouided for
the Prophet: that the Church of God
                  •
                beholding
your zeale toward God, your 
                  〈◊〉
                to his
Chur
                  ••
               ; desire to the truth, obedience 
                  〈◊〉
                his
word, humilitie in your high estate▪ mercie
and pietie toward the po
                  •
               re members of the
Church, constancie in vertue and all goodnes,
may blesse you with the saying of the wise man
of the godly matrone;Prov. 31. 29. 
               many daughters haue
done vertuously, but your surmount them
all: and that you may be eternally blessed in
heauen, that in that day it may be pronounced
to your comfort▪
               vers. 
                     ••
                  . 
               Giue her of the fruit of her
hands, &c.
            
            
               Your Highnes readie to be commanded
in the Lord,
Andrew Willet, Minister of
the Gospel of Christ.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Preface to the
Reader.
            
               THe Iewes returning from
captiuitie, did so wonder at
their strange deliuerance,
that they seemed to be as
men, that dreame: Psal. 126
1. As strange a worke hath
God wrought for the Church of Englād:
for though we are not come from thraldome
to libertie, or from captiuitie to our
owne countrie, hauing many yeares vnder
our late Soueraigne enioyed both true
religion, and therewith, as the handmaid
waiting vpon her mistresse, all flourishing
peace: yet in respect of our deliuerance
from that danger to the state, which many
feared, the change of religiō in the church,
which some doubted, others desired, we
can no lesse wonder at the Lords strange
worke, and say with the Church of God:
The Lord hath done great things for vs,
whereof we reioyce, Psal. 126. 3.
            In this common ioy who shall forbidde
any to reioyce? and where Gods mercies
are so manifest and euident to all the
world, who can hold his peace? But as benefits

are not acknowledged, where first
they are not well considered, nor due
thankes performed, where the grace receiued
is not worthely esteemed: for this
cause haue I addressed this short treatise,
that Gods goodnesse to Israel might be
proclaimed, and that no man be ignorant
what God hath done for vs, that we again
be not negligent to doe to him, that which
becommeth vs, to giue vnto him thankes
and praise.
            Samuel, to disswade the people from al
their wanton desires to haue a king, wheras
God was yet their king, telleth them,
what the properties of their king shall be,
and how hardly he should vse them, and
how little pleasing vnto them his gouernment
was like to be. 1. Sam. 8. As he would
disswade from their vnthankefulnesse to
God in that headstrong request, by propounding
vnto them the hard conditions
of their king: so mine intent is to perswade
to thankefulnesse to God, by setting forth
the princely and Christian endowements
of our gratious Soueraigne, and the manifold
benefits, which both Church and cō
               mon
wealth are sure by Gods grace to enioy
vnder his Maiesties godly & vpright
regiment.
            
               
For this cause haue I sorted out this 122.
Psalme, as seruing most fitly for this present
occasion; which I haue deuided into
20. seuerall meditations, shewing so many
blessings vpon this Church and commonwealth,
answerable to those which Israel
enioyed vnder Dauid.
            1. As Dauid appeased the strife betweene
him and the house of Saul,The particular blessings in Israel vnder Dauid, & in England like to be vnder his Maiestie. and
brought all Israel to one gouernment,
which was before deuided: so these two
kingdomes of England and Scotland hauing
beene long at variance, and exercised
in time past with long and bloodie battels,The vniting of two kingdomes.
are now vnited in one: His Maiestie
is the corner stone, that hath conioyned
these two walles togither.
            2. Vnder Dauid true religion was cō
               tinued:Continuance o
                     •
                   religion.
and by our Soueraigne the faith of
the gospell by his Maiestie truely professed,
and in his princely bookes protested,
shall still be maintained.
            3. Dauid was a learned prince,A iudicial and learned prince. an inditer
of heauenly songs and sonnets: And
God hath giuen vnto vs a wise and iudiciall
king, whose princely writings do giue
him the preheminence before all his predecessors:
another Salomon, a king and
yet an Ecclesiastes, a learned writer; such an

one, as Gratian the Emperour was: of
whome Ambrose saith,Epist. 25. ad Gratian. 
               Scripsisti tua totam
epistolam manu, vt ipsi apices fidem tuam pi
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  atem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
loquerentur: You haue written (not
an epistle onely) but whole bookes with your
hand, that the very points and letters doe
vtter your faith and pietie.
            
            4. In Dauids time there was free accesse
to Gods house,Free accesse to Gods house. 
               I reioyced when they
said, let vs goe vp, &c And nowe the
doores of Protestants Churches shall be
as wide set open as euer.
            5. Then the faithfull one exhorted an
other saying,Mutuall confe
                  
                     •••
                  e. 
               Let vs goe vp to the house of
the Lord: And now may Christians goe
hand in hand, conferring freely and edifying
one another.
            6. Dauid in bringing home the Arke,The example of the Prince.
went before himselfe, and was an example
of godly zeale to his people: So it is our
Dauids godly precept to his princely
sonne, Teach your people by your example, p.
24. And such is the practise in his owne
royall person giuing light by his Christian
life to all his subiects.
            7. Before Dauids time religion was
vnsetled,Religion s
                     ••
                  led. the Arke was flitting from place
to place, but he brought it to Hierusalem,
where it staied; and therefore he saith, Our

feete shall stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem: and
nowe whereas many feared an alteration
of religion at the next change, we verely
hope, that the Gospell hath set sure footing
in the Church of England, which
both by his Maiestie while he liueth,
(whose happie raigne God in his mercie
many yeares prolong) and by his roiall
posteritie walking in his steppes, we trust
shall be continued to the end of the world:
wherein his highnesse also hath deliuered
his sound iudgement, and constant resolutiō:
That in the last estate (when the church
is deliuered from the thraldome of Antichrist)
without any more generall mutations,
               Meditat. vpon the 20. of the Reuelat.
               the world shall remaine to the consummation
and end of the same.
               p. 3. art. 8.
            
            8. Vnder Dauid the cittie flourished,
beeing enlarged with goodly and beautifull
buildings:Encrease of wealth. 
               Ierusalem was a cittie well
compact and built togither. And nowe also
we hope by Gods mercie, that men shall
plant vineyards and eate the fruit thereof,
build houses, and dwell in them.
            9. Dauid was brought vp to Ierusalem,
with the ioynt consent of all Israel,
who said,The generall cō
                  sent and desire of all. 
               we are thy bones and thy flesh, 2.
Sam. 5. 1. And it is admirable to consider
the generall resolution of all English people,

and the coniunction of their hearts &
affections, both of high and lowe, in receiuing
their Soueraigne.
            10. Then, the tribes of Israel were not
onely vnited in one kingdome, but were
reconciled among themselues vnited also
in one religion: thither the tribes went vp,
&c. So not onely externall warres are like
for euer to cease betweene these two nations,Vniformitie in religion.
but one vniforme religion shall hereafter
containe them in perfect loue and vnitie:
that neither the Church of Scotland
shall be iealous of the English Church, as
inclining in some things to poperie; nor
the English suspect the other, as affecting
a popular paritie: but as louing sisters &
fellow tribes shall hold one worshippe of
God, and go vp to Ierusalem togither.
            11. Dauid expelled the Iebusites, not
admitting contrarie religion in Hierusalem:
               Religion sincere without mixture.
               And it is no doubt, but that God will
so direct our Dauids heart, that religion
shall be sincerely professed among vs,
without any mixture or toleration: as his
Maiestie most godly professeth thus; Is
there not nowe a sincere profession of the truth
among vs in this Isle,Meditat vpon 
                     •
                  5. of the 1. of Chron in the applica
                     •
                  . oppugned by the nations
about, haters of the holy word? and doe we not
also as Israel professe one onely God ruled by

his pure word onel? yon the other part, are they
not as Philistims,Meditat vpon 20. of the reuelat. 3. p. art. 1. adorers of legions of gods,
and ruled by the foolish traditions of men?
And again in another place, We must feare
to fall from the trueth reuealed and professed
by vs, that we may be free from the like punishment,
&c.
            12. Dauid reformed many things that
were amisse in Israel, he appointed the Leuites
their courses and seruices, that were
farre out of order. Our zealous Dauid
hath giuen vs great hope of the like, who
in his princely treatise,Reformation of things amisse. Preface to the Reader. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Queene Elizabeth
then liuing, thus writeth: I doubt nothing,
yea in her name I dare promise, by the bypast
experience of her happie gouernment, that
no good subiect shall be more carefull to enforme
her of any corruptions stollen into her
state, then shee shall be zealous, for the discharge
of her conscience and honour, to see
the same purged and restored to the auntient
integritie: and further during her time, becomes
me least of any to meddle in it, &c
That which his Maiestie promised in behalfe
of our late Soueraigne, God shall
direct his wisdome to performe by himselfe:
the dealing wherin before, as it pleased
his princely modestie to call medling,
so nowe the whole managing thereof of

right appertaineth vnto him.
            13. In Dauids time there was both
publikely and priuately a free entercourse
of religion,Praising of God. the praises of God were in euery
mans mouth: The tribes went vp to
praise the name of the Lord. Their seruice
was not mute and dumbe, but the temple
did ring and sound againe of Gods praises.
And thankes be to God, that the
Church of England is not forced to hang
their instruments of praise vpon the willowes
with the Israelites in Babylon, and
to intermit the comfortable exercise of
thankesgiuing, as it hath happened in
some changes, but that we haue as great
cause, & as much libertie as euer, to sound
out Gods praises: that we may say with the
prophet,Psal. 12
                     •
                  . v. 2. 
               thē was our mouth filled with laughter,
and our tongue with ioy.
            
            14. Then were the thrones set for iudgment;
and it is Gods mercie, that hath not
giuen vs ouer to the cruell desire of our enemies,Seates of iustice, 
                     •
                  4. benefit.
that the course of iustice is not interrupted,
but the lawe and seates of iudgment
open for euery man; whose heart do
not his Maiesties princely speeches reuiue,
thus writing to his noble sonne,
Preasse to drawe all your lawes and processes
to be as short,
               p. 9
                     •
                  . 92. 
               and as plaine as you can, &c.

wearie not to heare the complaints of the oppressed,
aut ne rex sis.
            
            15. Euen the thrones of Dauid:
               A prince no strā
                  ger, 15. Benefit. God
gaue Israel no stranger to raigne ouer
them, but one of their owne kinred: And
the Lord hath raised vnto vs a Soueraigne
descended of Dauids stocke, of the royall
blood of the kings of this land; a prince of
the same language, of the Island, of the
English royall blood; yea of the same religion:
who, as he is no forrainer, so giueth
counsell to his princely heire,pag. 55. 
               To haue ordinarie
councels and iustice seates in euery kingdome,
of their owne countrimen.
            
            16. Dauid would haue euery one pray
for the peace of Ierusalem, and not to disturb
it: So, whereas the peace of our
Church hath beene hindred by the opposition
of strange and newe doctrines,Consent in doctrine. our
hope is, that our Dauid will restore the
peace of the Church, and bring vs to one
vniforme doctrine; whose princely aduice
is,Pag. 10. l. 1. 
               That if any doe vrge to imbrace their owne
fantasies in the place of Gods word, &c. acknowledge
them for vaine men, &c, & grauely
and with authoritie redact them into order
againe.
            
            17. Peace be within thy walls: The people
vnder Dauid were freed from the

feare of the enemie:Externall peace. they needed not to set
watchmen vpon their towers, and garrisons
vpon their walls. So we trust to haue
peace abroad with other nations: who if
they will be wonne with kindnesse: we
haue a prince that will vse all other princes
as brethren,
               p. 56. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               honestly and kindly, and will striue
with euery one of them in curtesie and thankefulnesse.
But if they be readie to offend our
nation,p. 55. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . we haue a couragious defender,
that will reuenge and free his subiects from al
forraine iniuries done vnto them.
            
            18. In Dauids time, plentie and peace
was within their pallaces and houses: and
now we trust,18. benefit, domesticall peace and plentie. that euen our children shall
haue cause to blesse this day, wherby they
may obtaine godly education, not distracted
from their parents by iniquitie of the
times, which was feared, and might haue
iustly befallen vs: that we may say as it is in
the Psalme: Our sonnes shall grow vp as plāts,
and our daughters as the polished corners of
the temple, Psal. 144. 12.
            19. Dauid wisheth all good to Israel
because they were his brethren and neigbours:
               A louing prince.
               God hath sent vs a louing prince:
Who as our naturall father and kinde master,p. 25. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
thinketh his greatest contentment standeth in
his subiects prosperitie, and his greatest suretie

in hauing their hearts.
            20. Dauid cheifly because of Gods
house procureth the peace of Hierusalem:
Such is the zeale and affection of our Dauid
to Gods house:
               Loue of Gods Church. 
               who holdeth that the
cheife vertue which should be in a Christian
prince,Meditat. in 15. 1. Chro. part. 2. namely feruencie and constant zeale to
promoote the glorie of God that hath honoured
him. And concerning the Ministers of
the Church,
               p. 43. 
               his Maiestie saith,
               p. 20. Loue no mā
more then a good pastor, reuerence and obey
them as the heralds of the most high God.
            These singular mercies extented to the
Church of England, I haue dispersedly
handled in this treatise, that the consideration
thereof may prouoke vs to thankefulnesse.
And in trueth not only these, but
many other blessings, with a full horne the
Lord at this present some in possession,
some in expectation, some in acte, some in
hope hath powred vpon vs, so that the
Church may say with Dauid:Psal. 40. 5. 
               O Lord my
God thou hast made thy wonderfull workes so
many, that none can count in order thy
thoughts towards vs: I would declare and
speake of them, but they are moe, then I am able
to expresse.
            
            Our princely Ecclesiastes declareth,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   p 89.
that a king should be custos vt rius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tabulae:

the Gardian of both the tables of the lawe:
full well hath his Maiestie testified the
same in euery particular, in his Christian
and iudiciall treatises.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                For the 1. lawe, he
professeth himselfe an enemie to all atheisme.
p. 25. for the 2. he condemneth the
adorers of legions of Gods, and such as
are ruled by the foolish traditions of men:
for the 3. he saith, beware to offend your conscience
with swearing,
               Medita in Chro. applicat. 
               or lying. p. 17. For the
4. alwaies let the Sabboth be kept holy, and
no vnlawfull pastime vsed. p. 53. For the 5.
Honour your parents for the lengthening of
your owne daies,
               The prince keeper of both tables. 
               as God in his lawe promiseth.
p. 96. For the 6. There are some horrible
crimes (saith his Maiestie to his princely
heire) that ye are bound in conscience neuer
to forgiue: Such as witchcraft, wilfull
murther. p. 31. For the 7. God commanding
by the mouth of Paul to abstaine
from fornication,
               1. Cor. 6. 20. 
               declareth that fornicatours
shall not inherit the kingdome of
God. p. 74. For the S. His Maiestie hath
shewed his worthie resolution for the reformation
of robberies, and oppressions
of the Borderours. p. 36. For the 9. Our
royall Ecclesias
                  •
               es saith: Beware to offend
your conscience with vse of swearing,
or lying, &c. Lying commeth much of a

vile vse which banisheth shame. pag. 17.
18. For the 10. His princely counsell
is, Abstaine from haunting before your
marriage, the idle companie of dames,
which are nothing else, but irritamenta libidinis.
p. 127.
            Thus our Iosua well remembreth the
wordes of the Lord vnto that valiant
captaine: let not this booke of the lawe
depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou maiest
obserue and doe according to all, that is
written therein: of whome I trust, we may
truely say, as Ambrose of Theodosius, Licet
in aliis laudabilis,
               Ambrose epist. 2
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                
               tamen apex tuorum operum
pieta
                     •
                   semper fuit: though in other things
you are praise-worthie, yet the cheifest of all
your workes is humilitie.
            
            Further our noble teacher prescribeth
euery man his dutie:Euery mans duty prescribed in the kings booke. from this lampe
there is no calling but may fetch light,
and deriue water from this fountaine. Euen
here may the nobilitie learne, not to
thrall by oppression the meaner sort, that
doe dwell by them,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               nor to maintaine their
seruants and dependants in wrong. p. 45.
Merchants are taught not to buy the worst
wares, and sell them at the dearest prices.
p. 50. Iudges are admonished to take heed

of briberie, aduocates to decline the long.
somnesse of suites for the inriching of themselues,
with the spoile of the whole countrey.
p. 90. Church gouernours to preserue doctrine
and discipline in puritie, according to
Gods word, p. 43. Yea ministers & preachers
may receiue instruction for their calling,
how to handle the word. 1. not to varie
from their text. 2. not to meddle with
matters of state▪ p. 89. 3. that their speech be
not fairded with artifice, &c. but to eschewe
all affected formes. p. 115. 4. We are
taught to vse onely Scripture, (saith our Ecclesiasticall
Salomon) for interpretation of
scripture,
               Meditat. in 20. Reuelat 3. par. 
                     ••
                  rt. 7. 
               if we would be sure, & neuer swarue
from the analogie of faith in expounding.
May we not now truely without flatterie
pronounce that saying, which the kingly
preacher vttered of himselfe? The more
wise the preacher was,
               Eccles. 12. 9. 
               the more he taught the
people knowledge, and caused them to heare.
And in this sense we find that saying true,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Euery
good prince is of a priestly order, instructing
his subiects both by wholesome
lawes and precepts, and a vertuous example.
            Neither haue we onely from our christian
Salomon the light of direction, but

the sweete influence also of comfort and
consolation:The comfort & contentment of all sorts in his Maiesties godly resolution. that there is no sort or degree,
that is not interessed in this common
benefit. The nobilitie shall be duly respected:
eschew the other extremitie in lightlying
& cōtemning your nobilitie. p. 47. schooles
and schollers maintained. p. 43. Ministers reuerenced
and sufficiently prouided for. p. 44:
souldiours and martiall men liberally rewarded.
p. 59. faithfull and diligent seruants recompenced.
p. 71. the worthiest still preferred:
let the measure of your loue to euery one
be according to the measure of his vertue. p.
152. all subiects relieued, and their oppressions
helped: be diligent to trie, and carefull to
beate downe the hornes of proud oppressours:
embrace the quarrell of the poore and distressed,
as your owne particular. &c. p. 34. What
degree then or calling is there in the land,
which hath not great cause to reioyce in
the aduancement of so worthie a prince?
I speake not this (God is my record) to
please by glozing speach, for I should so
rather displease; his Maiesties mind herein
is well knowne: loue them best, that are
plainest with you. p. 71. but I trust I may
speake the truth without flatterie, and all
the world, I thinke will witnesse with me,
that I haue not fabled. It is fit that Gods

graces vpon his Maiestie, and mercies
therein toward vs should be proclaimed
and published, that his highnesse may
thereby be stirred vp to proceed and goe
forward, and the people prouoked to be
thankefull. As herein no nation hath greater
cause to ioy then England, to whome
God hath giuen a prince respectiue to all
sorts and degrees in their places, and according
to their necessities: who herein
may be compared with Eliakim, to a sure
naile, wherevpon all vessels both small and
great doe hang, euen from the cuppes to the instruments
of musicke, Isay. 22. 13. 24. And as
Ambrose applieth that saying in the Canticles:Lib. 1. de Virgini.
               Species eius sunt cedrus Lebani, quae
ramum nubib., radicem in terris inserit; in
altis habitat, humilia respicit: His countenāce
is like the Cedar of Lebanus, which stretcheth
the branches to heauen, and the roote to
the earth: so beeing in high estate he respecteth
the lowly. I trust of such a prince
England may more truly pronounce, then
Rome of Scipio▪ 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               :
that Rome could not
fall as long as Scipio stood. But we assure our
selues that this Church and commonwealth
through Gods gratious fauour
shall not miscarrie, as long as his Maiestie
liueth.
            
               
But because perseuerance is Gods gift,
and there is no mortall nature, but is subiect
to chaunge, it is our part to pray vnto
God, to giue strength and grace to our
Christian prince, to hold out in this godly
course, and that his Maiestie be not snared
or intangled with this great honour,
wealth, and prosperitie, to the which the
Lord hath aduanced him, but may take
heed by the example of the fall of Dauid,
the backsliding of Salomon, the declining
of Asa, that he forget not the lord his god,
that hath exalted him: which by Gods
grace we doubt not, as his highnesse hath
herein a firme trust (thus professing of himselfe)
that it shall please God,
               Prefation. ad 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               who with my being
and crowne gaue me this minde, to maintaine
and augment the same in me and my posteritie.
And God giue vs the people of
England the like grace, that we may continue
obedient to God, loyall and dutifull
to our prince, that he may haue comfort
of vs, and we ioy of him, that he may many
yeares raigne ouer vs in godlinesse and
peace, and his posteritie after him: that
God may aboundantly blesse both prince
and people in this life, and afterward grant
vs both a ioyfull entrance into his euerlasting

kingdome through Iesus Christ, to
whome be praise for euer. Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Certaine fruitfull meditations
vpon the 122. Psalme, by the example
of the people of God reioycing vnder the
raigne of King David for God
                  •
                manifold benefits,
moouing the Church and nation of
England to the like thankefulnes to God
for his vnspeakable mercies
shewed aboundantly toward
vs.
            Psal. 122.
            A song of degrees of Dauid.
            
               v. 1. I reioyced, when they said to me, Let vs
goe vp to the house of the Lord:
               2. Our foote shall stand in thy gates, O Ierusalem.
               3. Ierusalem is builded as a citie, that is
compact together in it selfe.
               4. Whether the tribes goe vp, the tribes of
the Lord, to the testimonie of Israel, to
praise the name of the Lord.
               5. For there are thrones for iudgement, the
thrones of the house of Dauid.
               6. Pray for the peace of Ierusalem, let them

prosper that loue thee:
               7. Peace be within thy walles, and prosperitie
within thy palaces.
               8. For my brethren and companions sake I
will wish thee now prosperitie:
               9. Because of the house of the Lord our
God, I will procure thy wealth.
            
            
               THis Psalme, wherein the
kingly Prophet Dauid expresseth
his great ioy for
Gods singular mercies to
his Church, consisteth of
two parts: the first containeth
a congratulation with the Church
of God, and a ioyfull declaration of his
gladsome heart, v. 1. with the causes thereof
first generally propounded, v. 2. then
particularly prooued: which are, 1. the
great vnitie and concord of the citie, the
Iebusites beeing now expulsed. v. 3. as we
read in the storie 2. Sam. 5. 6. 2. The restauration
of Gods worship, the arke beeing
now brought to Ierusalem, v. 4. see the
whole narration thereof 2. Sam. 6. 3. The
administration of iustice established, v. 5.
which had beene much hindred by the diuision
betweene the house of Dauid and
Saul. 2. Sam. 4. 1.
            
               
The second part of the Psalme is an exhortation
to all Gods people, to pray for
the continuance of these benefits, vers. 6.
which is inforced, by setting downe the
forme of their godly praiers and desires,
v. 7. and propounding his owne example
in the performance of that dutie in his
owne person, and the reasons moouing
him thereto; the law of his countrie, v. 8.
his affection to Gods Church. v. 9.
            
               A song of degrees of Dauid.
               Before I enter to treat of this Psalme,
three things are out of this inscription of
the psalme to be considered: 1. the occasion
of making and enditing this psalme:
2. the author thereof, which is Dauid: 3.
the title it selfe, why it is called a psalme of
degrees.
               
                  The 1. meditation.
                  First, the occasion, as is partly touched
before, was threefold: 1. the vniting of the
citie of Ierusalem before infested with the
idolatrous Iebusites. 2. The restoring of
religion maimed before by the absence of
the Arke, which was twentie yeares in the
house of Abinadab. 1. Sam. 7. 2. 3. The
reconciling of the kingdome before diuided
betweene the house of Dauid & Saul:

for these so great blessings the Prophet reioyceth
before the Lord, and exhorteth
the whole church of God to reioyce with
him. We learne hereby, that like blessings,
require like thanks, & that we also should
for all Gods mercies to his Church remē
                     ber
to be thankfull.
                  1. Thus elswhere the prophet Dauid
saith: My soule praise thou the Lord, and forget
not any of his benefits, Psal. 103. 2. Yea
this is an euident marke of Gods Church
to shew themselues thankfull: The voice of
ioy and health is in the tabernacles of the
righteous, Psal. 118. 15.
                  2 This hath beene the practise of the
Church of God from time to time: Thus
Moses and the children of Israel, as soone
as they came foorth of the red sea, sung a
song of thanksgiuing vnto God. Exod. 15.
1. Dauid daunced and sprang for ioy, for
the bringing home of the Arke. 2. Sam. 6.
14. Iehosaphat and his people praised
God for the victorie ouer the Moabites
and Ammonites, in the valley of Berachah,
which was so called, because there
they blessed God. 2. Chro. 20. 27.
                  3 Our thanksgiuing vnto God is as
incense,Thanksgiuing the incense of Christians. Psal. 141. 2. that as they vsed to lay
oyle, and incense vpon their sacrifices. Levit.

2. 15. the one maketh a cheerefull
countenance, the other is gratefull to the
smell: 
                        •
                     o should all our actions be perfumed
with thanksgiuing vnto God. This
dutie of praise is compared by the people,
to a young bullocke, that hath hornes and
hoofes, Psal. 66. 31. He then that remembreth
not to giue thankes vnto God, is as
though he offered an olde and leane bullocke,
beeing faint and slouthfull to praise
God: without hornes and hoofes: such an
one shall neither haue strength to withstand
and push the spirituall aduersarie,
neither is shodde with hoofes and prepared
to beare all things patiently.
                  4 If the superstitious heathen doe encourage
themselues to praise the gods of
gold and of siluer, Dan. 5. 4. to whome no
praise is due, much more are we bound to
render praise to God, to whome it of duty
belongeth: it is all the recompence which
we pay vnto the Lord. Quid repēdam Iehouae?
What shall I pay vnto the Lord, for all
his benefits towards me, I will take the cuppe
of sauing health, and call vpon the name of the
Lord, Psal. 116. 12. Giuing of thanks then
vnto God for his benefits▪ is as our Landlords
rent; vnworthie are we to hold our
farmes, if we refuse to pay so easie a rent-charge:

our great Landlord, of whome
kings and princes hold their kingdomes,
raiseth not his rent, but onely expecteth
the old seruice of thanksgiuing, which is
the freest rent that can be.
                  5 So then, as here the Prophet Dauid
made this song or hymne for his people,
to shewe their thankefulnesse to God, for
those great blessings: we ought also, vpon
the like occasion now offered to expresse
our ioy before the Lord: Dauid vnited the
kingdome before deuided; and now God
hath raised vp vnto vs a prince, in whome
both the regiments of England and Scotland
are conioyned: great was the rent
which in time past was between these two
nations (though for these 40. yeares,The vniting of these two kingdomes. the
gospell,1. Benefit. the onely bond of peace, hath
maintained loue and amitie amongest vs)
yet pitifull is the remembrance of former
calamities: how continually these nations
did one offend another, with bloudie and
grieuous battells: Sometime the English
preuailed, as in the 21. yeare of Edward
the first,Lanquet. there were 40. thousand of the
Scots slaine in one battell: Sometime the
Scottes had the vpper hand, as in the 7.
yeare of Edward the second, in a battell
fought at Retraueling in Scotland, there

were put to the sword, and taken, 10 thousand,
or after the Scottish historie, 50.
thousand English▪ I will not make mention
of Flodden and Musleborough fields,
& other fierce battels between these nations
By this ye may consider, what a great
blessing is like to ensue vpon this ioyfull
coniunction of these kingdomes.
                  Dauid againe brought home the arke,
that a long time had soiourned abroad: &
this is our greatest comfort,2. Benefit. that contrarie
to the desire and expectation of the Papists,Continuance of religion.
God hath sent vs a Princely shepheard,
that shall still lead his people to the
greene pastures, and refresh them stil with
the waters of the word of life.
                  Dauid also expelled the Iebusites out
of Ierusalem: and there are yet some Cananites
in the land; Iesuites they are called,
but more truely Iudasites, and other of
Baals priests, with whome I trust such order
shall be taken, that they be no more as
thornes in our eies, and prickes in our
sides. Thus you see how iust cause we haue
to celebrate a song of thanksgiuing, with
the Prophet Dauid for Gods great mercies:
which shall be a meanes, when the
Lord seeth our thankfull acceptance of
these good beginnings, that the proceedings

shall be answerable: for God by our
thanksgiuing is not profited, but we are
altogether thereby benefited: as it is said in
Iob, If thou be righteous, what giuest thou
vnto him? thy righteousnesse may profit the
sonne of man. Augustine teacheth this
point well: Non laudibus nostris ille crescit,
sed nos, deus nec melior fit si lauda
                           •
                        eris, nec
deterior, si vituperaueris, &c. God increaseth
not by our praise, but we: he is not the better
for our praise,
                     Psal. 133. 
                     nor worse for our dispraise: but
we are the better if we praise him, and worse
if we praise him not.
                  
               
               
                  The 2. meditation.
                  
                     A song of Dauid:] That Church and
common-wealth is happie to whome god
giueth a Prince, such as Dauid was,
whose heart is set aright to seeke God. In
that Dauid was occupied in godly meditations,
and did exercise himselfe to endite
holy songs and sonnets, to the praise of
God and comfort of his church; Princes
are taught to be deuoted to the worship
of God, and subiects doe learne to pray to
God to send them▪ Kings and gouernours
such as Dauid was, after Gods owne
heart.
                  
                     
1. Thus the prophet Esay, speaking
of the last times, saith, that kings shall be
nourcing fathers, and Queenes nourcing
mothers of his Church, Isay, 49. 23.
                  2. Such was Salomon, that praied himselfe
in the audience of the people, with
his hands stretched out vnto God at the
dedication of the temple, 1. King, 8. The
same wise and vertuous Prince did write
those heauenly bookes of the Prouerbes,
Ecclesiastes, the Canticles; & giueth himselfe
the name of a preacher, Eccles. 1. 1.
Such an one was Iosias, that himselfe read
in the eares of the people the bookes of
gods couenant. 2. King. 23. 2.
                  3. For praiers should be as the he
goates before the flocke. Ierem. 5. 8. to goe
before the rest by their good example;
whose godly lawes and wholesome precepts
are as the raine that commeth vpon the
mowen grasse, Psal. 72. 6. So they make religion
and vertue to increase and flourish.
                  4. Hereunto Princes should be mooued,
considering whose place and office
they beare in earth: that as they are called
Gods, Psal. 82. 1. so they should seeke to set
forth gods glorie: for they are called gods,
as our Sauiour expoundeth it, because to
them the word of God is giuen: Iohn 10. 35.

The cheife charge and care of preseruing
the worde of God is committed to them.
Philip an heathen king could say, that a
Prince must remember,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     that he had obtained
a diuine power, that he should command
diuine things.
                  
                  Beside great is the reward of godly and
vertuous Princes, who by their good example
drawe others vnto God: They that
turne many to righteousnesse, shall shine as the
starres for euer and euer, Dan. 12. 3.
                  5. Wherefore, as this consideration
should stirre vs vp to giue great thankes
vnto God,3. Benefit, when God sendeth a learned and ver
                        
                           •
                        uous prince. that hath in his mercie sent vs a
Prince, not onely wise and learned, but
sound in religion, and deuout in affection,
as appeareth by his Maiesties books, such
as we found not the like written by any
king of this nation before. So let vs not be
slacke to commend his Maiestie in our
continuall praiers vnto God, that the lord
would direct him by his spirit, and guide
him in his feare, and strengthen him to
holde out to the end, that godly course
which he is entred into.
                  And further the people of God are
taught, that where the Lord hath vouchsafed
so great a blessing, then the which in
this world there can be no greater, to send

his Church a Nursing father, and the Cō
                     monwealth
a prudent and vertuous gouernour,
they should endeauour for their
parts, in pietie to God, and obedience to
their prince, and in all Christian duties to
be answerable. It is a monstrous thing, that
there should be a good prince, and a bad
people, a sound head, and a diseased bodie.
The subiect should not by his vntowardnes
grieue the heart of a good prince;
but shew himselfe so conformable to all
acts of pietie, that the vertuous gouernour
may reioyce in the obedience and deuotion
of his people; that in the ende he may
yeeld vp himselfe and his people with
comfort vnto God, and say with the prophet,
Behold here am I, and the children
which thou hast giuen me. Isa. 8. 18. For as
Ambrose saith of good children, so it is
true of good subiects: Stipendia militiae suae
sunt, vernet in dei laudem terra quia colitur,
mundus, quia agnoscitur, ecclesia, quia devotae
plebis numerus a
                           •
                        getur. They are as the hire
or reward of the princes warfare: let the earth
sprout forth to Gods praise, because it is tilled,
the world, because it is inhabited, the Church
because it is with deuout children filled and
replenished.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The 3. meditation.
                  
                     Of degrees] There are thus intituled 15.
psalmes, that are here set together: which
are next this so called, as though the Leuits
were appointed to sing them vpon the
degrees and staires of the temple,Thus seeme the Septuagint to thinke, translating 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         degrees, or ascending places. for as yet
in Dauids time, the temple was not built,
nor the plot thereof drawne, or the forme
and patterne set forth: neither is it to be
referred to the rising of the tune, wherewith
those psalmes were sung in the temple:
for other psalmes beside these were
tuned sometime with the falling, sometime
with the rising of the voice:Why they are called psalmes of degrees. some in an
high tune were sounded forth, which was
called Atamoth, 1. Chron. 15. 20. some in
the eight or base tune, as psal. 6. and 12.
which was called Sheminith, 1. Chron. 15.
21. This title then, if it depended of the
tune, could not be proper to these psalms.
Wherefore psalmes of degrees signifie nothing
els, but excellent songs, of an higher
degree, and more principall vse: for so the
word magualah is sometime taken; as, 1.
Chron. 17. 17. Dauid saith, Thou hast regarded
me according to the estate of a man of
high degree, O Lord.
                  
                  From hence then it may be gathered,

that although the word of God in it selfe is
of the same excellencie, as proceeding frō
one and the same author, yet in respect of
our vse, and mens seuerall necessities, some
part of the Scripture may be saide to be
more excellent, then an other.
                  1. For whereas the scripture is profitable
to fowre speciall vses,The scripture
                           •
                         whereunto profitable. to teach, to improoue,
to correct, and instruct in righteousnes,
as the Apostle sheweth, 2. Tim. 3.
16. which fowre properties are answerable
to those fowre set downe by the prophet
Dauid; to giue light to the eyes, wisdome
to the simple, to conuert the soule, and reioyce
the heart, psal. 19. 7, 8. The light is to know
the truth, wisdome to discouer and improoue
errour; conuersion, to turne the
heart and correct vice; the reioycing is to
take delight and to be instructed and goe
forward in well doing. Now euery man
hath not neede alike of all these: some man
had more neede of knowledge to be instructed,
other of conscience to be conuerted:
one hath greater cause to be reformed
of errour, & other to be reclaimed
from vice.How one scripture is said to be more excellent then another. Therefore in respect of mens
diuerse and particular occasions, the scriptures
are diuersly to be applied, and accordingly
to be singled out.
                  
                     
2. It was not then by chance, that our
Sauiour Christ opening the booke in the
synagogue at Nazareth vpon the sabboth
day, did light vpon that place of the prophet
Isai, Luk. 4. 8. or that Eunuch was directed
to read vpon that prophecie, Act.
8. But this prophet, as most directly foreshewing
Christ, was sorted out, as fittest to
instruct them, that yet did not beleeue on
Christ. The same reason mooued Ambrose
to commend vnto Augustine,August. epist. 3. ad 
                           〈◊〉
                        . as yet
but a newe conuert, the reading of this
prophet.
                  3. For like as though all meates be
wholsom in their kind, yet are they not fit
for euery stomacke; but a man of discretion
will haue a care of his diet: & sitting at
a great mans table (where is varietie of dishes)
will consider diligently what is set
before him, Prou. 23. 1. The like iudgement
should euery one bring to the reading
of Scripture: as in an Apothecaries
shop, though euery drug haue his vse, yet
are they not to be ministred for euery disease:
so the word of God must be applied
according to the diuers maladies of the
soule.
                  4. The reason why the Lord hath thus
tempered the Scriptures, the Apostle

sheweth: That the man of God may be absolute,
beeing made perfect to euery good worke,
2. Timoth. 3. 17. That from the rich treasure
of Gods word we may draw for euery
occasion: as the wise Scribe taught vnto
Gods kingdome, is as a wise housholder,
that hath in his store-house both newe &
old, Math. 13. 52. both old experience of
Gods mercies to comfort him; I remembred
thy iudgements of olde and receiued cō
                        fort,
Psal. 119. 52. and newe examples of
Gods iustice to humble him, as the Prophet
againe saith: Feare is come vpon me for
the wicked that forsake thy law, Psal. 119.
53. In the scriptures, there is milke for
babes, and strong meate for the riper age:
there is instruction for the simple, & meditation
for the deeper wit. Augustine saith
well, Pascimur apertis, exercemur obscuris,
ibi fames, hic fastidium tollitur: We are nourished
with the easier, and exercised by the
harder places of scripture: there are we kept
from famishing, here from loathing.
                  
                  5. Let euery man then learne, when he
readeth or heareth the worde, to sort out
that, which is most for his vse: to lay vp
places of comfort against the day of affliction:
if he feele his heart to be dull, to
quicken it with the sense of Gods iudgements.

Thus the Prophet Dauid teacheth
vs to single out scripture, where he giueth
this note (Selah) in diuerse places of the
psalmes: as thrice in the 3. psalme, v. 2. 4. 8.
which is a marke of attention, whereby he
would haue those sentences so marked, especially
regarded. And in the same sense
are these called excellent psalmes, because
of their excellent matter, and necessarie
vse.
                  Whole men neglect this course, not
knowing their owne necessities, neither set
apart the spirituall food of the word, but
take it as in a whole lumpe:The particular application of Scripture. they misse of
the right vse of scripture, and defraud their
owne soules. Ye shall haue some, that had
neede to be humbled, and as yet know not
themselues, dwelling and delighting in
their sinnes, and yet forsooth, these men
cannot endure the law, euery thing hath
an harsh sound in their eare, that rellisheth
not of the sweete com
                        •
                     orts of the gospel.
Like as it is not good to eate too
much honie. Prou. 25. 16. so neither is it
fit for such alwaies to tast of the sweetnes
of Gods promises. And as Augustine saith
well of Iudas,De Ecclesiast. dogmatio. c. 56. 
                     mustum sancti spiritus potare
non potui
                           •
                        , quo accepto continuo crepuit: he
could not drinke the sweete liquour of the spirit,

but after he had receiued it, he burst: So
impenitent persons, and such as are hardened
in their sinnes, when they heare of nothing
but peace, peace, are thereby made
more incurable: and their wounds are not
purged, but putrified. It is fit therefore for
euery man, as his disease is, so to applie the
medecine.
               
               
                  The 4. meditation.
                  v. 1. I reioyced, when they said vnto me.
Let vs goe vp into the house of the Lord.]
This princely prophet reioyceth in the
publike and peaceable exercise of religion,The ioy of christian assembli
                           ••
                        .
that the people of God had now free
recourse vnto the house of God. And indeede,
this is a benefit wherein all Christian
people are much to ioy, that they are
not exiled from Gods house, but may
chearefully and quietly thither assemble.
                  1. So saith the prophet Dauid, Blessed
are they, that dwell in thy house, they will euer
praise thee, Psal. 84. 4. Therefore our Sauiour
noteth this, as a fearefull signe of future
miseries, when they shall see the abomination
of desolation standing in the holy place:
then let them that be in Iudea flie vnto the
mountaines, Math. 24. 15. When the holy

place of Gods worship beginneth to be
desolate and forsaken, what comfort can
elswhere be expected?
                  2. Therefore Dauid desireth this as
first and principall aboue all other, that he
might dwell in Gods tabernacle all the
daies of his life, Psal. 27. 4. And he professeth,
that he had rather be one day in Gods
courts, then a thousand els where, Psal. 84.
10. And he powreth out his heart for
griefe, when he remembred how he had
gone vp with the people to Gods house, as
a multitude keeping a feast, Psal. 42. 4. but
now was tossed from place to place, and
banished from that place of ioy and comfort.
                  3. The people of God flocking togither
to Gods house, are resembled to
doues, that flie in at their windowes, Isa.
60. 8. & as birds, that flicker to their nests,
Psal. 84. 3. So euen as the sparrowes and
swallowes beeing chased, doe resort vnto
their nests; so the house of God is a place
of rest to a troubled soule. And as in the
poole of Bethesda, the lame and diseased,
when the waters were stirred by the angel,
found remedie for their disease: so in Gods
house the waters of life doe issue forth to
the health of all, that thirst after them.
                  
                     
4. Great cause then haue the people of
God to frequent the Lords Sanctuarie:
because the Lord sitteth betweene the
Cherubins, Psal. 99. 1. Gods way is in the
Sanctuarie, Psal. 77. 13. Gods power and
beautie are in his Sanctuarie, Psal. 96. 6.
who then would not desire to enioy God
                        •
                     
presence; to behold the beautie of his face;
to see the Lord in his word; to tast him in
the sacraments, to feele him by the operation
of his spirit, to talke with him by
praier?
                  5. Wherefore we all this day are much
bound to giue thankes to God, that in his
mercie still graunteth vs to haue free accesse
to his temple.4. Benefit, fre
                           •
                         accesie to God
                           •
                         house. This gratious entercourse
of religion, we had iust cause in respect
of our sinnes to feare, least it might
haue beene stopped: but God hath giuen
vnto his gospel in this land an open doore
againe, which should haue beene for euer
shut vp vnto vs, if the Popes curses, and
Papists wishes, and Iebusites practises
could haue preuailed. How good yet and
louing is God to Israel? in many countries
to this day Gods house is desolate, and his
true worship abolished: they which feare
God are driuen to heare the word in corners,
in woodes and solitarie places: O

therefore let vs reioyce in England, that
we may safely goe vp to Gods house.
Some, while they haue beene seruing
God in his house, haue beene robbed and
spoiled at home: some in the Church haue
beene put to the sword, the house hath
beene fired ouer their heads; their blood
shed in the sanctuarie, as the Galileans
blood was mingled with their sacrifice,
Luk. 13. 1. Thus we read that 20. thousand
Christians in Nicomedia were burnt,Euseb. l. 8. c. 6. beeing
all assembled in the Church to celebrate
the natiuitie of Christ, vnder the cruel
persecution of Dioclesian: Thus cruell
Miniers,Fox p. 952. col. 
                           •
                        . commaunded his captaine Iohn
de Gaxe, to put diuers of the Merindoliās
to the sword, which were gathered togither
in the Church: Hierome also maketh
mention in his time,Hiero ad Gerontia
                           •
                        . how that at Ments in
Germanie, the cittie beeing taken, diuers
thousands were slaine in the Church.
Thankes be to God wee neither feele, nor
see any of these euils. Wherefore my brethren,
let vs loue Gods house, and make
much of this blessing, while we may: let no
man contemne or neglect the holy assemblies;
let not any worldly businesse drawe
vs from the house of praier, let not vaine
pleasure hinder vs. How many are there,

that of purpose put off their iourneys to
the Lords day, thinking the time gained,
that is spared from the exercises of religion?
How many, that sit quaffing and tipling,
trifling and toying, when they should
present themselues before God? Let these
things be nowe amended, and let vs begin
to reioyce, that the Gospel hath yet a free
passage among vs; and lay we vp in our
store-house plentie of spirituall instruction
against the euill day: The wise man
sendeth vs to the Pismire, Goe to the Ant
thou sluggard, behold her waies and be wise,
Prou. 6. 4. which similitude Augustine
doeth very fitly thus explicate: Vide formicam
Dei, surgit quotidie, currit ad Ecclesiam
Dei, audit lectionem, recondit intus grana
electa de horreo.
                     in Psal. 66. 
                     Behold Gods Ant, he riseth
daily, goeth to Church, heareth the word, laieth
vp the cheifest cornes, &c. The time of
winter commeth, some euill or crosse befalleth
him, modo intus formica comedit labores aestat
is; now he doth within to himselfe enioy the
gatherings of summer. Let vs in like sort
learne wisdome of the Ant, nowe while
we may, to lay vp store of spirituall foode
in the granaries of our hearts, that we may
be prouided against the time of dearth &
famine come.
               
               
                  
                  The 5. meditation.
                  
                     Let vs goe, or, we will goe into the house of
the Lord.] The people did encourage one
another to goe vp to Gods house: whereby
we are taught, that it is euery mans
part, to helpe forward his brother, and to
stirre him vp vnto the exercise of godlinesse.
                  1. Thus Isay prophesied of the last
times: Many people shall say, come, and let vs
goe vp to the mountaine of the Lord, Isay, 5. 3.
Saint Paul also mooueth the brethren one
to comfort another, 
                        •
                     . Thess. 4. 18. One to
exhort and edifie another, 1. Thess. 5. 11.
Neither yet, where Ieremie saith: in those
daies, they shall teach no more euery man his
neighbour, and euery man his brother, saying,
know the Lord, Ierem. 31. 34. is this prophet
contrarie to Esay: but this saying
must be vnderstood comparatiuely; that
in regard of the aboundance of knoweledge
vnder Christ, there shall not be such
neede of mutuall instruction, as was before
vnder the lawe.
                  2. Thus Iacob encouraged his seruāts
and whole familie, Clense your selues and
change your garments, we will rise vp and goe
to Bethel, and I will make an altar there vnto

God, Gen. 35. 2, 3. The shepheards vnto
whome the angels declared the glad tidings
of the birth of Christ, said one to another:
Let vs goe vnto Bethlem, and see this
thing that is come to passe, Luk. 2. 15. Thus
Andrew brought Peter, and Philip Nathaniel
vnto Christ, Ioh. 1. 41. 45.
                  3. Like as then, two are better then one,
(as the Preacher saith) if they fall one will
lift vp the other, &c. If two sleepe togither,
they shall haue heate, Eccles. 4. 10. 15. So by
the fellowship of brethren, and their mutuall
exhortations, zeale is increased, and
spirituall strength augmented. And as in
the bodie one member helpeth another,
and doe communicate their offices; so
should we, beeing one bodie in Christ,
seeke and procure the good one of another.
                  4. See we not the wicked howe they
one prouoke another to mischeife, and
entise vnto euill? Come, we will lay waite for
blood, &c. cast in thy lot among vs, we will
haue all one purse, Prou. 1. 11, 14. They do
claspe togither as briers, Mich. 7. 4. Much
more should Christians one stirre vp and
prouoke another to goodnesse.
                  
                     For this is the propertie of charitie, it
seeketh not her owne things, 1. Cor. 13. 1.

                     it desireth to impart, what gift soeuer it
hath, to the good of many: as Bernard well
noteth, vpon the 134. Psalme: It is like to
the pretious ointment vpon the head, that runneth
downe vpon the beard, euen vpon Aarōs
beard, which went downe vpon the border of
his garments: Non remaneat in barba Aaron
tota vnctio salutaris;Serm. 14. in Cantic. capiat sane prima, non
sola, refundat & inferioribus membris, quod
accepit ipsa desuper. Let not the wholesome
annointing stay in Aarons beard, let it receiue
it first, but not alone, but shed forth to the mē
                     bers
belowe, which it hath receiued from aboue.
                  5. By this doctrine then, the great negligence
of people is reprooued, which suffer
euery one to walke his owne way: no
man exhorteth, admonisheth one another:
but like as, if thou shouldst see thy brother
readie to fall into a pit, which he was not
ware of, and forbearest to tell him, thou
art accessarie to his danger: so saith Augustine,
Praecipitat se quis in vitia sua, praedicat
apud te malefacta sua, tu nosti mala esse &
laudas, &c. Thou seest a man to run headlong
vnto sinne,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Psal. 49. 
                     he vaunteth of his wickednesse before
thee, thou knowest he doeth euill, and yet
doest not tell him: thou art guiltie of his perishing.
The time was, while Poperie raigned,

that Christians could not meete to
conferre togither, one to exhort and admonish
another without danger of their
liues: as Iames Brewster, for hearing one
Sweeting to read māy good things out of
a booke: and because the said Sweeting,
when Iames had said, The sonne of the liuing
God helpe vs,Fox p. 818. anno 1511. answered, Now almightie
God so doe, were both condemned
and burnt in Smithfield.
                  
                     Ioannes de Cadurco, for bringing forth
this sentence at a feast,Fox p. 897. Christ raigne in our
hearts, and prosecuting it by Scriptures,
was burned. ann. 1533.
                  Thomas Saupaulinus, because he rebuked
one for swearing,Fox p. 904. was suspected for
a Lutherane, and burned at Paris. ann.
1551.
                  This was the miserable thrall of Christs
Church in those blind sottish daies; but
now blessed be God, these 45. yeares it
hath beene lawefull for Christians to vse
godly conference,The 5. benefit, godly conferēc
                           •
                        
                      and mutuall exhortation,
and I trust this libertie shall contiuue
still twice so many yeares, and I hope to
the worlds ende. This benefit if it be not
cheerefully vsed, it shall be the peoples
fault, not want of Christian freedome and
libertie therein. But it is no great maruell,

that the common people neglect this mutuall
dutie, seeing they which haue charge
ouer others, as fathers ouer children, masters
ouer seruants, do faile in this behalfe;
the most part of these, leauing those whōe
they are charged with to their owne election,
and sway of their simple wit: Let
these also knowe, that God will require
their blood, which perish by their negligence,
at their hands. Let them remember
how seuerely Elie, otherwise a good man,
was punished in himselfe and his posteritie,
for his remisnesse toward his children,
1. Sam. 2. And so I conclude this place,
with that golden sentence of Augustine:
Adduc eos ad domum dei tecum▪
                     
                     Epist. 70. 
                     qui sunt in
domo tua t
                           •
                        cum, mater ecclesia aliquos à te
petit, aliquos repetit, petit eos, quos apud te invenit,
repetit eos, quos per te perdidit, acquirat
solers quos non habuit, non plāgat, quos habuit:
Bring those vnto Gods house with thee,
which thou hast in thine owne house with
thee: the mother Church doeth craue some of
thee, other shee doth challenge: shee craueth
those which shee findeth with thee, shee challengeth
those which shee hath lost by thee: let
her get what shee had not, not grieue for that
shee had. Wherefore masters, fathers, and
gouernours should rather seeke by their

godly care to winne those vnto God, that
belong vnto them, then pull them by their
negligence from God, for whome they
are accomptable.
               
               
                  The 6. meditation.
                  
                     The house of Iehovah] This is a great
honour, which the Lord vouchsafeth vnto
such places, as are dedicated to his worship,
that they are the Lords houses and
dwelling places: that though heauen and
earth cannot containe that infinite maiestie,
yet he is present among the faithfull
assembled together in his house.
                  1. Thus the Lord saith by his Prophet,
Heauen is my seate, earth is my footestoole:
where is that house that ye will build for me?
To whome will I looke, to him that is poore
and of a contrite heart, and trembleth at my
words, Isa. 66. 1, 2. So our Sauiour Christ
promiseth, Wheresoeuer two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst among them, Math. 18. 20.
                  2. Iacob hereof had experience, when
in his dreame he saw that comfortable vision
of the ladder, and awaking called it
Gods house, and the gate of heauen, Gen.
28. 17. Salomon by his holy praier at the

dedication of the temple, obtained that
God would be there present, and heare
the supplications of the people that should
pray in that place. 2. King. 8. 30.
                  3. Like as then the curtaines of the
Temple was pictured with Cherubs faces,
Exod. 36. 8. so are the Angels of God
present as ministring spirits for the Elect
sake, when the people of God are assembled
in praier: and as the tabernacle of Moses
was shadowed with a cloud, an euident
signe of Gods presence, Num. 9. 22.
so the Lord doeth ouershadowe by the
worke of his spirit the hearts of the faithfull
assembled in his house to heare his
word.
                  4. God therefore is present in his
house because of his promise: for there
the Lord will be seene, as Abraham said;
In the mountaine will God be seene, Gen. 22.
14. so will the Lord shew himselfe in his
sanctuarie, promising there to heare the
praiers of his people. And againe, where
els should the Lord be thought to be present,
then where he bestoweth his gifts: as
it is saide in the parable of the prodigall
child; In my fathers house is bread enough,
luk. 15. Therefore because the store of this
spirituall bread, which is the word of God

preached, is dealt in the Church assemblies,
that there is surely our fathers house.
                  5. First, here all superstitious persons
must be met withall,Holines not 
                           〈◊〉
                         be ascribed to the place it s
                           •
                        lfe▪
                      which tie Gods presence
to the walls & stones of the church,
as though it were in it selfe a more holy
place: such were the Israelites, that thought
the very presence of the Arke would deliuer
them from the Philistims, when as
God was not present, whome they had
chased away with their sinnes, 1. Sam 4.
And they had nothing in their mouth, but
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, Ierem. 7. 4. foolishly imagining, that
what sinnes so euer they had committed,
if they did but once come within the walls
of the temple they were deliuered, Ier. 7.
10. Such is the superstition which the Papists
haue of their hallowed Churches,
ascribing great vertue to the place it selfe:
whereas the Lord for his worship maketh
no difference of places, but euery where
he is accepted, which worshippeth in spirit
and truth, Ioh. 4. 23, 24. Churches indeede
are holy places, but not in respect
of any inherent holines, but because of the
holy vse, namely the holy praiers and exercises
of holy assemblies: which point is
very well touched by Bernard, Habent

sanctitatem, sed propter corpora vestra, &c.
Your Churches are holy because of your bodies,
                     De d
                           •
                        dicat. eccles. serm. 1.
                     as your soules are holy because of the spirit
that dwelleth in you, your bodies holy because
of your soules, so this house is holy because
of your bodies.
                  
                  Secondly, all profanation of Gods
house is forbidden,Houses of praier not to be profaned▪
                      or turning of it to any
secular vses. Our Sauiour would not suffer
them to carrie a vessell through the
Temple, nor to buie and sell, but ouerthrew
the tables of the money changers,
Math. 11. 15, 16. Hereof it is that diuerse
abuses of places consecrate to religious
vses, haue beene by diuers wholesome Canons
restrained: that law-daies should not
be kept in Churches, Concil. Aretalens. sub.
Carol. c. 22. that feasts be not made there,
Trullan. c. 74. that no man bring in beasts,
or cattell, ibid. c. 88. that no dancing there
be vsed, songs, or enterludes, Bracarens. 3.
c. 2. All which, and such like corrupt vsages,
are great profanations of Gods house,
which is appointed for praier, and other
holy exercises.
                  Thirdly, if the Church be Gods house,
it ought euen in respect of outward comelines
and decencie, to be reuerently kept.
Men should not be curious in adorning

their owne houses, and dissolute in maintaining
the house of God. This was the
reproofe of the Israelites in Haggai his
time, because they themselues dwelled in
sieled houses, and suffered the temple to
lie wast, Hagg. 1. 4. And verily where people
are slouthfull in this busines to beautifie
and repaire the publike places of religion,
it sheweth that they much regard
not the exercises of that holy habitation.
                  Lastly, as it is Gods house, so we should
come reuerently to it, as into Gods presence;
as Iacob resolueth himselfe: How
f
                           •
                        arefull is this place? this is none other but
Gods house, Gen. 28. 17. Gods palace is
much vnlike Ahashuerosh court: Mordecai
could not enter there, because he
was cloathed with sackcloath, a mourning
garment, Esth. 4. 2. but he is soonest admitted
into Gods court, that commeth
with true sorrow and contrition. Men vse
to come trembling vnto the princes Maiestie,
and with reuerence enter into the
court: Gods house in like manner is his
pallace:Arelatens. sub Carol. c. 22. and therfore in time past we shall
finde, that the Church was called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
a basilike or princes house.Laodican. 28. It is the mansion
of the great King, and therefore we
should not come with secure hearts, and

profane affections, as the manner of some
is, but with reuerence and feare, as into the
presence of the highest Maiestie. And
herein we haue the exāple of our princely
Ecclesiastes, that both in practise and precept
goeth before vs in this dutie of reuerence
toward God, thus moouing & aduising
his princely sonne:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     But in your praier
to God speake with all reuerence: for if a
subiect will not speake but reuerently to a
king, much lesse should any flesh presume to
talke with God as a companion. Howe much
are we bound vnto God, that in his mercy
hath sent vs a king truely touched with the
deuout sense of religion?The 6. benefit, the example of a godly king. who, what he
prescribeth to others, doeth first practise
in his royall person, and as the Prophet
saith, is as an he-goate before the flocke, Iere.
50. 8. that is, most forward of the rest. To
conclude this place, Bernard well saith:
Terribilis plane locus quem fideles viri inhabitant,
quem angeli sancti frequentant, quem
sua quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         praesentia dominus ipse dignatur,
worthie of all reuerence, which faithfull men
inhabite, angels frequent, where God himselfe
is present. The presence of Christs
Church requireth reuerence, but of angels
more, of God himselfe most of all.
               
               
                  
                  The 7. meditation.
                  v. 2. Our feete shall stand in thy gates.]
That is, whereas the Arke before was flitting
from one place to another, not onely
in the wildernes vnder Moses, where the
Arke was remooued, as the campe pitched
their tents; but afterwarde also it often
changed place:1. Sam. 5. v. 1. 8. 10. from Shiloh to Ebenezer,
from Ebenezer to Ashdod,1. Sam. 6. 14. from thence
to Gath,1. Sam 7. 1. from Gath to Ekron,2. Sam. 6▪ 10. and 12. frō thence
to the house of Obed
                        •
                     Edom, and so to Ierusalem:
now the Church of God reioyceth
that the Arke was setled and brought
to his resting place. This then is the ioy of
the Church when religion is setled and established,
and brought to perfection:
when the people are resolued in their conscience
of the truth, and stand confidently
with their feete in Gods house.
                  1. Thus the Lord promised concerning
Sion: The Lord hath chosen Sion, and loued
to dwell in it: this is my rest for euer, here will
I dwell, for I haue a delight therein, Psal.
132. 13. Now in Dauids time, and not before,
the place was elected and appointed,
where the solemne exercise of religion
should be practised.
                  2. Thus Salomon builded God an

house, whereas he dwelt in tents before,
that the Arke should be no more transported
out of his place: and herein Salomon
was a figure of Christ, in whome the promises
of God are Yea, and Amen, 2. Cor.
1. 20. Who hath giuen vs an euerlasting testament,
a kingdome, which cannot be shaken.
Hebr. 12. 28. who is the true Messiah, neither
are we to looke for any other. Math.
11. 3.
                  3. Like as then when Samuel went to
annoint Dauid,The fi
                           •
                        th of Ch
                           •
                        ist not flitting or changeable. first Eliab, then Abinadab,
then Shammah, and the rest of the
brethren came in order before Samuel,
but none of them was chosen: at the last
Dauid was sent for, and he was the man,
1. Sam. 16. So after many prophets, and
many professions in the world, at the
length commeth Christ, and he is annointed
king for euer. And as when Elias was
in the caue, a mightie winde was sent of
God,1. King. 19. then an earthquake, then a fire, but
God was in none of them: but at the last
he spake in a soft and still voice: So Christ
came not, though many signes and wonders
went before, till he himselfe spake
with a soft and still voice in the forme and
shape of a man.
                  4. For the Apostle saith, Iesus Christ

yesterday and to day, and the same for euer,
Heb. 13. 8. therefore as Christ is alwaies
the same, so the faith and religion of
Christ is constant and immutable. And as
the Apostle inferreth hereupon in the
same place, Be not carried about with diuers
and strange doctrines, v. 9. so should we be
resolued and setled in religion.
                  5. Wherefore, euery man may consider,
how much bound we are to praise
God, which hath in his mercie raised vs
vp a Dauid after Samuel, to bring home
the arke of God, and to establish and settle
religion,The 7. benefit the setling of religion. which was feared of many, and
wished of some, to be flitting at the next
change. The Pope and his adherents
would draw the English people, as Ieroboam
called the Israelites to Dan and Bethel,
to the Romane religion: but I trust
our feete shall stand still at home in the
gates of Ierusalem. Let men therefore be
constant in faith, not be carried away with
euery wind of doctrine, as the Apostle saith,
Eph. 4. 14. nor halt betweene two opinions,
as some, like Ianus bifrons, looking
both waies, haue of late in the Church of
England, set a foot some popish doctrines,
mingling the sweete lumpe of the gospel,
with sowre leauen of their owne. Such

teachers I trust will hereafter be better aduised,
and fill their hands with better seede,
that no more cockle and darnell be scattered
in good ground. God graunt a generall
consent in iudgement and concord in
heart, both in teachers and hearers, that
we may goe vp together to Gods house,
and that our feete may stand stedfastly in
Ierusalem: that as Ambrose well alludeth,
Sicut rotam intra rotam vidit propheta currentem;
                     Lib 1. de spirit. cap. 2
                           •
                        .
                     ita teres vita sanctorum est, & ita sibi
concinens, vt superioribus posteriora respondeant:
as the Prophet saw one wheele runne
within another, so the life of the Saints
should be round and currant, and so consorted
together, as one part may answer to
another.
               
               
                  The 8. meditation.
                  
                     In thy gates O Ierusalem.] This citie
God made especiall choise of: as it is in the
pslame, God loueth the gates of Sion aboue
all the habitations of Iacob, psal. 87. 2. It was
called the citie of God, v. 3. the citie of the
great king. math. 5. 35. the holy citie, mat.
4. 5. there Abraham was bid to sacrifice
his sonne, Gen. 22. of this citie was Melchisedeck
founder, and king. Gen. 14. yet
notwithstanding all these priuiledges, this
citie was often for their sinnes besieged, by

Pharao Necho, 2. king. 22. 23. by Nabuchadnezzer,
2. king. 24. 11. destroied by
the king of Babylon, 2. king. 25. and at the
last vtterly ruinated and made desolate by
the Romanes. Whereby we learne, that
there is no citie or countrie, though indued
with neuer so great priuiledges, but if
they continue in sinne, may be in Gods
iustice cast off.
                  1. The Prophet saith, He turneth a
fruitfull land into barrennes for the wickednes
of the people,
                     Ruine of cities for sinne. 
                     that dwel therein, Psal. 107.
34. God is able both to change cities and
countries, to bring them to perpetuall ruine
and desolation, because of the sinnes of
the inhabitants.
                  2. Thus the Lord dealt with Samaria,
2. king. 21. 13. and with Shiloh, where
three hundred yeares the arke of God rested:
Goe vnto my place, which was at Shiloh
where I set my name at the beginning, and behold
what I did vnto it, for the wickednes of
my people Israel, Ier. 7. 12. What is become
now of Babylon the chiefe citie of the
Chaldeans, of Niniue of the Assyrians, of
Reuatane the great citie of the Medes, Susis
of the Persians? there is no monument
of them left,Epist. 91. but as Seneca saith, Ipsa fundamenta
consumpta sunt, nec quicquam extat,

quo appareat illas saltem fuisse: the very foundations
are worne out, and it doth not appeare
that there were any such cities.
                  
                  3. As God hath dealt with these citties,
so he can offer the same occasion to
others: I will stretch ouer Ierusalem the line
of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of
Achab, and I will wipe Ierusalem, as a man
wipeth a dish, which he wipeth, and turneth it
vpside downe, 2. King. 21. 13. It is no whitte
harder for God to bring destruction vpon
citties, then for the mason to lift vp his
line and plummet ouer his worke, or then
it is to wipe a dish when it is foule.
                  4. The cause why the Lord iudgeth
countries and citties is expressed in the
case of Israel; because they sinned against the
Lord their God, &c. and walked according to
the fashion of the heathen, &c. and had made
them images, &c. therefore the Lord, was exceeding
wroth with Israel, and put them out
of his sight, 2. King. 7. 8, 10, 18. The like
sinnes in any cittie neuer so famous or
honourable in the world, must needs procure
the same iudgements.
                  5. First in that Ierusalem that famous
citie is now forsaken of her inhabitants, &
made an habitation of deuils, of pagans &
infidels, we learne, that Gods church and

the true religion is not limited to any certaine
place: and seeing God hath shewed
such indignation toward that countrie &
nation, which put Christ to death, what
reason had the Romane bishops in time
past, to incite Christian Princes to mooue
such deadly warres for the recouerie of the
holy land, as they called it? After God had
polluted his owne cittie and temple, and
Christ neglected the very place of his
birth for the sinnes of the people,Of the wars for recouering the holy land so superstitiously called. what
cause had Christians so superstitiously to
be addicted to that place, which was reiected
of God? Their ouersight herein well
appeared by the euent, for we shall not
read of any warres that continued longer,
with greater bloodshed, and lesse happie
successe, then these maintained by Christians
against the Saracens for the possession
of the holy land. Hereupon Princes
lead with a superstitious conceite, take vpon
them the crosse, to goe fight for Hierusalem,
as Henrie the 2. Richard the 1.
king Iohn, with diuerse other, who
thought simply as Naaman, that no earth
was so holy as that about Iordan, 2. King.
5. 17. But our Sauiour hath giuen vs a rule
for this: The houre commeth, when ye shall
neither in this mountaine, nor at Ierusalem

worship the father, Iohn. 4. 23. The true
worship of God is not tied to Ierusalem,
as Hierome wel expoundeth those words
of the Psalme; God loueth the gates of Sion
more then all the habitations of Iacob. Nunquid
istas portas diligit Deus,
                     Deterr. promis
                           •
                        . 
                     quas videmus in
cineres & favillas conuersas? &c. Doe you
thinke that God loued these gates, which are
turned to dust and ashes? no man is so foolish
to thinke so, &c. And againe he saith, Ne
quicquam fidei tuae deesse putes,
                     Ad Paulin. 
                     quia Hierosolymam
non vidisti, &c. Thinke not any thing
therefore wanting to your faith, because you
haue not seene Ierusalem, nor vs therefore
better, because we haue there our habitation.
                  
                  Secondly, the like fantasie the Papists
haue of Rome, which the Iewes had of Ierusalem;
they imagine that Gods Church
cannot possibly faile there: as though they
euer had the like promise for Rome, as
the Iewes had for Sion▪ 
                     That God would
dwell there for euer, Psal. 132. 14. Howe
would the Papists triumph if they could
finde any such text for Rome, This is my
rest for euer? yet if they did, such promises
are but conditionall; for God no longer
bindeth himselfe not to forsake a nation,Rom
                           •
                         neuer had such promises as Hierusalem.
then while they doe not forsake him. Let
proud Rome therefore know, that seeing

shee is fallen away from the faith of Christ
by most grosse idolatrie, and other apostasies,
that shee cannot long escape vnpunished:
Ierusalem was deerer in gods sight
then euer Rome was, it was longer protected
by him, greater miracles had God
wrought for them, more holy men and
Prophets there preached, then euer Rome
had. And Hierome speaking of poore
Bethlem saith, Puto sanctior locus est rupe
Tarpeia,
                     Hier. ad Eustach. 
                     quae de caelo saepius fulminata ostendit,
quod deo displiceat: I take it to be a more
holy place, then the Tarpeian rocke at Rome,
which beeing so often smitten with lightening,
sheweth that God was angrie with it. If Bethlem
was not spared, where Christ was
borne, much lesse Rome is priuiledged,
by whose authoritie Christ died: If God
spared not the naturall branches, take heed
least he spare not thee, saith S. Paul to the
Romans. Rom. 11. 21. The Iewes then
were the true naturall branches, the Romans
strange and adopted branches: therfore
if the first were plucked off for their
rebellion, the second must not thinke to
stand in their superstition. A foolish conceit
therefore and imagination it is, that
Rome should be the mother Church, and
nurserie of all the world. Hierome well

saith: Non audeo Dei omnipotentiam angusto
fine concludere,
                     Ad Paulinum. 
                     & coarctare paruo terrae
loco, quem non capit c
                           •
                        lum. I dare not conclude
Gods omnipotencie with a smal bounds,
and to thrust him into a small roome, whome
the heauens cannot hold.
                  
                  Thirdly, this example of Ierusalē doth
admonish all cities, not to presume of their
temporall and externall happines, but to
learne thankefully to embrace the truth,
least for their vnthankfulnes they be depriued
both of the vertue, and the handmaid
thereof prosperitie. Let Ierusalem of
England the citie of London be warned
by her sister, the Iewish Ierusalem, that
shee take heede of her sinnes, that shee tast
not of her sause. Let the calamitie of other
neighbour cities admonish her: it is some
while since Lyons in Fraunce was in
one night consumed sticke and stone with
fire: whereof Seneca maketh this lamentable
mention,Epist. 92. 
                     Vna tantùm nox interfuit inter
civitatem maximam & nullam, denique
diutius tibi, illam perijsse, quàm perijt, narro.
There was but the distance of one night betweene
a great citie, and none at all, and I
haue beene longer in telling you of the destruction
thereof, then it was in destroying. Verolamium
here in England situate not farre

from S. Albons,Cambden de comit. He
                           •
                        tford. was a famous and great
citie, now not so much as the name thereof
remaineth. What great calamities befell
most famous cities in Hieroms time he
himselfe reporteth: how all France was
wasted of the Barbarians,ad Gerontiam. 
                     the city of Ments
taken, and many thousands slaine in the
Church: Ipsa Hispania iam peritura contremiscit:
Spaine trembleth, as if it were
now readie to perish. And what hath hapned
in other countries and cities round about
vs in our time, who can be ignorant?
The massacre of Paris, the desolation of
Antwerpe, the sacking of Calice, surprising
of many townes in the low countries.
All these examples should warne noble
cities and corporations of England to beware
of those sinnes, for the which the other
haue been chastised. As Hierome wel
saith, Orbis terrarum ruit, in nobis peccata
non ruant,
                     Hieron ibid. 
                     vrbs inclyta & Romani imperij
caput, vno hausta est incendio: The famous
citie and chiefe of the Romane citie at once
consumed with fire, the world falleth to ruine,
and yet within there is no ruine of our
sinnes.
                  
               
               
                  The 9. meditation.
                  
                     Ierusalem is built as a citie.] Here is expressed

one principal fruit of Dauids prosperous,
good, & peaceable gouernment,
that the city was beutified & enlarged with
many goodly houses and buildings: which
sheweth that it is not the least temporall
blessing, when a citie or nation enioyeth
peace, that they may build them houses
and plant their grounds.
                  1. Thus the Lord saith by his Prophet,
I will bring againe the captiuitie of lacobs
tents, and haue compassion on his dwelling
places, and the citie shall be builded vpon
her owne heape, and the palace shall remaine
after the manner thereof. Ierem. 30. 18. The
Lord promiseth this as a singular blessing,
that Ierusalem which was before destroied
and laide wast, should be reedified againe,
and recouer the pristine beautie.
                  2. Thus the Psalmist doth celebrate
this as a great fauour of God to Ierusalem,
that when the citie was besieged, as it
should seeme of Senacherib in the daies of
Hezekiah, the Lord so protected it, that
no part thereof was defaced: Compasse about
Sion, goe round about it, and tell the
towers thereof, marke well the wall thereof,
behold the towers, that you may tell your posteritie.
Psal. 48. 13. 14. There was not so
much as one tower, or any part of the wall

defaced. So Dauid when he had taken the
sort of Sion, he built round about it, & called
it the cittie of Dauid (to which building
this verse hath speciall relation) and
the reason thereof is giuen, Dauid prospered
and grew, for the Lord of hosts was with him.
2. Sam. 5. 9, 10.
                  3. Like as the nest is to the birds, so is a
mans house as Iob resembleth it: I shall die
in my nest, 29. 18. Euen as when the sillie
birds are suffered to build their nestes quietly,
where to lay their young; so is it with
citizens, when they safely and securely
dwel in their houses. They are as mens
bowers, wherein they solace and refresh
themselues from the heate and cold, as Ionas
reioyced in the gourd that shadowed
him from the sunne, Ion. 4. so a ioy it is
when men may sit quietly vnder their
owne bowers. Vnto this outward flourishing
in comely and decent buildings, the
Lord compareth the spirituall encreasing
of his Church: If shee be a wall, we will build
vpon her a siluer pallace, if shee be a doore, we
will keepe her in with doores of cedar.
                  
                  4. The preacher sheweth what is the
cause of this blessing,Cant. 8. 9. that a man sitteth
quietly in his owne house, and inlargeth

his dwelling place, and prospereth in his
affaires: It is of the hand of God, and Gods
gift, for a man to take pleasure in his labors.
Eccles. 2. 24. c. 5. 17.
                  5. Wherefore much is this nation of
England,The 8. benefit, enlarging of citties & buildings. and especially the goodly citties
and townes thereof to reioyce and giue
thankes to God, and the cittie of London
most of all, for this long time of peace,
whereby men doe inioy the labours of
their owne hands. We haue not built houses
for others to dwel in, nor planted vineyards,
and others eate the fruit thereof, as
the Lord threatned the Israelites, 2. Deut.
28. 30. And as other citties haue had wofull
experience: their houses haue beene
beaten downe ouer their heads, and the
goodly sumptuous buildings made lowe
with the ground. Sometime cities and famous
buildings haue beene ouerthrown
with water, as in Noahs deluge: sometime
consumed with fire, as Sodome and Gomorrha:
sometime deuoured and swallowed
vp of the earth, as the tents & houses
of Cote, Dathan, and Abiram: beaten
downe with windes, as Iobs house. We
read in forraine stories of great calamities
which haue fallen vpon citties:Calamities vpon citties by winds and earthquakes Socrat. l. 1. 7. at Antioch
there was an earthquake which continued

a whole yeare together. At Nicomedia
many houses were shaken downe with an
earthquake,Zozomen, lib. 
                           •
                        . cap. 15. and diuers people slaine with
the fall of the houses, and among the rest,
Cecropius and Arsacius: at Constantinople
vnder Leo the Emperour, such a raging
fire tooke the cittie,Euagr. l. 2. c. 1
                           •
                        . that it continued
foure daies, and the houses were burnt the
length of 14. furlongs. The like calamities
Seneca reporteth to haue beene in his
time:Senec. epist. 91. 
                     Quoties Asia, quoties Achaia vobes vno
tremore ceciderunt? quot oppida in Syria,
quot in Macedonia diruta sunt? Howe often
haue the cities of Asia and Achaia fallen
downe by earthquakes▪ how many cities in Syria
and Macedonia haue beene swallowed
vp of the earth, in Cyprus likewise and Paphus?
The cittie of London hath not beene
free in time past from such losses: ann.
1091.Stowe. in the 4. yeare of William Rufus,
600 houses were blowen downe by tempest
in London: ann. 1232. in the 16. of
Henrie the third, great hurt was done in
the cittie by thunder and lightning Wherfore,
much are we all bound to thanke god
that hath preserued vs, our cities, our houses,
from these fearefull calamities: that we
are not surprised in our houses, and sitting
at our tables of our enemies, as Balthasar

was in the middest of his feast. Dan. 5. and
as many haue beene in other places: and
how much are we to praise God, that hath
so wrought for this Church and common
wealth, prouiding a nourcing father for
vs, vnder whose shadow we trust to be defended
still in peace and true religion, that
I hope we may say as Dauid here doeth,
of our cities and townes: Ierusalem is a city
well built, &c.
                  
                  Further, because mention is here made
of building, it shall not be amisse briefly
to obserue, what rules are to be kept in the
rearing of edifices among Christians,
                        
                           •••
                        esto be obserued in building of houses.
which may briefly be reduced to these
three, that they be made without oppression
or crueltie, not with ostentation and vanitie,
nor yet without compassion & charitie.
                  
                  For the first, the Prophet saith, Woe vnto
him that buildeth his chambers with vnrighteousnesse,
and his chambers without equitie,
Ierem. 22. 13. So doe they, which
oppresse the poore, and ouer-reach vpon
their grounds to enlarge their own dwellings,
as Ahab did vpon Naboth, 1. King.
21. For the next, the prophet reprooueth
those, that build them houses, &c. and call
their lands by their names: Such was Nabuchadnezzar,

that said in the pride of his
heart, is not this Babel, which I haue built for
the maiestie of mine honour? Dan. 4. 17. A
vaine thing is it for men to set their heart
vpon their gay houses, and to swell in
pride because of their sumptuous edifices,
seeing they must one day leaue their lightsome
and glorious houses, and lie in darknes.
Thirdly, men must not set their minds
so to build their houses of timber & stone,
as that they forget to releeue the liuing
stones, the poore members of Christ,
whereof the spirituall building of the
Church consisteth: which Iob noteth as a
fault in the rich men of his time, that did
build in solitarie places, Iob. 3. 14. that
they might dwell alone, and not be troubled
with the crie of the poore at their gate.
Such are those builders in these daies, that
delight to build faire to the eye, but the
poore there findeth nothing to fill his hū
                     grie
bellie: they make many chimneies,
but keepe fewe fires: their chambers are
lightsome with faire windowes, and their
staires loftie with high towres, but their
gates not adorned with troupes of the
poore. Their palaces are seene a farre off,
but not smelt neere hand: their lodgings
are hung with greene, and grasse groweth

at the doores. Ambrose saith well of such,
Clamat ante domum tuam nudus & negligis,
& tu sollicitus es quibus marmoribus pavimenta
vestias: The poore naked crieth at thy
doore not regarded, and yet thou art carefull
with what marble the floore should be paued.
Wherefore if any will build sure, that their
habitation may remaine, and that Ierusalem
may still be as a citie well built: let
them lay the foundation in equitie. Houses
built with vsurie, extortion, wrong
iudgement, briberie, deceit, as I am afraid
the houses of many in the countrie are, but
more in the citie, cannot long continue,
nor the owners long enioy them, but as
Ieremie saith, 
                        •
                     o their posteritie shal soone
say, Habitacula nostra proiecerunt nos, our
habitations haue cast vs out. Ier. 9. 19.
               
               
                  The 10. meditation.
                  
                     That is compact together in it selfe] The
word in the originall is chabar, which signifieth
to ioyne together. The Septuagint
translate, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which doth
participate or communicate together. Before
the citie was deuided, part thereof beeing
possessed of the Iebusites, which were of a
contrarie religion. This then was a singular

benefit, that the citie which was before
disioyned in religion, and ciuill dissention,
is now reduced to vnitie and conioyned in
one. A happie thing therefore it is, when
a nation, citie, or people doe consent and
agree together and liue as brethren.
                  1. Behold (saith the Prophet Dauid)
how comely and good a thing it is, brethren, to
dwell togither, Psal. 134. 1. So the Prophet
saith, The hatred of Ephraim shal depart, &c.
Ephraim shall not enuie Iudah, nor Iudah
vexe Ephraim, Isa. 11. 23. that is, they which
before liued at variance, shall be reconciled.
                  
                  2. Thus Abraham appeased the stri
                        •
                     e
that was betweene his seruants and Lots,
Gen. 13. Isaak made an atonement with
Abimelech, whose seruants before had
contended with Isaaks seruants for certain
wells of water. Gen. 26. Moses would
haue pacified the two Ebrewes that stroue
together. Exod. 2. 13.
                  3. For discord in a citie, or among
neighbours is like a raging fire: as Iotham
prophecied, that a fire should come from Abimelech,
and consume Sechem, and a fire
likewise from Sechem to consume Abimelech,
                     The danger of discord.
Iud. 9. 20. Which fire was that ciuill
dissention, wherby they were one destroied

of another. And as Abimelech when
he had destroied the citie, did sowe it with
salt, to make it for euer vnfruitfull, ibid. v.
45. so is dissension among neighbours
and citizens, like to the sowing of salt.
And contrariwise, vnitie and concord is a
comely and pleasant thing, like to the
sweete ointment of Aaron, that gaue a
pleasant perfume round about: and like
as they could not roll away the stone vpon
the wells mouth to water the sheepe,
till all the shepheards came together, and
ioyned their strength to doe it, Gen. 29.
8. so by concord and vnitie, great matters
are compassed which by diuision are hindred.
                  4. Concord and peace is an euident
signe of Gods presence, who is the author
of peace, and not of confusion, 1. Cor. 14.
33. And the Prophet Dauid hauing set
forth the singular benefit of concord among
brethren, comparing it to the dewe
that falleth vpon the hills: he thus concludeth,
there the Lord appointed the life and
blessing for euer, Psal. 134. 3. shewing that
all blessings are expected, where brotherly
loue is kept and nourished.
                  5. First then, herein appeareth a wonderfull
worke of God at this present among

vs in this realme of England: who
hath made this nation as a cittie well compact
in it selfe, that all, as one man, haue
consented togither to bring the Lords annointed
to Ierusalem: as all the tribes of Israel
came vnto Dauid and said, we are thy
bones and thy flesh: & with one consent annointed
him king.The 9. benefit the generall consent and desire of all in receiuing his Maiestie. 2. Sam. 8. 1. And as Israel
and Iuda did contend, which should be
most forward in restoring Dauid, 2. Sam.
19. 43. So men of all sorts haue striued,
who might shewe most ioy, and
greatest dutie to our Soueraigne. What
troubles haue men feared at the next
change, who can be ignorant? many wishing
they might not liue to see those daies,
some looking as it were a squint two
waies, to be readie for all accidents; some as
it hath beene credibly reported, disposing
their lands to feoffes, to the vse of their
heires, fearing the troubles of these daies.
But God hath put away all feare, and turned
all to good, and wrought mens hearts
as waxe, to a loyall agreement, that neuer
any prince entred more quietly in this
land, then our nowe Soueraigne Lord,
whose happie yeares and godly raigne,
God in his mercie long continue: This is
the Lords doing, as the Prophet saith, and it

is marueilous in our eies, Psal. 128. 23.
                  Secondly, let vs acknowledge another
great benefit, that the Lord hath now bestowed
vpon this famous Island of Brittannie:
neuer could it be said, as at this
time, that we are now indeed this whole
Island compact togither into one kingdome:
sometime England onely was deuided
into an heptarchie,Fox. p. 101. p. 135. that is, into seauen
kingdomes, for the space of 300. yeares
togither and more, from ann. 456. to the
raigne of king Egbright. ann. 802. Then
England beeing reduced to one Monarchie,
yet the countrie of Wales remained
a seuerall kingdome vntill Edward the 1.
ann. 1279. who subdued Lewline king of
Wales,Fox. p. 3
                           •
                        5. and made his eldest sonne Edward
prince of that countrie. But all this while
England and Scotland remained two distinct
kingdomes, which a long time, one
offended another with most cruell and
fierce warres: now are they by Gods prouidence
conioyned and made one kingdome.
This according of these two kingdomes
was diuers times attempted before:
the which better to effect, diuers kings of
England gaue their daughters in marriage
to the kings of Scots, as King Iohn his
daughter Elianor; Edward the 2. Ioane his

daughter;Stowe. Henrie the 7. Margaret his eldest
daughter, of whome is lawefully descended
our dread Soueraigne king Iames
the true and lawfull possessor of both
kingdomes: after this king Henrie intended
a marriage betweene his sonne prince
Edward,Lanquet. The 10. benefit, the wonderfull conioyning of both kingdomes. and Marie queene of Scots. But
none of these deuises tooke place, that this
worke might not seeme by mans counsell
to be compassed, but by gods prouidence
onely to be effected: So that we may now
say of this Isle, as Dauid here of Ierusalē,
it is a kingdome compacted togither in it
selfe.
                  
                  Thirdly, let vs all learne nowe to loue
as brethren, that neighbours should liue
peaceably and louingly togither; not one
to be readie to offend and grieue another:
but as we see in great citties, the houses to
be one ioyned to another, and to be compacted
togither, so that there might be as
neere a coniunction in mens hearts and
affections. While men are in wrath and at
variance, their praiers are hindred, their
mind disquieted, Gods worship neglected,
some are wronged, others prouoked.
Howe should the child looke vpon
his father, whē he hateth his brother? how
should we thinke to be forgiuen of God,

when we seeke reuenge one against another?
how can any man in wrath or enuie
say the Lords praier? as Hierome saith, animo
discrepante cum verbis, oratione dissidente
cum, factis, Our minde dissenting from our
words, and our words varying from our deeds.
                  
               
               
                  The 11. meditation.
                  
                     Whereunto the tribes, euen the tribes of
the Lord goe vp.] King Dauids especiall
care was to reduce the people of God to
one vniforme worship, that euery man
should not be permitted to deuise a religion
to himselfe, but that all should goe vp
to Hierusalem to worship God there. So
this care doeth principally belong vnto
Princes, to see all false worshippes abolished,
and the true seruice of God established.
                  1. This then is rendred as a reason, how
it came to passe, that Micah set vp Seraphim
in his house, and consecrated a new
kind of priesthood: There was in those daies
no king in Israel, but euery man did that
which was good in his owne ei
                           •
                        s, Iudg. 17. 6.
A vertuous king then is a most excellent
meanes, to drawe the people distracted in
opinions and sectes, to one true worship

of God: they that liue in one kingdome,
should haue one Christendome, be all of
one faith and religion: as they obey one
king in earth, so they should adore one
God in heauen: and as they are subiect to
one lawe for ciuill administration, so they
should walke after one rule, concerning
their Christian profession: as Moses saith.
One law shall be to him that is borne in the
land, and to the stranger that dwelleth among
you. Exod. 12. 49.
                  2. As Dauid expelled the Iebusites,
which hindred the peace of Ierusalem, hauing
there inhabited aboue 300. yeares,
since the first conquest of Canaan, Iud. 1.
21. and tooke away their blinde and lame
idols, 2. Sam. 5. 8. So Caleb had long before
driuen the Anakims cruell and prophane
gyants out of Hebron, Iosua. 14. 12
Ezra also caused the strange women to be
put away, which were married to diuers
of Israel, and corrupted both their faith &
language, Ezra. 10. 18. Nehem. 13. 24. Nehemiah
likewise banished the irreligious
merchants of Tyrus, that would haue vttered
their wares vpon the Lords day,
Nehem. 13. 21.
                  3. This may seeme to be the meaning of
that lawe, whereby the Israelites were forbidden

to sow their vineyard with diuerse
seedes, or to plowe with an oxe and an asse
togither, Deut. 22. 9, 10. So the mixture of
diuers religions, and the cohabiting of diuers
worshippers cannot be good. As Zerubbabel
and Ioshua would not suffer the
enemies of the people of God to build the
temple with them, who thereunto offered
their sacrifice deceitfully: it is not for you,
but for vs (say they) to build an house to the
Lord. Ezra, 4. 3. So it is not fit, that a contrarie
religion should be admitted.
                  4. The Lord saith by his prophet, my
glory will I not giue to another, Isay, 42. 8.
The Lord will not deuide stakes, he will
be God alone, as Eliah saith, If the Lord be
God, follow him: but if Baal be he, goe after
him, 1. King. 18. 21. But where diuers different
professions are admitted, God must
be dishonoured, who can not by contrary
sects be truely serued.
                  5. First then we may acknowledge an
other great mercie toward our nation,The 11. benefit, sinceritie in religion. that
whereas in other countries, diuers professions
of religion are suffered; some runne
to Dan, some to Bethel, some to Shiloh,
some one way, some another. All the tribes
of Israel with vs are called vp to Hierusalem;
the holy profession of the gospell of

Christ hath these many yeares flourished
in these two famous kingdomes of England
and Scotland, and by Gods mercie is
like to flourish still: that we may say with
the Prophet, God is knowne in Iudah, his
name is great in Israel, Psal. 76. 1. No other
God is worshipped in the Church of
England but the Lord; no other religion
acknowledged but the gospel of Iesus
Christ: and our Prince and his people doe
say with one ioint voice vnto God, Thou
art my Lord, &c, the sorrowes of them that
offer to another God shall be multiplied, their
offerings of blood will I not offer, neither make
mention of their names within my lippes, Psal.
16. 54.
                  Secondly, if all the tribes of the Lord
goe vp to Hierusalem to the Tabernacle,
then certes, they which refuse to goe vp,
are not the tribes of the Lord:An admonitio
                           •
                         to recusants. here then is
an admonition to all Recusants popish &
others, that they would now at the length
lay aside their froward spirits, and humble
themselues to come vp to Ierusalem with
the rest of Gods people. They are not of
the tribes of the Lord, that wil not goe vp
to the place of his worship. Let not the
Romist deceiue himselfe, and expect a toleration
of his superstitious (I would it

were not also an idolatrous) profession.
Certainely, where Gods arke is, Dagon
cannot stande:1. Sam. 4▪ 4. but shall also loose in
the ende both his head and hands: their
Dagon of Rome was cast downe to
to the ground, when first the papall authoritie
and cells of superstition were destroied
in England: he lost his head and
his hands; when afterward papall religion
was expelled: if yet any stumpe of his
bodie remaine, we doubt not but by Gods
grace it shall sooner be cast out, then his
former wounds be recouered. Let them
not thinke that Hezekiah will suffer the
high places and images to stand, 2. king.
18. 4. or Iosias the Chemarims to continue,
2. king. 23. 4. Wherefore stand not
out wilfully as the Ephramites, that refused
to ioyne with Iephtah against Ammon,
Iud. 12. 4. neither despise with the tribe
of Manasses the message of Hezekiah,
that called them vp to the Passeouer, 2.
Chron. 30. 10.
                  Now as for them, which stand apart,
and separate themselues from vs, swelling
with an opinion of their owne greater
holines,Aduise giuen to schismatikes. if they will be counted among the
tribes of the Lord, let them also come vp
to Ierusalem: if any thing hath grieued

them in our Church, let them not feare if
their offering be iust, but God will put it
into the heart of Hezekiah in good time
to remooue euen Moses brasen serpent, if
any such abuse were. 2. king. 8. 4. I wish
therefore and exhort them to assemble
themselues with the hoast of Israel, and to
gather Manna with the rest of Gods people,
least if they goe out to gather it alone,
as some of the Israelites did vpon the seauenth
day, they loose their labour, and
finde none, Exod. 16. 26. And as much
haue these brethren of the separation
found, since they first went out from vs. I
say vnto them with Ambrose vpon these
wordes of the Lord to Moses, The place
where thou standest is holy ground,
                     Epist. 82. 
                     Ecclesia
locus sanctus est, sta ergo in Ecclesia, sta vbi
tibi apparui, ibi ego tecum sum, &c. The
Church is the holy place, stand therefore in
the Church, stand where I appeared vnto
thee, for there I am with thee. If euer God
appeared then vnto them, when they
heard the word, and made their praiers
in our Church assemblies, why doe they
forsake that place, where God hath manifested
himselfe?
               
               
                  
                  The 12. meditation.
                  
                     To the testimonie of Israel] That is, at
Ierusalem was the arke, which was called
the testimonie of God, because in them
were kept the two tables of stone, which
were testimonies of Gods presence, Exod.
25. 16. 22. Beside before the Arke was
placed the pot of Manna, Exod. 16. 34.
and some good while after, Aarons rodde
that budded, was also put before the testimonie,
Num. 17. 10. So then these three
monuments of Gods presence were with
the Arke, the tabernacle of the testament,
the golden potte of Manna, and Aarons
rodde that budded, Hebr. 9. 4. The Arke
thus furnished is called the testimonie,
whereby God did testifie his presence to
his Church.The testimonie and cognizance of the old church of Israel. The same also are the sure
signes and markes of the Church of God
now: the word of God represented by
the tables of the law, the sacraments signified
by the potte of Manna, and discipline
by Aarons rodde. But all these are not of
the like necessitie: for as the tables onely
were within the arke, the other before it,
Exod. 25. 16. but the pot of Manna was
there first placed, and last of all Aarons
rodde: so the most essentiall note of the

Church, is the word of God, the next the
sacraments, the third is discipline, which
so much concerneth not the beeing, as the
well beeing, not the essence, but the magnificence,
not the making, but the beautifying
of the Church. Now that these are
testimonies to the Church, the word and
sacraments, as the arke was to Israel, it thus
appeareth:
                  1. Saint Paul sheweth, that this was
the preferment of the Iewes; to them were
committed the oracles or words of God, rom.
3. 2. hereby were they knowne to be the
people of God. Likewise els where he
thus describeth the Church: Christ doth
clense it by the washing of water through the
word, Eph. 5. 26. These two thē, the word,
and the sacraments, are the onely meanes
whereby the Church is cleansed, and so
made a fit habitation for God.
                  2. Thus S. Paul reasoneth for his coū
                     trimen,
proouing them to be the Israelites,
that is, the church of God, because to thē
belonged the couenants,
                     Rom. 9. 4. 
                     and the giuing of the
lawe, and the seruice of God, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which
comprehendeth the ceremonies and sacraments
of religion.
                  Thus the Apostle prooueth himselfe
a member of the Church, because he was

circumcised, &c. and as touching righteousnesse,
which was by the lawe, he was vnreprooueable,
Philip. 3. 6. He was both imitated
by the sacraments and instituted in the
doctrine of the lawe.
                  3. Like as the Lord threatneth to remooue
his candlesticke from the Church
of Ephesus, Reuel. 2. 5. that is the ministerie
of the word: for as when the candle &
candlesticke are taken away there is nothing
but darkenesse in the house:The word and sacraments essentiall notes of the Church. so is it,
when any place is depriued of the light of
Gods word: These two then, the word of
God rightly preached, and the sacraments
duly administred, are as the breasts of the
Church; and where these are not, there are
not breasts, as the Church speaketh of the
Gentiles not yet called: We haue a little
sister, and shee hath no breasts, Cant. 8. 8.
But the Church saith of her selfe, my breasts
are like towers, v. 10. that is, where the word
of God and sacraments are found in integritie,
that Church hath goodly breasts
indeede.
                  4. The reason is, because it is most like
that God will bestow his best gifts vpon
his beloued Church: he will plant the vinyard
with the best plants, Isa. 5. 2. But a
more excellent gift can there not be, then

to haue the word, the statutes and ordinā
                     ces
of Gods, as Moses saith: What nation is
so great, that hath ordinances and lawes so
righteous, as all this lawe which I set before
you this day? Deut. 4. 8.
                  5. First then, where are they, whether
papists, or other whatsoeuer, that say, there
is no Church in England? haue we not the
word of God, and the Sacraments? these
are sufficient testimonies and euidences of
Gods presence. To say, that these are not
sufficient notes of Gods church, as the
Papists affirme, is to speake ignorantly &
falsely, for whereby was the auntient
Church of Israel discerned, but by the law
and statutes of God, and the true seruice
of his name? and to denie that the Church
of England hath either word or sacramēts,
as some schismatickes doe, is to speake absurdly,
and contrarie to their owne knowledge:
for if that be Gods word which is
contained in the olde and new testaments,
and these the sacraments which Christ
hath instituted; then hath the Church of
England both, professing the first, and celebrating
the second. We teach no doctrine
but concluded out of the Scriptures,
we receiue no sacraments, but those
instituted by our Sauiour.
                  
                     
Concerning discipline,Of the discipline o
                           •
                         the Church. neither is the
Church of England destitute of it altogether:
for where the word of God and the
sacraments are, it is not possible that all discipline
should be exiled: I graunt, that the
discipline of the English Church may be
much amended, and I trust in time shall:
many defects and wants are amongst vs.
We doe not conceale our imperfections,
nor iustifie what is amisse;In the commination. as is extant in
the booke of common praier in these
wordes: vntill the said discipline may be restored
(which thing is much to be wished.)
But it followeth not, that where discipline
is wanting, the Church is fading, and that
the infirmitie of the one maketh a nullity
of the other: The Church of the Iewes
thus saith of the Church of the Gentiles:
If shee be a wall, we will build vpon her a siluer
pallace, if shee be a doore we will keepe her in
with bonds of cedar, Can. 8. 9. Shee calleth
her sister, because shee had a wall, though
not of siluer, and a doore, though not of
cedar. And England, thankes be to God, is
a famous and beutifull sister to all reformed
Churches, though shee may haue
some spots in externall matters.The 12. benefit, reformation of things amisse. But our
trust is, that if it yet be not, her wall shall
be made more costly, and siluerlike, and

her doore of Cedar, when God will: In
the meane time, what great thanks should
we giue vnto God, that hath not remooued
the arke of his testimonie from vs, as
he did from Israel, when it was taken of
the Philistims? 1. Sam. 4. nor taken away
the candlesticke from vs, as from Ephesus,
Reuel. 2. 5. Yet by our sinnes we had deserued
it, as much as either: but hath in his
mercy raised vp a Dauid vnto his church,
to keepe and defend the arke in Ierusalē
still.
                  Lastly, as these are testimonies and euidences
to the whole Church, the word &
Sacraments, so ought they to be to euery
true mēber of the Church, that euery one
also by his faithfull hearing of the word,
and fruitfull receiuing of the Sacraments,
may iudge himselfe a liuely member of
Christs bodie, and grow vp thereby to the
assurance of his calling: for as our Sauiour
saith, My sheepe heare my voice, Ioh. 10.
16. He that heareth and beleeueth the
voice of Christ our great sheapheard, is
certainely one of his sheepe. By the fruite
and effect of the word a man may discerne
of himselfe, whether he be good or badde
ground: for if the word fructifie in him, he
is of the good kinde, but if he bring forth

                     thornes and briars, he is a reprooued ground,
neere vnto cursing, whose ende is to be burned,
as the Apostle saith, Heb. 6. 8. So Augustine
to the same purpose: Quicquid loquimur
in nomine Domini Dei imber est; videte
qualis terrae sitis,
                     In Psal. 98. in fine 
                     qui peior est factus, ignem
speres, pluviam non accuset, qui melior factus,

                           •
                        orreum speret pluuiam laudes: Whatsoeuer
we say vnto you in the name of the Lord, is
the Lords raine, see you, what manner of
ground yee be: if thereby ye become worse and
bring forth thornes and brambles, feare the
flames, blame not the showers. If ye are made
better, and bring forth good fruit, hope for the

                           •
                        arne, and praise the raine.
                  
               
               
                  The 13. meditation.
                  
                     To praise the name of the Lord.] The
Prophet sheweth, what is the chiefe ende
of going vp to the Lords house, namely to
praise God, and call vpon his name.
                  1. So the Lord saith by his prophet,
My house shall be called an house of praier to
all nations, Isa. 56. 7. And Ieremie saith, prophecying
of the Church of God, They shall
come and reioyce in the height of Sion, chap.
31. 12.
                  2. Thus Anna praied in the temple,

when shee asked a sonne of God:Churches appointed for praier. 
                     Shee was
troubled in her mind, and praied to the Lord,
and wept sore, 1. Sam. 1. 10. And after shee
had obtained her desire, shee in the same
place gaue thanks vnto God, And Anna
praied, and said, My heart reioyceth in the
Lord, 1. Sam. 2. 1. To this spirituall vse of
praier, Salomon consecrated the Temple:
Heare thou the supplication of thy seruant,
and of thy people Israel, which pray in this
place, and heare thou in the place of thine habitation,
euen in heauen, and when thou hearest,
haue mercie, 1. king. 8. 30.
                  3. The prophet compareth the thāks
of the heart giuen vnto God, vnto fresh
springs: all my springs are in thee, Psal. 87.
7. And the prophet Ieremie speaking of
those, that reioyce before the Lord, saith,
their soule is as a watered garden, chap. 31.
12. He thē which giueth not thanks vnto
God in his temple, is as a barren ground
without springs: but he which praiseth
the name of God, is as a well watered
ground refreshed with sweete springs.
What becommeth the temple better then
incense, and where should it be rather offered
then there? now the odours and incense
of the Saints are their praiers, Revel.
8. 3. and their fatte calues are the fruit of

their lippes, as the prophet saith, We will
render the calues of our lippes. Hosh. 14. 3.
                  4. For we should present the Lord
with our best gifts, if any thing be better
then another, that should be the Lords
part: but the sacrifice of contrition, of
praise & thanksgiuing, are the most principall:
as the Prophet saith, Thou desirest
not sacrifice, &c. the sacrifice of God is a contrite
heart, Psal. 51. 16, 17. And the Apostle
saith, Let vs by him offer the sacrifice of
praise alwaies vnto God, that is, the fruit of
our lippes, &c. with such sacrifice God is pleased,
Heb. 13. 15, 16.
                  5. First then, if the house of God be
principally ordained for praier, preaching,
and praising of God, as Moses was
read and preached in the synagogue, Act.
15. 21. and the prophet saith, In his temple
doth euery man speake of his glorie, Psal. 29.
9. Then is that a superstitious opinion,
and erroneous doctrine of the Papists,
who hold,B
                           •
                        llar lib. 
                           ••
                        . de 
                           •
                        uk. sanct. c. 4. that the Churches of Christians,
are chiefely ordained for the sacrifice of
the Masse, not onely or chiefely for praier or
preaching, and administration of the sacraments.
And as they teach, so they practise:
for there is no true praier at all,Churches not ordained n
                           •
                        w for sacrifice. in popish
Churches, all beeing in an vnknowne

tongue, and so is the reading of scripture,
beeing both without edifying and vnderstanding:
there is no singing of psalmes,
but the bellowing of the voice, and rumbling
of organes, onely to delight the eare.
In stead of praying and preaching, there
is creeping to the crosse,Abuses in popish seruice. kneeling to images,
kissing of the pax, knocking of beads:
and whereas all should be done to the
praise of God, they sing psalmes endited
to the praise and honour of Saints, whereas
the Lord saith in the scripture, Mine
honour will I not giue to another, Isa. 42. 8.
So the popish assemblies offend two
waies, that worship, which they in their
Church celebrate, they doe not ascribe
onely to God: neither is it their principall
intendement to come together to praise
God. But the ancient Church thought otherwise.Decr. par. 1. dist. 42. c. 7.
Augustine thus saith, as he is by
themselues alleadged, In oratorio praeter orandi
& psallendi cultum nihil agatur, &c.
Let nothing be done in the oratorie or place of
praier, beside praying and praising God. And
a certaine Councell calleth Churches, Orationis,
                     Synod. Mog
                           ••
                        . c. 40.
                     divini cultus & sacramentorum officinas,
the shoppes of praier, diuine worship
and the sacraments.
                  
                  Secondly, let it be remembred, how

much the people of England are bound
vnto God,The 13. benefit, publike and priuate entercourse of religion. that this holy entercourse of
religion is not interrupted, but that they
may both publikely in their Churches,
and priuately in their houses sing psalmes
to the praise of God. O how happie are
we, and blessed be the name of God, that
hath wrought vs this happinesse, that the
voice of ioy and deliuerance is still heard in
the habitation of the righteous! Psal. 118. 15.
Many may yet remember, how vncomfortable
those times were, when poperie
was for a while reuiued in this land: their
Church seruice was dumbe, their comming
thither fruitlesse, their staying there
idle, their returne from thence, as they first
came: beside gazing with the eyes, tickling
with the eares, warbling of the fingers,
smacking with their lippes vpon the
pax; sweeping the ground with their creeping,
scraping with their feete, stretching
out their neckes at the eleuation time:
there was nothing els beside these outward,
vaine, and superstitious gestures,
that was done or saide to the edifying
of the vnderstanding, and sanctifying
of the affections: as wee haue cause to
praise God, for the first happie change
vnder Queene ELIZABETH: so also

for the continuance vnder our kings Maiestie,
of our comfortable and Christian
Church assemblies, where the minister
praieth, and the people pray with him, he
preacheth and they vnderstand him, they
sing vnto themselues also in hymnes and
spirituall songes: blessed be the name of
God, which hath performed that ioyfull
prophecie of Ieremy: Thus saith the Lord,
againe there shall be heard in this place, &c.
the voice of them, which shall say, praise the
Lord of hostes, because the Lord is good, because
his mercie endureth for euer, and of thē
that offer the sacrifice of praise in the house of
the Lord, Ierem. 33. 10. Haue we not iust
cause to say with the Prophet Dauid, for
the sweete comforts that we finde, by the
preaching, praying, and praising of God
in our Churches: O Lord of Hostes, howe amiable
are thy tabernacles? psal. 84. 1. When
sometime by the sweete Saints of the
Church,Lib. confess. 10. c. 33. as Augustine saith, animi nostri in
flammam pietatis mouentur, Our mindes are
inflamed with godly pietie and zeale: Sometime
teares fall from our eies, as he againe
saith, Cum reminiscor lachrymas meas, quas
fudi ad cantus Ecclesiae, &c. When I remember
my teares, which I shedde in the Church
songs: sometime the minde is instructed &

edified, as the same father also saith: Gratias
deo meo,
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . 
                     pulsatori aurium mearum, illustratori
cordis mei: Praise be to God that beateth
vpon mine yeares, and bendeth my heart.
                  
                  Thirdly, seeing Churches are appointed
for praier,No man must come emptie into Gods house. and the praise of God, no
man should come thither, as in the lawe
emptie handed, so nowe vnder the Gospel
emptie hearted; as the Prophet saith,
bring an offering, and enter into his courts,
Psal. 96. 8. If thy offering be not readie,
presse not into Gods presence: and what
kind of offering it must be, the Prophet
also sheweth, Come before him with praise.
Psal. 100. 2. Wherefore their comming
vnto the Church is in vaine, that prepare
not themselues to offer vnto God some
spirituall gift: as the Apostle saith, What
is to be done then brethren, when ye come togither,
as euery one of you hath a psalme, or
doctrine, or a tongue, or reuelation, or interpretation,
let all things be done to edifying, 1.
Cor. 14. 26. Some must come with doctrine
to teach others, some with reuelation,
that God may reueale his wil vnto thē,
others with a psalme to praise God: let no
man be dumbe or silent, or be as a cypher
in the Church, but all things must be done
to edifying: he that praieth, or praiseth

God, let him not doe it, as many, onely
with lip-labour, but from the heart: This
is the praise which waiteth for God in Sion.
Psal. 65. 1. Vpon which wordes Augustine
thus well inferreth,Augustin. in Psal. 65. 
                     Non enim carne
canto, sed corde, carnem enim sonantem audiunt
ciues Babylon, c
                           •
                        rdis autem sonum audit
conditor Ierusalem: I sing not with my flesh,
but with my heart: the sounding flesh delighteth
the citizens of Babylon (for they said
sing vs one of the songs of Sion, Psal. 137.
3.) but the sounding spirit, the sounder of Ierusalem.
                  
               
               
                  The 14. meditation.
                  
                     V. 5. There are thrones set for iudgement.]
That whereas all things before
were confused, there was no order, no iustice,
no redresse of errors, no correction
of offenders, now Dauid had constituted
an exact politie and gouernment, he appointed
thrones of iustice, where euery
mans complaint might be heard. We see
then what an excellent benefit it is, when
the Lord giueth vnto a nation, a fetled &
established gouernment.
                  1. As the Lord promiseth by his prophet,
that if they did sanctifie the Sabbath,

&c. then shall the Kings and the Princes enter
in at the gates of this citie, and shall sitte
vpon the throne of Dauid, Ier. 17. 25. The
contrarie, the taking away of order and
gouernment is threatned as a curse: The
nobles shall call to the king, and there shall be
none, all the princes thereof shall be as nothing.
Isa. 34. 12.
                  2. Thus God gaue vnto his people,
Moses his faithful seruant, that sat to iudge
the people from morning to night, and by
the aduise of Hobab his father in law, he
appointed other inferiour gouernonrs,
both to ease him of some burthen, and for
better expedition for the people, Exod.
18. And at Ephesus, what would haue
beene the issue of that tumultuous vproare,
if it had not beene appeased by the
authoritie and wisdome of the towneclarke?
who among other wise speaches
said vnto them, If Demetrius haue a matter
against any man, the law is open, and there are
deputies, let them accuse one another, Act.
19. 38. And what miserie is like to befall a
commonwealth without gouernment, it
is euident by the historie of the Iudges,
where this is yeilded as a reason, of the oppression
of the children of Dan, Iud. 18. 1.
and of the horrible adulterie committed

by the men of Gibeah, with the Leuites
wife, Iud. 19. 1. In those daies, there was no
king in Israel.
                  
                  3. For men without a gouernour, are
as the fishes of the sea, that deuoure one
another, Hab. 1. 14. But the protection of
Magistrates and gouernours, is like the
shadow of a great tree, where the beasts
doe finde shelter, and the birds build their
nests, Dan. 4. 18. And as we see the wall is
a proppe to the small boughes, or Ivie
that runneth vpon it, Gen. 49. 22. so was
Ioseph to his brethren, and euery good
Magistrate to his people.
                  4. Therefore Iudges in Scripture are
called Gods, Exod. 21. 6. as Moses was to
Aaron, as a God, Exod. 4. 16. to giue him
direction. And for this cause the Lord endueth
Magistrates, with necessarie graces
of discerning, and directing, of boldnesse
and courage, of protection and deliuerance,
that they might be guides and gouernours
of his people, and distribute vnto
euery man his right: as the Lord said to
Iosua, I wil neuer leaue thee, nor forsake thee,
be strong and of a good courage, for vnto this
people shalt thou deuide the land for an inheritance.
Ios. 1. 5, 6.
                  5. This doctrine then giueth vs occasion

herein also to remember the louing
kindnes of God towardes vs,The 14. benefit, 
                           ••••
                        tion of iustice. that, as the
thrones haue beene set for iudgement all
the happie and peaceable raigne of Q.
Elizabeth: so they doe and are like to cō
                     tinue
still. Many feared great confusion to
fall vpon the land, and some wickedly imagined,
and as treacherously desired,
that this famous countrie might haue bin
a pray for the Spanyard: then indeede the
thrones of iudgement should haue beene
cast downe, and no other iustice should
haue beene expected but by the sword:
such iustice as Lysander shewed, when the
Argives, who seemed to haue better right,
contended with the Lacedemonians about
their bounds:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . he drew his sword and
said, He that vseth this can best determine of
the bounds and titles of lands. Much that
like was the Duke of Medina his speach,
the king of Spaines factor and chiefe captaine
for the pretended inuasion of England,
ann. 88. that his sword knew not to
make any difference betweene Papist and
Protestant,
                     Repli
                           •
                        . fol. 52. pag. 1. 
                     if he had preuailed. The same reports
also the secular masse priests affirme,Manifestat. fol. 52. pag. 1.
that Parsons should thus write concerning
the king of Spaine, that after the
losse of his Armado, he ranne to an altar,

and taking a siluer candle sticke, swore a monstrous
oath,
                     Manifestat. fol. 98. pag. 1. 
                     that he would wast not onely all
Spaine, but also all his Indies to that candlesticke,
but he would be auenged on England.
But thankes be to God, these cruell lords,
that would haue raigned ouer vs,Deliuerance frō forraine dangers. haue lost
their hope, and as the Psalmist saith, They
haue slept their sleepe, and all the men of
strength haue not found their hands: at thy rebuke,
O Lord, both the chariot and the horse
are cast asleepe. Psal. 76. 5, 6. Many of those,
which gaped for our destruction are asleepe,
as Pharao with his hoast in the bottome
of the sea, so that we may say againe
with the prophet, Thou hast saued vs from
our aduersaries, and put them to confusion
that hate vs, Psal. 44. 7. Blessed be God,
that hath not suffered such cruell lords to
raigne ouer vs, but hath raised vp the
thrones of iustice from among our selues.
Long may these thrones set for iudgment
cōtinue and be established in peace; which
we trust to see: that as it is in the psalme, we
may sing: Mercie and trueth shall meete, iustice
and peace shall kisse each other, Psalm.
85. 10. Truth & vertue in religion bringeth
forth mercie and equitie in the princely
administration: and the vpright sitting
in these thrones of iustice, is the way to establish

peace, as Augustine well saith vpon
these wordes of the psalme: Vultis pacem,
                     in Psal. 85.
                     ama & iusticiam, quia duae amicae sunt
iustitia & pax, ipsae se osculantur, si amicam
pacis non amaueris, non te amabit pax, nec
veniet ad te, &c. If you will haue peace, loue
iustice, because iustice & peace are two friēds,
they one kisse another: if you loue not the friēd
of peace, peace will not loue thee, nor come at
thee. God graunt, that both in the Ecclesiasticall
and Ciuill state of this kingdome,
iustice and peace may so embrace the other,
with veritie and truth, that, if it be
Gods blessed will, they may neuer be parted,
nor pulled asunder.
               
               
                  The 15. meditation.
                  
                     Euen the thrones of the house of Dauid.]
That is, God had giuen vnto his people a
gouernour from among themselues: as the
Israelites say to Dauid, We are thy bones &
thy flesh, 2. Sam. 4. 1. as also an vpright wise
and iust prince, that did feed them according
to the simplicitie of his heart, and guided
them by the discretion of his handes, Psal. 78.
72. It is then an vnspeakable benefit, when
the Lord setteth vp the thrones of Dauid,
that is, giueth vnto a people iust gouernours,

and the same not strangers but of
their owne bone and flesh.
                  1. For the first, the wise man saith: When
the righteous are in authoritie, the people reioyce,
Prou. 28. 2. Great ioy there is, when
God raiseth vp to his Church vertuous
rulers and gouernours: as the contrarie is
a great iudgement: When the wicked beareth
rule the people sigh, Prou. 28. 2. For the
other: the Lord by Moses gaue them this
law, From among thy brethren, thou shalt
make a king ouer thee, thou shalt not set a
stranger ouer thee, which is not thy brother,
Deut. 17. 15.
                  2. Such an one was Salomon, who
both was the sonne of Dauid, borne from
among his brethren the Israelites, as he
himselfe saith, Thou hast kept for Dauid this
great mercie, and hast giuen him a sonne to sit
vpon his throne, as appeareth this day: as also
he praied▪ vnto God to giue him an vnderstanding
heart, that he might iudge the
people righteously, 1. king. 3. 5. 9. Such an
one was Zorobabel, of whome the prophet
Ieremie thus testifieth, Their noble ruler
shall be of themselues, and their gouernor
shall proceede from the middest of them, and
I will cause him to draw neere, and approach
vnto me. Ier. 30. 21. The same Zorobabel

when as strangers, the aduersaries of Iuda
and Beniamin offered their seruice to
build the temple, he refused their helpe,
saying, It is not for you, but for vs to build an
house vnto our God, Ezra 4. 3. This was a
double blessing, that both God gaue them
a ruler of their owne kinred, and such an
one, as was zealous to build the Lords
house.
                  3. Such gouernours the prophet compareth
to nailes whereupon hang the vessels
and other instruments, Isa. 22. 23. and
they are as pillars, that beare vp the kingdome,
Psal. 75. 3. and as the staffe whereupon
a man leaneth, Ier. 48. 17. So is a
mercifull and righteous prince, vpon
whome the glorie and safetie of the kingdome
dependeth.
                  4. And great cause the people haue to
ioy in a good Prince, because the whole
realme receiueth a blessing because of him,
as the wise man saith, By a man of vnderstanding
and wisdome a land endureth long,
Prou. 28. 2. And a Prince borne of the
kings seede and of the royall blood, must
needes be more kind and naturall to his
people, then a stranger. Such an one was
Eliakim, as a father of the inhabitants of Ierusalem.
Isa. 22. 21.
                  
                     
5. First then, if the thrones of Dauid
must be set for iudgement, and all causes
there tried,The Princes power in causes Ecclesiasticall. then it followeth that Dauid
must not be excluded from the cognizance,
and iudgement of causes Ecclesiasticall:
and so was it practised in his
raigne. For Dauid distributed vnto the
Leuites their offices, and appointed the
courses of the priests the sonnes of Aaron,
1. Chron. 23. 24. The chiefe gouernment
both in Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill
cause belonged vnto Dauids throne. From
whence it is necessarily inferred, that euery
king ought to be chiefe in all causes within
his kingdome, and that what forraine
potentate soeuer entermedleth, he is to be
held an vsurper: so that by the word of
God the Pope is no more to meddle with
the managing of Ecclesiasticall causes
within the realme, then the king of Spaine
is to deale with temporall. The prince
then is both to prescribe lawes according
to the word of God, euen in matters Ecclesiasticall,
and to see them executed,
though not in his owne person, and to punish
transgressions: for as the Apostle saith,
He beareth not the sword for naught, for he
is the minister of God to take vengeance on
him that doth euill. Rom. 13. 4. It belongeth

then to the Prince to correct all sorts of offendours,
whether Ciuill or Ecclesiasticall
persons, for the Apostles words are generall:
none that doth euill, is exempted frō
the Princes sword.
                  And that it is gods ordinance to stirre
vp the hearts of princes to reforme religion
and Ecclesiasticall abuses, and not to
leaue it wholly to the disposition of the
cleargie; it is euident by the experience of
al ages: wherein the greatest reformations
haue beene wrought by kings, not by
priests. As in Iuda, the godly kings, Asa,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Iosias, were the
greatest purgers, and reformers of the
Church, & most zealous for Gods house:
so were Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, after
the returne from captiuitie, the one for the
building of the temple, the other for repairing
the cittie most forward. Whereas
the Priests were often found vnfaithfull,
and very backeward in the Lords worke:
such was Vriah the high Priest, in the
daies of Ahaz, that consented to his idolatrie,
2. King. 16. 16. When Ezra returned
from Babel, the priests were the hindmost,
for whome he staied three daies,
Ezra 8. 15. They more forward then any,
to marrie strange wiues, contrarie to the

law.The negligence and slouthfulnes of priests in the returne from captiuitie. Ezra. 10. 18. One of the high priests
sonnes was confederate with Samballat, an
enemie to Ierusalem, Nehem. 13. 29. And
diuerse there were beside of the priests,
that hindred reformation, against whome
Nehemiah praieth, Remember them O lord,
that defile the priesthood: The whole burthē
of redressing the corruptiōs of the church,
as concerning the keeping of the sabboth,
the putting away of strange wiues, & such
like, lay vpon Nehemiah, cap. 13. 19. 23.
Likewise in our Sauiour Christ time,
none were greater adversaries to the gospel,
then the high priests, Annas and Caiphas,
and Ananias to S. Paul, Act. 23. 1.
And of late times, who more hindred reformation
in the Church of England, then
the Pope and his papal brood? When had
England receiued the gospel, if God had
not stirred vp the heart of the Prince to
embrace the trueth? Is it like that the pope
and his papall Hierarchie would euer set
their mindes to reforme the Church abroad,
when they suffer such abomination
at home? Paulus the third made some semblance
and shew of reformation, when he
set certaine Cardinals aworke, as Contarenus,
Sadoletus, Polus, with others, to certifie
him of the abuses of the Church,

which they did accordingly, but no reredresse
or amendment followed. But
God would haue this worke to be vndertaken
by his annointed to whome it belongeth,
receiuing their direction from the
word of God: as thereto he stirred vp the
heart of king Henrie the 8. that beganne;
king Edward followed, Queene Elizabeth
happely proceeded, and what is yet
wanting either in Church or commonwealth,
we trust that by the hands of our
dread Soueraigne, that nowe is, it may▪ in
good time be perfected & accomplished;
that as the Prophet saith of Zorobabel, he
shall bring forth the head stone thereof, that
is, finish Gods worke, that the whole
Church of God with ioyfull acclamations
and shoutings shall crie, Grace, grace vnto
it, Zach. 4. 7.
                  Secondly, here is the great ioy & comfort
of the English nation, that there wanteth
not a man of the house of Dauid,The 15. benefit, a prince no stranger, or forrainer. to
sit vpon the throne: that God hath giuen
vs a king of our own kindred and nation,
of the familie of Dauid, of the noble race
of the kings of this land▪ not a stranger, or
forrainer, borne of English blood and parentage,
brought vp in the same Island,
neither by sea nor moūtains discrimined,

                     eiusdem labii of the same speech and language,
and which is the cheifest of all, of
the same faith and religion. God graunt
vnto his Maiestie Dauids spirit, that he
may be after Gods own heart, and as the
Scripture saith of Iehosophat, that he may
walke in the first wayes of his father Dauid,
2. Chron. 17. 3. And we trust that God
hath sent vnto vs a Dauid indeede, to
whome these princely qualities of Dauid
doe agree,Ambr. lib. 2. offic. cap. 7. as Ambrose well describeth:
humilis spiritu, sedulus corde, facilis affatu,
&c. fortis in praelio, mansuetus in imperio, &c.
meritò ergo expetitus est ab vniuerso populo,
vt omnes ad eum venirent dicentes, ecce nos
ossa tua, &c. Hūble in spirit, diligent in heart,
affable in speech, valiant in battell, mercifull
in gouernment: therefore he was worthely desired
of all that came vnto him saying, We are
thy bones, &c.
                  
               
               
                  The 16. meditation.
                  Ver. 6. Pray for the peace of Hierusalem.]
Now beginneth the second part of
this Psalme, wherein the prophet exhorteth
the Church of God to pray for the
continuance of these so great benefits before
rehearsed: Christians then are taught

in all their praiers to remember to remē
                     ber
the prosperous state of Christs
church, that their eie should not onely be
set vpon their own priuate necessities, but
to commend vnto God that vniuersal bodie,
whereof they are members.
                  1. Thus the Prophet saith, If I forget
thee, O Ierusalem, let my right hand forget to
play: if I doe not remember thee, let my tongue
cleaue to the roofe of my mouth, if I preferre
not Ierusalem to my cheife ioy: Psal. 137. 5. 6.
So the prophet Isay encourageth Gods
people to giue thankes for the Church of
God: Reioyce with Ierusalem, and be glad
with her, all ye that loue her, reioyce for ioy
with her, all ye that mourne for her, Isay,
66. 10.
                  2. Thus did the prophet Dauid remē
                     ber
the whole state of Israel in his praiers,
Deliuer Israel O God out all his troubles,
Psal. 25. 26. Thus the faithfull vsed to
pray, O Lord I pray thee saue now; I pray
thee now giue prosperitie, Psal. 118. 25.
                  3. Like as then, when Moses by Gods
commandement made the tabernacle, euery
one brought according to his ability,
some iewels of gold, some purple, some
fine linnen, some rammes skins and badgers
skins, &c. Exod. 35. 23. 24. So should

euery one helpe forward the peace and
prosperitie of the Church: princes by their
authoritie, ministers by encouraging and
exhorting all men by their heartie praiers
and desires. If such be the loue of the saints
to the Church, that they delight in the stones
thereof, and haue pittie on the dust thereof,
Psal. 102. 14. that is, forgot her not in her
greatest affliction & humilitie: how much
greater cause is there to beare affection to
her in her beautie and prosperitie?
                  4. For in praying for the peace of the
Church, we doe also pray for our selues, to
whome that benefit of peace redoundeth:
as it is in the Psalme, All nations shall blesse
him, and be blessed in him, Psal. 72. 17. They
which blessed the Prince in their praiers,
did also in so doing procure a blessing
to themselues. By the same reason the prophet
mooueth the people to pray for the
prosperitie of Babel: Seeke the prosperitie
of the citie, whether I haue caused you to be
caried away captiue, and pray vnto the Lord
for it: for in the peace thereof, shall you haue
peace. Ier. 29. 7.
                  5. First then their securitie is here reprooued,
that in their praiers, thinke to appropriate
Gods fauour to themselues,
onely making mention of their owne

wants,Against selfe-loue in praier. Selfe-loue. not regarding the necessities of the
Church. Such was the Pharisies praier,
that onely boasted of his owne gifts, and
gaue thanks for himselfe: he despised the
poore Publican, whome he saw not farre
off smiting and knocking vpon his breast:
charitie might haue mooued him, by his
praiers to haue helped, whome he saw so
to be perplexed, Luk. 18. This vaineglorious
seruice and selfe loue of this Pharisie,
was nothing pleasing or acceptable
vnto God, no more is their praier, that
onely seeke their owne things, and are not
touched with compassion toward the afflicted
members of Christ, neither reioice
in the welfare of Gods Church, but are
tickled onely with the ioy of their owne
prosperitie.
                  Secondly, if they be worthie of reproofe,
that are negligent in procuring the peace
of their Church by their praiers, they are
much more to be blamed, that are too diligent
to disturbe the same by their vncharitable
practises. What els can be thought
of those, who haue stepped forth, and by
their straunge nouelties and paradoxes
corrupted the doctrine of the Church?
and whereas Protestants were before of
one iudgement and consent in religion,

they haue distracted many,New doctrine a disturbing of the Church. and perswaded
some to like and affect their singular
conceits. This haue they aduentured to
doe, not sowing their homely seede onely
in sermons, but dispersing the same in
their writings, to the great offence of the
Church of Christ. From this fountaine
haue sprung forth these, and such other
whirlepit points, and bubbles of new doctrine,Strange and vnsound positions maintained by some in the Church of England.
                     that▪ Christ is not originally God: that
the Scriptures are not the onely meanes, concerning
God of all that profitably we know:
that they are not alone compleat to euerlasting
felicitie: that the word of God cannot possibly
assure vs, that it is the word of God: that
mans will is apt naturally without grace, to
take or refuse any particular obiect whatsoeuer
presented vnto it, and so consequently to
beleeue: that mens naturall workes, or to do
                           •
                        
that, which nature telleth vs (without grace)
must needes be acceptable to God: that there
are workes of supererrogation, that a man can
doe now, and God approoue more then he cō
                        mandeth:
that to be preserued from all sinne
in this life, is not vnpossible: that the Church
of Rome (as it now standeth) is the familie of
Christ: that idolatours, wicked heretikes are
members of the visible Church: that there is
in orders giuen an indeleble character: that

they haue power to make Christ bodie, &c.
that sacraments doe giue and conferre, grace,
and are instruments of iustification: that they
are as necessarie in their place, and no lesse required
then beleefe it selfe: that the soules of
infants dying without baptisme are damned:
which must be the meaning of these words, the
Church as much as in her lieth, by denying the
meanes, doth cast away their soules. All which
positions▪ with others, are both contrarie to
the Scriptures, to the iudgement of protestant
writers, and the most of them opposite
to the articles of religion in the church
of England established, and to the faith of
the Church of Scotland, and of the kings
Maiesties preface to the answer of the
Apologicall epistle, as shall hereafter (if
God will) elswhere be more at large declared:
and hath beene alreadie by some
English protestants sufficiently prooued:
Yet thus haue some men beene bolde to
teach and write, who, as some schismatikes
and headstrong sectaries haue disturbed
the peace of the Church one way, in externall
matters which concerned the discipline
of the Church, they haue troubled
the Church another way, in opposing
themselues by new quirkes and deuises to
the soundnes of doctrine among Protestants

alwaies professed. It is high time
that our Elisha should cast salt into the
springs to heale the bitter waters: and that
our princely shepheard driue vs altogether
to greene pastures, that none be suffered
to straggle by themselues and seeke
their meate apart from the rest of the
flocke:The 16. benefit, consent of doctrine. that as the Apostle saith, we may
proceede by one rule, that we may minde one
thing, Philip. 3. 17. Ambrose very well
toucheth this point, Vinci illi facilè possunt,
vel facilè vitari, quorum prima propositione
omne consilium pectoris proditur:
                     Ambrose prolog. de fid. orthodox. 
                     at vero hi,
quibus multa nobiscum paria sunt, facilè possunt
innoxias mentes fraudulenta societate
percutere, dum malorum suorum virus per
bona nostra defendunt, &c. They may easily be
confuted, or auoided, which at the first dash,
bewray all their counsaile: but they, which agree
with vs in many points, may easily deceiue
simple mindes by their subtile secrecie, while
they bolster out their poisonfull doctrine by
some conformitie, &c.
                  
               
               
                  The 17. meditation.
                  
                     They shall prosper that loue thee.] They,
which doe but beare good will vnto Sion,
shall prosper: their louing affection to

Gods house, shall not be forgotten.
                  1. So the Lord by Isaak saith to Iacob;
They shall be cursed, that curse thee, and
blessed are they, that blesse thee, Gen. 27.
29. Likewise the Prophet Dauid saith,
The Lord is with them, that vphold my soule,
Psal. 54. 4. Our Sauiour promiseth, that he
which giueth but a cuppe of cold water to
any of his little ones in the name of a disciple
should not loose his reward, Math.
10. 42.
                  2. Thus Laban was prospered for Iacobs
sake, Gen. 30. 27. because he succoured
and entertained him in his house. The
Lord blessed Obed-Edom and all his
house because of the arke, 2. Sam. 6. 11. he
receiued it into his house, and had a loue
and respect vnto it, therefore the Lord
shewed him fauour againe. Thus god deliuered
Ebedmelech the Moore, because
he releeued and fauoured the prophet Ieremie,
cap. 39. 18. Ierem. And contrariwse
they are accursed, that doe hate the church
of God. What gained Ismael by mocking
of Isaack? he was cast out of his fathers
house, Gen. 21. 9. 10. Or what did it profit
Abimelech to slaie his brethren, the
sonnes of noble Ierubball? was he not
himselfe slaine, his braine pan broken with

a peece of a milstone, and after thrust thorough
by his page? Iudg. 9. 52. 53. And
Saul had good experience, what it is to
persecute the innocents, and to hate Gods
seruants: he put the priests to death, and
caused Doeg in one day to kill of them
85. persons, he chased Dauid from place
to place: what was the issue hereof? he
himselfe was ouercome in battell, and desperately
died vpon his owne sword, 1.
Sam. 31. 4.
                  3. Like as then the Prophet saith, in thy
light shall we see light, Psal. 36. 9. as a man
by beholding the light, is himselfe lightened;
so they which loue the light of Gods
trueth shining in his Church, shall themselues
find light and comfort by it. The
Lord is said to turne the bed of the mercifull
man in his sickenesse, Psal. 41. 3. that
as the turning and beating of the ficke
mans couch doeth yeild more ease and
pleasant rest to the sicke and weary bones:
so the Lord doth minister spirituall comfort
and refreshing to the soule of that
man, that hath beene a comfort vnto others.
In this respect it is said in the Canticles,
Thy name is as an ointment poured out,
therefore the virgins loue thee, Cant. 1. 2.
that like as they which are neere vnto a

precious ointment powred out, though
they were not annointed with it, yet they
are filled with the fauour of it. So they
which loue Christs Church, where this
oyntment is powred out, shall haue the
pleasant sauour and smell thereof in their
welfare and prosperitie: they shall prosper
that loue thee.
                  
                  4. For the loue that is shewed to any
of Christs members Christ accepteth, as
bestowed vpon himselfe: In as much as he
did it to one of the least of these, ye did it vnto
me, Math. 25. 45. And therefore Christ wil
recompence the loue of such, they shall
prosper themselues and be blessed in
it.
                  5. First according to this rule, They
shall prosper that loue thee,
                     The vnhappie ende of the haters of Christs Church. it were good for
vs to measure the current of many accidents
in the world: there shall we see the
miserable ende and vnprosperous successe
of such, as were enemies to Gods Church,
and the happie estate and blessed progresse
of such, as were friends and louers
of it. What hath beene the ende of those
treacherous practisers against the Lords
annointed our late Soueraigne, and of
those haters of religion? I meane Babington,
Ballard, Arden, Sommeruile, Sherwin,

Parrie, Lopez, Squire, with the rest:
they brought themselues to a shamefull,
but well deserued death, and haue left behind
them a perpetuall note of infamie,
howsoeuer the Pope hath canonized thē
for martyrs of his Church. Fit saints for
such a chappell, and worthie inhabitants
of the Popes heauen. But God shall prosper
the faithfull endeauours of his seruants:
the teares, which they shed in their
praiers for Gods Church, shall be put into
the Lords bottles, Psal. 56. 8. They shall
eate the bread in the sweate of their browes:
they shall be partakers of the comfort
and prosperitie of CHRISTS Church,
for the which they haue trauailed. And
now I trust is the time, that it shall be saide
to all that loue the Gospel; They shall prosper
that loue thee.
                     The 17. benefit, prosperitie. The Gospel hath by
Gods goodnes prospered and flourished
aboue these 40. yeares, and now, by Gods
goodnes, is like to prosper still: God shall
blesse both Prince and people, as he hath
done alreadie in great measure: God hath
brought a prosperous king to a prosperous
nation. His Maiestie the Lord hath
aboundantly honoured: in one day aduancing
him to the princely regiment of
an honourable nation, to the loue & heartie

desire of his subiects, to a countrey professing
religion, to the treasures of a rich
prince. God hath giuen him Salomons
portion: honour, wealth, wisdome: God
we trust, shall giue his Maiestie grace and
strength with al his power to honour him
againe: that we may say with the prophet,
Because the king trusted in the Lord, and in
the mercie of the most high, he shall not slide:
thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, and
thy right hand them that hate thee, Psal. 21.
7, 8. But they that loue him, shall be as the
Sunne that riseth in his might. Iud. 5. 31.
                  Secondly, seeing they prosper, that loue
and beare affection to Ierusalem; let men
learne to shewe good will vnto Christs
Church, though as yet they be no ripe
schollers themselues in Christs schoole:
though they be not growne to perfection,
let them expresse a good affectiō. A good
will and inclination, where strength yet
faileth, is accepted, and a readie disposition
is not reiected: though thou be not yet
of the Saints, yet loue the Saints. If thou
likest and louest that, thou wouldest be,
thou maist be that hereafter, which yet
thou art not. The little birde before shee
flieth, flittereth with her wings in the nest:
the child creepeth before he goeth: So religion

beginneth with affection, and deuotion
proceedeth from desire. A man
must first loue, that he would be, before
he cā be that which he loueth. It is a good
signe,The desire and loue of vertue a good steppe to obtaine it. when a man affecteth that, which he
expecteth: and doth fauour that, which
he would more fully sauour. He that loueth
Sion, shall prosper: he that loueth
vertue, shall encrease and prosper in it.
The day of small things shall not be despised,
Zachar. 4. 10. neither shall the smoking
flaxe be quenched, Math. 12. 20. but
the smoake shall bring forth fire, and fire
shall breake forth into a flame. The good
desire of the heart shall be recompenced
with the encrease of the thing desired: and
as it is saide of the mariners, God bringeth
them to the hauen, where they would be, Psal.
107. 30. so the Lord conducteth them to
the hauen of spirituall comfort, that long
after it. And so as Augustine well saith,
Habet proximus aliquam gratiam,
                     Homil. 15. 
                     ama illum
& tua est, tu habes aliam, amet te, & sua est.
Thy neighbour hath a certaine grace loue
him, and it is thine, thou hast an other grace
let him loue thee, and it is his also. Thus shall
we finde that saying of Wisdome in the
Prouerbs to be most true: I loue them that
loue me, and they that seeke me earely shall

finde me, Prou. 8. 17. Like as he that earnestly
seeketh that which he misseth, shall
finde it, so whosoeuer desireth the grace
of God, shall not be deceiued. And like as
amongst men, he that is friendly shall find
friends, Prou. 18. 24. which agreeth to that
vsuall saying, Vt ameris, amabilis esto, shew
thy selfe louely, if thou wilt be loued againe:
So is it betweene vs and God, he
loueth those that loue him, and yet it is
most true, that he first loued vs, that we
should loue him againe.
               
               
                  The 18. meditation.
                  
                     Peace be within thy walls, and plenteousnes
within thy palaces.] Some doe read,
peace be in thy strength, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; so
Hierome and the Septuagint. The word
cheel, signifieth both an armie, or a wall or
fortresse: and properly it signifieth the
rampart & defence before the wall, which
is antemurale, as Arias translateth, or as
Tremellius, praemunitio: and so is it taken
Lament. 2. 8. he made the rampart and the
wall to lament. In the other part of this
verse, some read, prosperitie, or tranquillitie:
the Septuagint interprete, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , abundance,
which the originall Shalvah,
                     
will well beare, and so it is vsed. Ezech. 16.
49. the aboundance of peace. The faithful
then are here taught to pray that warre &
trouble may cease, that there neede no
watching or warding vpon the walls: but
that the citizens within the wals, and euery
man in his house may be quiet & at peace.
It appeareth then, that this also is not the
least blessing, when God sendeth peace
vnto a nation, and intermission of warre.
                  1. As the Lord promiseth by his prophet:
My people shall dwell in tabernacles of
peace, and in sure dwellings, and in safe resting
places, Isay, 32. 18. They shall breake their
swords into mattocks, and their speares into
sythes, nation shall not lift vp sword against nation,
neither shall they learne to fight any
more, Isay. 2. 4.
                  2. Thus God blessed the raigne of
Dauid:Ceasing of wa
                           ••
                        . 
                     The Lord gaue him rest, round about
from all his enemies, 2. Sam. 7. 1. He also
prophecieth of his sonne Salomon: that aboundance
of peace should be as long as the
moone endureth, Psal. 72. 7. who had his
name Salomon therefore giuen him from
the Lord, because he should haue rest frō
all his enemies round about, 1. Chro. 22.
9. And contrariwise, as God blesseth righteous
kings with peace, so he iudgeth wicked

gouernours and people with warres
and troubles: as the Prophet threatneth
Israel. Manasseh Ephraim, & Ephraim Manasseh,
and they both shall be against Iudah, Isay,
9. 20. Thus was it in the daies of Asa in
the world, There was no peace to him, that
did goe out and in, but great troubles were to
all the inhabitants of the earth; for nation was
destroyed of nation, and cittie of cittie, for God
troubled them with all aduersitie. 2. Chro.
15. 5, 6.
                  3. The prophet, speaking of the troubles
that should befall the people for their
sinnes, saith, They should be as meate to the
fire, Isay. 9. 19. Warre is as the fire, and it
feedeth vpon and destroyeth the people,
as the fire consumeth strawe or wood: or
like as an hungrie man snatcheth at the
right hand, and at the left, and is not satisfied,
Isay, 9. 20. such is the vnsatiable and
hungrie desire of warre, there is no measure
of satietie of blood. But like vnto a
raging storme, that falleth vpon the wood
and forrest, Isay, 32. 19. which commeth
with great violence & terrible voice, such
is the tumult and violence of battell.
                  4. Peace therefore and ceasing from
warre is the fruite and effect of trueth and
iustice:Iustice and truth the causes of p
                           •
                        ace. as the prophet saith for the first▪ 
                     I

will reueale vnto them the aboundance of
peace and truth, Ier. 33. 6. and another prophet
also testifieth for the second: the work
of iustice shall be peace, Isa. 32. 17. Therefore
vnder the kingdome of Christ, peace
and safetie is promised; because his kingdome,
is a kingdome of righteousnes: I
will raise vnto Dauid a righteous braunch,
&c. in his daies Iudah shall be saued, and Israel
shall dwell safely, Ierem. 23. 6. which
though it be specially referred to the spirituall
peace, yet we doe see also that outward
tranquillitie doth waite vpon the
Gospel as an handmaid.
                  5. First then we are taught to acknowledge
another singular fauour of God toward
vs:The 18 benefit, externall peace. that hath heard the praiers of his
seruants, and graunted peace vnto his
Church. Domesticall peace and quietnes
this land (thanks be to God) hath enioyed
more then these 40. yeares vnder the conduct
of our worthy Deborah our late Soueraigne
Q. Elizabeth. But much forren
busines hath happened in this time in Ireland,
the low countries, and in other places:
much piracie hath beene committed
vpon the sea, diuers assaults and inuasions
haue beene intended against this realme,
and one furiously attempted by the Spanyards,

                     ann. 88. But now we trust that the
English nation may haue peace abroad,
and there is great hope, that our peaceable
Salomon and princely Ecclesiastes, will
bring vnto this land a generall peace and
quietnes both at home and abroad: that
men may trauaile safely at home, merchants
traffique without daunger abroad,
that artificers may still sing in their shops,
husbandmen chearefully follow the plow,
students applie their bookes: all which
things by warre are interrupted. For as
Hierome saith, Si iuxta inclyt
                           •
                        m oratorem
silent inter arma leges, multo magis studia
scripturarum▪ quae librorum multitudine, silentio
& otio indig
                           •
                        nt, &c. If▪ as the famous
Orator saith, lawes are silent amidst warres,
how much more the studie of scriptures, which
require multitude of bookes, silence and rest?
Further, we see the contrarie disposition of
the righteous seede, and the wicked race▪
for they are not so much given vnto peace,
as these are to be contentio
                        •
                     s: as the prophet
Dauid saith, I seeke peace, and when I
speake vnto them thereof, they bende themselues
to warre, Psal. 
                        •
                      20. 7. Like as it is said
of Ismael, that his hand was against euery
man, and euery mans hand against him, Gen.
16. 12. Such are nations with their gouernours,

that haue not the knowledge and
true worship of God. It is easie to ges
                        •
                     e,
who are the Ismaelites of this age, that are
readie to offend all their neighbours both
by sea and land, thirsting after the monarchie
of many nations, and stretching out
their line beyond their measure. These are
the fruits of the Popish separation, and
such is the spirit of that bodie, breathing
out continually contention and warre. It
is no rare thing for one countrey, citie, or
state, professing poperie to prouoke another:
witnesse hereof the great contentions
betweene the Guelphs in Italie taking
part with the Popes, and the Gibelines of
the Emperours part:ann. 132
                           •
                        . the strifes & warres
mooued among the Popes themselues,
that diuers times warred one vpon another
for the triple crowne;ann. 1168. as Alexander
the 3. against the Antipopes Octavian,Lanquet.
Guido, Ioannes: the Vrbanists against the
Clementines:ann. 1383. and twentie times beside
was that Sea deuided. Such were the wars
betweene the states of Italie; as the Romanes
and Tuscanes, ann. 1166. betweene
Millane, Florence, and Mantua, an. 1398.
betweene the Venetians and the citie of
Pavie,Lanquet. and Verone, ann. 1405. Thus
France and Spaine haue beene at variāce,

England and Scotland,Contentions vs
                           •
                        all betweene nations professing poperie. til the religion and
faith of the Gospel vnited them. Which
vnitie we trust nowe shall for euer hold,
beeing knit together with three most sure
bonds natural, ciuil, & religious: the first, in
that the same continent containeth them;
the second, one kingdome and gouernment
ruleth them: the third▪ one religion
and worship of god instructeth them: and
therefore, as the preacher saith, a threefold
cord cannot easily be brokē, Eccles. 4. 11.
Long may this cord hold, & long may his
princely Maiestie continue among vs, that
hath twisted this cord: and God graunt
that both prince and people may walke
in his feare, that as our Christian king is
pious and faithfull toward God, so we
may be obedient to God and our king.
And let vs not onely pray for peace but
practise it, not wish it onely, but worke it:
that we may desire so to please God, that
he may delight to dwell among vs: That
according to the angels song, Glorie be to
God on high, and in earth peace, &c. Luk. 2.
14. We may in all things set forth the glorie
of God that we may enioy peace: that
God hauing his due, we may receiue our
desire: glorie beeing not giuen vnto God,
peace is denied to men: where God by

our sinnes is prouoked, there peace in
earth is like to be interrupted. And therefore
he saith well, Quanam est causa tanti
furoris▪ non alia sane, nisi quia displicet mortalibus
angelica illa partitio, &c. What is the
cause of so great rage? none other but this, because
that partition of the angel disliketh men
whereby glorie is giuen vnto God, peace vnto
men: Quonam modo stabit pax hominum coram
deo,
                     Bernard. epist. 1
                           •
                        7. 
                     si deo apud homines non potest tu
                           •
                        a
esse sua gloria? Howe shall mans peace be
ratified before God, when Gods glory is violated
with men?
                  
               
               
                  The 19. meditation.
                  Vers. 8. For my brethren and neighbours
sake I will wish thee now prosperitie.] First
the prophet sheweth, that the loue of his
countrie, and affection to his brethren
mooued him to wish well vnto them, and
to desire the peace thereof: So then religion
taketh not away naturall affection to
countrie, friends, and parents, but it rather
maintaineth and vpholdeth it.
                  1. The Apostle reprooueth the Gentiles,
because they were 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Men void
of naturall affection, Rom. 1. 31. And the
Prophet saith, Hide not thy selfe from thine

owne flesh: Isay, 58. 6. He which withdraweth
his affection from his neighbours and
countrimen, is as though he had no pittie
or compassion vpon his owne flesh.
                  2. Thus nature wrought in faithfull
Abraham,Religion taketh 
                           •
                        ot away natural affection. when he armed himselfe and all
his familie, and rescued and recouered Lot
his brothers sonne, which was taken captiue,
Gen. 14. S. Pauls affection was very
ardent toward his countrey, when he wished
himselfe to be separated from Christ,
for his brethrēs sake, which were his kinsmen
according to the flesh. But cursed is
the memorie of cruell and vnnaturall Abimelech,
who destroied his owne citie of
Sichem, and sowed it with salt to make it
vnfruitfull and desolate, and slue the people,
whome before he saide were his bone
and his flesh. Iud. 9. 2. 45.
                  3. Like as the doue returned to the
Arke, from whence she came forth, Gen.
8. as the oxe and asse know their masters
cribbe, where they are vsed to be fed, Isa. 1.
3. and loue that place before any other: as
the riuers goe vnto the sea from whence
they came, Eccles. 1. 7. so should our loue
and affection be vnto that place, which
hath bredde vs, and where we had our
beeing. The lyons doe couch in their

dennes,Loue to our co
                           •
                        
                        trey naturall. where they are accustomed, and
the birds will hardly forsake the place,
where they were hatched: and nature draweth
affection to our countrie, which first
gaue vs breath and life.
                  4. Nehemiah giueth this reason of his
affection to Ierusalem, because there was
the cittie and the house of the sepulchers of his
fathers, Nehem. 2. 3. Therefore a man can
not be forgetfull of his countrie, vnlesse he
will shewe himselfe vnnaturall and vnthankefull
to his parents and progenitors,
which there remained while they liued, &
and there lie buried nowe they are dead.
This made Iacob charge his children, to
burie him in the caue with his fathers:
There they buried Abraham and Sara his
wife, there they buried Isaack and Rebecca,
and there I buried Lea, Gen. 49. 29. 31.
                  5. By this doctrine then we condemn
vnnaturall and mostrous practises of all
traiterous papists, that haue heretofore
most cruelly practised against their prince
and countrey: Such were Morton, to the
Popes bellowes to kindle the rebellion in
the North, Saunders in Ireland: such were
Ballard, Babington, Arden, Sommerfield,
Parrie, Campion, Sherwin, Yorke, Standley,
Squire, with the rest of that popish

broad, who by their treacherous attempts
against the life of their Soueraigne, intended
nothing els but the hauocke & spoile
of their countrie; and to make it a pray to
the enemies teeth. Herein they professing
Christianitie, were much inferiour to the
heathen,Heathen louers of their countrey who preferred the safetie of their
countrie before their owne liues, so farre
were they from attempting any thing preiudiciall
to the state and welfare thereof:
So forraine stories make honourable mē
                     tion
of Codrus king of Athens,Plutarch. Fa
                           •
                        all. 
                           •
                        8. who warring
vpon the Thracians, which had promise
of victorie by an Oracle, so that Codrus
were killed, rushed into the middest
of his enemies, and by his death obtained
the victorie to the Athenians. The
like did the Decij among the Romans, the
father in the warres against the Albanes,
the sonne against the French, vowed thē
                     selues
to die for the safetie of their countrey.
Therefore it may be a shame for such
as would be counted Christians to seeke
the spoile of their countrie, for the preseruation
whereof; they ought to spend their
life and blood. Iudge then, what manner
of religion this is, that nourisheth such disciples,
and bringeth forth such fruits.
                  Beside there are others, which offend against

this rule, who, though they shewe
not themselues as enemies to their countrey,
as the former, in seeking the hurt
thereof, yet they faile in their dutie toward
their countrey, because they procure
not the good thereof: Such are they,
which seeke to inrich themselues, though
it be to the vndoing of a whole countrey,
as inclosers of commons, engrossers of
commodities to raise them to a higher
price,Against enclosures and monopolies. purchassers of monopolies and priuiledged
sales and aduantages: all which
doe tend to the priuate gaine of a few, but
the hinderance of many, and losse to the
common-wealth: Such the wise man speaketh
of: He that withdraweth corne, the people
shall curse him, &c. Prou. 11. 26. which
is true also of all other commodities; that
whosoeuer shall drawe any common profit
from the people, be it in corne, merchandize,
commons, or such like, Gods
curse and the peoples shall light vpon
him. And of this sort, I feare me, there are
many in the world, that respect more their
own, then the common-wealth: nay looke
but into the state of euery towne, how few
shall you finde, that are deuoted to the
good of the township, but addicted wholly
to themselues? you shall see many, that

are readie to eate vp and deuoure their
neighbours, by vndermining and ouertaking
them by hard and vncharitable bargaines:
like to the raine that sweepeth away
their food, Prou. 28. 3. for such sweep away
a poore mans crops and corne, as if it
should be lost by raging and vnseasonable
weather: like as hastie raines doe wash and
carrie away the tilth of the land; so such
cormorants ouerdripping their poore
neighbours, will not suffer them to thriue
or grow by them. It is a great infamie to
Christians, that these times wil not affoard
such good common-weale men, as were
many among the Pagans. It is written of
Pompeius the great, that while Rome suffered
a great dearth, he hauing prouided
great store of corne abroad, and shipped
the same, while the marriners were afraid
to set forward because of the suddaine
tempest, he himselfe was the first that entered,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                     
vsing these couragious wordes: It is
necessarie for vs to saile, but not so necessarie
to liue: he preferred the releife of many before
the saftie of one.
                  Lastly, howe much are we bound to
giue thankes vnto God,The 
                           •
                        9▪ benefit a 
                           〈…〉
                        . who hath giuen
vs a prince to gouerne vs, who may and
doeth say with the prophet here, for my

brethren and neighbours sake, I will wish thee
prosperitie. Whose Maiestie, though in his
regall authoritie our Soueraigne lord and
King, yet in respect of his consanguinitie
our brother, borne of English parentage,
and we his louing neighbours before, in
countrey, language, religion, and now his
dutifull subiects. Now England shall be
to his Highnes as Scotland, and Scotland
as England. Such a prince, as vnto whome
I am perswaded the Church and Commonwealth
are as deare, as his life: who
herein may be compared to Dauid, who
was readie (as Ambrose rehearseth) Seipsum
pro populo offerre morti,
                     Lib. 2. de offic. c. 7. 
                     cum ferienti angelo
occurrebat, &c. meritò ergo expetitus est
ab vniuersis, &c. To offer himselfe for the
people, meeting the Angel in the way that
stroke the people, &c. therefore he was worthely
desired of all. And as he againe saith,
Charitas nunquam cadit, ideo Dauid nunquā
recidit, quia charus fuit omnibus, &c. Loue
neuer falleth away, therefore Dauid could
not fall, who was beloued of and deare vnto
all. So I trust our vertuous Dauid shall
neuer fall, beeing beloued of his people,
and much more deare vnto God, who
graunt vnto his Maiestie an happie, godly,
and peaceable raigne ouer vs.
               
               
                  
                  The 20. meditation.
                  v. 9. Because of the house of the Lord our
God, I will procure thy wealth.] This beeing
the greatest motiue that drew from Dauid
this great affection, is reserued for the last
place: his naturall loue vnto Israel, as his
countrey and kinred was very great, but
his desire vnto it, as Gods Church, and because
of the Lords presence amongst thē,
was much more: spirituall loue then is to
be preferred before naturall, but where
there is a concurrence and connexion of
both, the flame is encreased. There can be
then no greater bond then religion, no
greater loue, then for Christs cause.
                  1. Therefore the prophet Dauid saith
els where:Ioy for the welf
                           •
                        re of Christs Church. 
                     He hath exalted the borne of his
people, which is a praise for all his Saints, euen
for the children of Israel, a people neare vnto
him, Psal. 148. 14. The righteous doe reioyce
and praise God, when the Lord exalteth
his Church, and prospereth it, and
strengtheneth the horne thereof against
their enemies. And this is set downe as a
sure marke to know a faithfull man by: He
honoureth them, that feare the Lord, Psa. 15.
4. According to this rule the Apostle saith,
While we haue time let vs doe good to all men,

but specially to them which are of the houshold
of faith, Gal. 6. 10. That like as God is the
Sauiour of all mē, specially of those which
beleeue, 1. Tim. 4. 10. so we should make
the same difference preferring those in
our loue, which are most beloued of god.
                  2. Thus the prophet Dauid professeth
his loue to the people of God: Mine eyes
shall be to the faithfull of the land, Psal. 101.
6. yea he saith, that all his delight is in the
Saints of the earth, Psal. 16. 3. Such was his
zeale to the house of God, that he would
choose rather to be a doore-keeper there,
then to dwell (or to raigne as king) among
the wicked. Psal. 84. 10. Thus also the people
of God doe testifie their affection to
the Church; they well preferre Ierusalem before
their chiefe ioy. Psal. 137. 6.
                  3. For he that loueth God, must needs
also loue Gods house the place where he
dwelleth: he cannot but loue Gods image,
which most of all appeareth in the faithful
and righteous. For Christs cause therefore
his Church is beloued. Whatsoeuer
is done vnto the members therof, he doth
acknowledge it as done to himselfe, Mat.

                        •
                     5. 45. A man cānot be the bridegroomes
friend, and hate the bride, which is new Ierusalem,Revel. 21. 2.
the holy city and Church of god.
                  
                     
4. The loue of Christ and his Church
should be remembred more then wine,
Cant. 1. 3. that is, to be preferred before all
other pleasures of loue. The faithfull say, I
am sicke of this loue, Cant. 2. 5. This loue
hath no measure, it exceedeth all bounds:
this loue is as strong as death, Cant. 8. 6. nay
it is stronger then death: for it remaineth
after death; loue neuer falleth away: much
water cannot quench this loue: affliction
                        •
                     
cannot ouercome it: thy seruants delight in
the stones thereof, and haue pitie on the dust
thereof, namely of Sion. Psal. 102. 14. Euen
Gods Church when it is in the greatest
affliction is louely: though shee be
blacke, because the funne of affliction
hath looked vpon her, yet is shee comely:
though for the one like the tents of Kedar,
which are mooueable and flitting, as the
Church is tossed too and fro with affliction;
yet for the other, shee is beautifull
and pretious as the curtaines of Salomon.
Cant. 1. 4.
                  5. First then vnto the naturall loue of
our countrey, this must be added as a
more worthie affection, that our hearts be
towarde it, because it is the Church of
God: that euery man should procure, as
much as in him lieth, not onely the temporall

welfare therof, as it is the commonwealth,
but to wish the spirituall health
and growth, as it is Gods house. As he is
an enemie to his countrey, which hindreth
the externall state and condition, so he is
no friend to the Church, that furthereth
not the internall perfection. Ministers are
to informe, and Magistrates to reforme
the Church. The one negligent to instruct,
the other remisse to correct, are
not well-wishers to Gods house. This
then may be an admonition to all slouthfull
and idle pastours, that are slacke in the
Lords busines,Ministers who carelesse of Christs church. and as euill and vnfaithfull
stewards giue not meate in due season to
their Lords seruants. Such are they, which
want abilitie and cannot teach, or want
will and are idle and doe it not, or are couetous
and heape many Churches and
dignities, and are carelesse to teach: feeding
themselues rather then the people of
God: how can these say, because of the
house of God I will procure thy wealth? nay
they esteeme not Gods house, neither duly
regard the price of soules: taking vpon
them some that, which they cannot at all
discharge, some more then they can compasse,Who be the dumbe, g
                           •
                        e
                           •
                         s
                           •
                        eepie dogg
some that whereunto they haue no
desire. The first are dumb
                           •
                         dogges, that can

not barke, the second greedie dogges, that
can neuer haue enough, the third sleepie
dogges, that he and delight in sleeping, as
the prophet compareth the watchmen
and shepheards of Israel. The first then
should be supplied, the second moderated,
the third awaked. All of them are conuinced
to beare small loue to the Church
of Christ. Our Sauiour saith to Peter, If
thou louest me, feede my sheepe: he therefore
that carefully feedeth not the flocke of
Christ, is found to be cold in his loue to
Christ. The Pharisies refused no paines,
but compassed sea and land to make one
Proselyte of their religion, Math. 23. 15. in
like manner the Pharisaicall brood of popish
Iudasites and Seminaries in these
daies, doe trauell by sea and land to seduce
simple soules, and peruert them to their
superstition. Then what a shame is it, that
the Ministers of the Gospel should giue
themselues to a drousie sleepe, as though
the spirit of slumber had ouertaken them,
and not to be as carefull to defend Christs
sheepe, as they are to offend them, to reduce
them vnto God, whome they haue
seduced, and to keepe them in the way,
whome the other seeke to driue out of the
way?
                  
                     
Further, what a great treasure had Israel
of Dauid, that was thus affected to Gods
house, for whose sake he thus heartily praieth
for peace, and promiseth to procure it.
I trust that God hath raised vp another
Dauid to his Israel of England, whose
princely heart nothing can more surely
knit vnto his kingdom, then because Gods
house is amongst vs. He commeth not to
a nation of a diuerse religion in substance,
though differing in some ceremonies:
(with or without the which religion neither
standeth nor falleth.) Which diuersitie
of religion betweene Prince and people,
hath at other times and otherwhere,
caused great trouble sometime to the
Prince, where the kingdome could not be
receiued, vnlesse the religion professed
were admitted, as of late in France; sometime
to the people, when a religion is by
force imposed, which is of fewe desired, as
well appeared in the change of religion in
England at Queene Maries entrāce. Now
both these occasions of trouble and tumult
are remooued: neither the king required
to chaunge his profession, nor the
people enforced to leaue their religion:
but as we wish vnto the one (which we
doubt not of) princely constancie and

perseuerance, so to the other Christian
loyaltie and obedience. God hath sent vs
a Prince,
                        
                           •
                        0. Benefit, care of the Church of Christ. that loueth Gods Church; that
wisheth no longer to liue, then he may be
a protectour of the faith; who counteth it
one of his fairest stiles to be called a louing
nourish father to his Church, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
43. one that frequenteth the exercises of
religion, fostereth the faithfull Ministers
thereof, affecteth all the true professours
of it: who misliketh and condemneth enmitie
in nobles, prophanenes in Courtiers,
papall pride in Church gouernours, negligence
in Pastours, loosenesse of life in
Christians, coldnes of religion in Protestants.
How much are we bound vnto the
Lord, that hath raised vp such a prince,
vnder whome religion is like to prosper,
and Christs Church to flourish: who will
heare the complaints of the poore, and not
despise the groanes of the heauie hearted,
nor deferre the desire of the godly: according
to the petition of the Church vnder
Dauid, Let the king heare vs, when we call:
of whose princely loue and fauour euery
honest and sincere heart may say, as one
saith:August. Hier
                           ••
                        . 
                     in cuius charitatem facise me totum
proijcio, fatigatum scandalis saculi, deū quippe
illie esse sentio, in quem me s
                           •
                        curus proijcio,

& in quo securus requiesco. Vpon whose loue I
doe repose my selfe, beeing wearied with the
off
                           •
                        nces of the world, for God is there present,
vpon whome I wholly relie, and in him securely
rest. God giue vs grace, that as Samuel
saith, We may so feare the Lord and serue
him, and not disobey the word of the Lord,
that both we and the king that raigneth ouer
vs, may follow the Lord our God: that is, he
may remaine with vs for euer, that God
may conduct vs in this life in all happines
and prosperitie, and we and our king may
follow him to euerlasting felicitie. Amen▪
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Errata.
            Pag. 3. l. 9. for law, read loue.
            p. 5. l. 5. for people, read prophet.
            p. 6. l. 29. for Retraveling, read Estraveling
            p. 10. l. 4. read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            p. 10. l. 18. for found, read find.
            p. 12. l. 4. next this, read neither.
            p. 12. l. 16. for Atamoth, read Alamoth.
            p. 16. l. 11. for whole, read while.
            p. 20. l. 16. for Gaxe, read Gaye.
            p. 29. l. 2. for that there, read there.
            p. 31. l. 26. read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            p. 37. l. 27. for Revatane, read E
                  •
               vatane.
            p. 61. l. 2. for offring, read offence.
            p. 64. l. 4. for imitated, read initiated.
            p. 72. l. 18. for with the, read of the.
            p. 78. l. 26. for reports, read reporters.
            p. 88. l. 1. read, to remember, once.
            p. 92. read, in the preface to the answer of
the Apologicall epistle: these wordes
must be placed in the margin, as it was
not in the copie, which by great ouersight
were set in the booke.
            p. 109. for, to the, read the.
            
         
      
   