
      
         
            
               
THREE
Miseries of Barbary:

                  Plague.
                  Famine.
                  Ciuill warre.
               
With a relation of the death of Mahamet
the late Emperour: and a briefe
report of the now present Wars
betweene the three Brothers.
            
               POST TENEBRAS LUX
            
            Printed by W. I. for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold
in Pater noster rowe at the signe of the Sunne.
         
         
            
            To the Right Worshipfull
the whole Company
of the Barbary Merchants.
            
               HAuing drawn certaine Collections
together of some,
the best and maine occurrents
which haue now lately
(and not many yeares
past) hapned in Barbary; &
they being digested into a
Volume (although little for quantity, yet delightfull
to be perused for the raritye,) I thought they
could not better be bestowed, than vpon such as
holde commerce with that Countrey, and know
the state and condition of the people. Amongest
which number I make bolde to present these my
labors to you onely, because you are all Brothers,
and men that most worthily can iudge of the Relation,
and the truth thereof. The chiefe and farthest
point that my intention seeks to arriue at in

this, is to describe the horrour and vn-heard-of
misery that hath falne vpon that Kingdome by a
Plague: to the intent that by comparing our sins
with theirs (being altogether as greet if not greater)
and the hand of mercy which Heauen hath
stretcht forth ouer our Nation, aboue theirs, we
may be allured to looke into our soules betimes,
least the like Viols of Wrath bee powred downe
vppon vs. It is my loue that bestowes this vppon
you, which I pray receiue with such good acceptation,
as with my best affection it comes vnto
you. And thus referring my selfe to your censure
I take my leaue.
            
               Deuoted yours,
Geo. Wilkins.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Barbary.
            
               THis is a story (like a briefe Chronicle)
conteining various and much matter
in few lines: It is but a little bottom
of Tyme, which you may holde and
hide in your hand, yet being vnrolled
(to the length) it reacheth to the beginning of many
yeares past. A word now must stand heare (as
in a Map) for a Citty, and a few sheetes for the
Chart of a spacious Kingdome.
            Understand therefore that Abdela the Emperor
being dead: Muly Mahamet his Brother succeeded,
and was crowned King of Barbary. No sooner
was this dignity conferred vppon him, but he reuenged
himselfe on those that in Abdelaes raign loued
him not, and therefore by their counsels did
what in them lay, to draw his Brothers (the Emperors
affection) from him, yea so far that they perswaded
either to haue his eyes put out, or bee sent
to death: of these counsellours, these three were
chiefe, Alcade Azus, Alcade Mussa, and Alcade Bardu,
from two of which he commaunded their liues: but
because his state needed the heads of Wise-men to
hold it vp, and for yt he was not generally beloued
of ye Nobility and some of the bloud Royal: he gaue

               Alcade Azus his life, and of a prisoner and a Man
in disgrace, aduanced him vp to higher honours
then before; receiuing him euery daie into his bosome
for his counsell: which he did the rather because
he knew that Azus would bee prouident and
carefull to increase the Emperors Bittelmell (that
is to say) his treasury. Much and often was his
mind perplexed with thoughts about settling his
Empire; his cogitations fought within thēselues,
when sometimes hee would (in his owne pryuate
Iudgment) make such a man fit to be of his secret
and chiefest counsels, and sometimes another: this
he would like to day, and to morrow vtterly distast
him.
            At length he resolued to trust none of his owne
Country-men, but lay his hart in the brest of one of
his Elkes, (yt is to say, a Christian turned Moore)
yet (vpon sounder contemplation) him hee reiected
too: he would put the health of so great a Kingdome
into no such dangerous Physitiaus hands:
for he deliuered that Mahamet (his GOD) would
take all fauor from him if he should doe so: besides
he that had forsaken his owne Law and religion,
could not haue the temper of constancy, to serue one
of a contrary religion: nay, how euer in out-ward
shew, these Elkes or Regadoes (quoth hee) seeme
Saints, and holy ones, to me they may proue Diuels,
and hold it no conscience to betray my bloud
and Kingdome. Azus therefore was the man culled
out from the rest, by the Emperor.
            
               
This Prince flourished in as great glory,
as the greatest of his predecessors: the blessed
fruites of sweete peace, tooke away the sourenesse
of any warre (either forren or domesticke)
that was serued in against him: his subiects
were infinite, his Citties filled with Nations:
He had more Wiues then any of his fore-fathers:
his Concubins were fairer and more
in number; he was as happy as euer was any
King in Barbary, in the flourishing multitudes
of his people: and as infortunate as euer
any before him, in beholding their misery.
Fortune twice had her pleasure vpon him, first
in lifting him vppe hygh in her loue, lastly in
pursuing him and his subiectes with her tyrrany.
            Many noble and notable occurrentes, presented
themselues to the eye and eare of the
world, during his Raigne: of which to write
as they deserue, were to adde a large Uolume
to the Chronicles of that Countrey. I will
therefore (as one hauing been at a royall banquet)
reserue some of it to my selfe, and bestow
some vppon others, such as I thinke will be
sweetest in going downe: of which take this
as part.
            It was in his time, when that great Armada,
(that brought terror in her Wombe from
Spaine) was deliuered of it, in the narrowe
Seas of England. At the birth (but indeed
the buriall) of which inuincible Nauy, the

               Spaniards that lay then in Barbary and attended
on the Spanish Embassadour, beguiling
themselues with a false rumor, that this land
was conquered, prepared for triumphs, as (if
their ioy had bin tamely begot) they had reason:
But one Maister Arnold Tomson (an english
Marchant) certifying to the Emperour
the truth and certaine defeature of the Spanish
Fleete: the English men that were there,
hadde likewise leaue of Mahamet, to expresse
their ioy in Bone-fires, and other triumphes;
for the King did euer loue the Nation of our
Countrey, and did many fauors to our Marchantes.
            The English Embassadour lying in the
same streete where the Spanish Embassador
lay, and our Marchants gathering togither,
determining to ride into the fielde, and there
hauing put themselues into some gallant order,
to come backe into the Citty, in a triumphant
and ciuill manner, to doe honour to
their Country for so happy and vn-heard-of a
victory: behold, before the Spanish Embassadors
gate (by which our Country-men determined
on horsebacke to passe) stood a company
of Spaniardes, (with some Moores
whom they had hired) armed with pike and
shot to stoppe their passage; betweene whom
what happened, those english Marchantes ye
then were hurt, (of which maister Arnold Tomson
was one) can if they be yet liuing testifie:

and for those that were then slaine out-right, the
Emperour (in indignation) swore not onely that
they who did execute this trechery vppon the english
Nation, should haue Iron giuen them (that
is to say, should haue their throates cut) but hee
would also certifie the King of Spaine of this abuse:
so willing was hee to doe Iustice euen to
strangers.
            Another accident (because it is worthy note for
the example, and may be a warning to our Countrey-men)
will I set downe: and this is it. An
English man fallen out and struck by his maister,
desperately resolued (whilest the fire was in his
bloud) to reuenge those blowes on his body, by giuing
wounds to his own soule: and thereupon he
presently went and denyed his religion, forsooke
Christ to follow Mahomet; And from a Christian
turned Moore.
            It is the custome of that Countrey when any
Man wil do so, to obserue (amongst others) these
ceremonies: It is signified to those Christians yt
are in the Citty, Towne, &c. that such a one will
be an Elke, or turne Moore, A certaine equall
number therefore (aswel Barbarians as Christians)
are assembled in a place fit for such purposes; one
part sitting (like Iudges) on ye one side, the other,
opposite directly against them: the Turne-coate
iust in the middle of the roome betweene them, and
in presence of both, he is there then demaunded,

whether he will deny the law of his owne religion
and embrace theirs or no: It is offered vnto him
his free liberty to take the one or the other: nay it
is lawfull for those that sit there on the contrary
part (being Christians) to vse all the power of Argument
to winne him from this delinguishment.
Thus did they serue this man: thus was he three
seuerall times, conuented before them: and three
seueral times did he most stifly defend what he had
done, and defie Christ: no Physicke of Spirituall
counsell doing good vppon him, they gaue him ouer.
But note the iudgment of that Captaine (the
Lord of hoasts) whose colours of saluation he had
forsaken, within a short time (after this Apostasy
& rebellion of his soule) this Traytor to God, happened
to kill a Man: for which fact hee was adiudged
by the Ladies of that Country, not to loose
his life, but (which was worse) to liue; But how
to liue? As the first Murderer that euer drew bloud
of Man: as Cayne liued, wandering vp and down,
with none (on paine of death) to keep him company,
but his owne thoughtes which were tenne thousand
executioners; none to giue him bread, so that
he fed vpon despaire: none to quench his thirst, so
that he drunke the poison of an infected conscience,
he knew he had killed a Man, and therefore euen
Infidels abhorred him: he knew he had forsaken
his Religion, and therefore Christians would not
pitty him: In this wretehed state he went vp and
downe, in this misery he pyned, till hee dyed: let
that death of his teach others how to line.
            
               
But leauing this, let vs againe fixe our eyes vpon
Mahamet the Emperor, who (thinking it would
be as great a glory to him, to create others, Kings,
as to be a King himselfe) did (by the aduice of his
counsell, but most of all out of the working and
height of his owne spirit) determine to diuide his
large and fruitful Empire amongst his Sonnes.
            Of all the Wiues and Concubins that this Emperor
had, three onely, (aboue the rest) had a soueraignty
ouer his amorous affections, and of those
three, he did still prefer one before the other. Lilia
Isa was the fairest, and her did he loue dearest: shee
was empresse ouer the rest, yet were ye rest Queenes
ouer others, shee had the supreame commaund of
the Kinges house, and none commaund her but
the King. Lilia Ageda was a Negro, yet had she a
second place in his heart. Lilia Myriem had the
third: of Lilia Myriem (being a blacke Woman
likewise) did hee beget a Son, called Muly-Shem,
being one of the fairest Children that euer he had,
but this Muly-Shem offring some offence to a youth
that attended on him, was by him slaine. The
young-man afterward (knowing the Emperours
wrath) killing himselfe. Lilia Agede was mother
to Muly-Beferris, and Muly-Sheck, (the youngest
Brother:) Lilia Isa Mother to Muly-Sidan (the eldest.)
Betweene these three were these late ciuell
warres in Barbary.
            
            And thus did Mahamet make diuision of his
Kingdome, which afterwarde bred diuision amongst
his people, and set all in a Combustion to

               Muly sidan (who was giuen to Armes and to loue
a Souldier) gaue he the Kingdome Tadula, and
Taphalet: to Mulibefarris (whose soule lusted after
nothing but sensuall pleasure) gaue he the Kingdome
of Sus: to Muly-Sheck, the Kingdome of
Fez: appoynting Mustapha (that was born a Christian,
and turned Moore, but a Souldier, and a
Gentleman of a Noble Spirit) to attend on Sheck
as his Guardian, because he was but young.
            Before we step any farther, it shall not be amisse
(because I would draw this Barbary-picture, with
as much life and delightfull colours as I could)
to set downe a pretty combat betweene two of
the Emperours Wiues, playd before the Emperour
himselfe. Thus it was: Mahamet sitting
one morning with Lilia Ageda (the Negro) by him,
talking mearily (for hee tooke pleasure in her
speech, because shee was wise:) In comes Isa (his
fairest bedfellow) and seeing the Blacke-one so
neere her beloued, she blushed and shewed anger
euen in her eyes, (for what Woman woulde not
be angry to see another robbe her of the loue of
an Emperour?) At length bowing to the earth,
she fell at the Kings feete, and with a pretty smile
beganne to tell a tale of the Larke and the Crow:
the shutting vppe of her morrall being, that the
Larke was the Bird of the morning, and of the
day, and therefore might be bold to challenge the
mornings due, and all Rytes of the day; But the
Crow was the Bird of the night, and had nothing
to do with the morning.
            
               
The emperor vnderstanding her sweete witty
bitternesse, that by the Larke thee ment her selfe,
and by the Crow, Lilia Ageda (because of her blacknesse)
was so delighted with the comparison,
that hee gaue charge none should euer after presume
to giue the Emperour his good morrowe,
till Lilia Isa had bin with him, and thereupon was
Isa called the emperors Larke, or his Bird of the
morning.
            Let vs loose one poynt more of our compasse,
and sayle a little out of our intended way to finde
out in what feare and awful reuerence the subiects
of this Kingdome hold the anger of their Soueraigne:
to vnderstand which, receiue this only as
a tast. One of the emperours officers of his Custome
(whose name was Cidde Abdela Creme) being
an olde Man, had one Sonne onely, (called
Enhamet) whom he tendred as his life, being the
hope and health of his age: him had the father
put into his owne place: the young man comming
in a morning betimes to the Custome-house, but
the rest of the officers being not present, he could
not enter (for euery one hath a seuerall Key, and
vnlesse all be there together, not one can get in)
he determined within himselfe to spend an houre
(til the rest met) in renewing the emperors pallace
(where his Concubins liued) because he was told
it was a rare and rich place, and that it was not
lawfull without great meanes to enter. That report
more inflamed his desire, insomuch that in the
end (watching his time) by stealth he got in.
            
               
Where being, and staring vp and downe, it chanced
that one of the Women saw him, who presently
screeked out, and ranne crying, A man, a man:
for you must note, that if any one of them spy a
Man, (except the Eunuches that attend them) and
doe not call for helpe, it is death to her: and what
Man soeuer rudely presume to haue a fight of thē,
it is death to him. It was knowne by inquiry,
(vpon her noyse) that it was Enhamet the Customers
Sonne, who had thus offended the lawes:
the Emperor being giuen to vnderstand so much,
made an oath he should dye for it. Immediately
vpon this (by occasion of some busines) comes the
olde Man (Enhamets Father) to the King, who
supposing it hadde beene about his Sonnes
pardon, and his indignation being now a little
cooler) suddainely demaunded of him what that
Man deserued, that durst breake into the place
where his Emperours Concubins were: Cidde
Abdela (not suspecting the offender) answered, that
hee deserued the sharpest sentence of death, for so
the Law would adiudge him. Be thou then (quoth
the Emperor) thine owne Sonnes condemnation:
As thou hast iudged him, so let it be. But the
King beholding death sitting in the olde Mans
face at that doome, grew pittifull, and (for loue he
bare the Father) forgaue the Sonne, which mercy
notwithstanding, Abdela Creme not truely laying
holde of, but mistaking the Noble spirit of a
Prince, and imagining that this fauor so strangely
extended was but a snare to intrap his owne

life, because offences of that nature were neuer before
pardoned in any: home hee comes; with sorrow
in his afflicted looks, and his heart euen murdered
within him, by the cruelty of his owne
thoughtes: his Sonne demaunded the cause of
this so strange and suddaine distemperature, but
his Father giuing no answer, sends for cordes,
shewes them onely insteade of speech, and to
make this dumb Tragedy fall in the end, he causeth
him before his owne eyes to bee strangled:
great were the lamentations of the Sonne, and
aboundant were the teares he let fall to soften his
Fathers heart: a mighty conflict was there in the
poore old mans bosome, betweene naturall piety
to a Child, and naturall feare of a Soueraigne:
but the last of the two preuailed: and hauing bestowed
vpon the dead body the ceremonies of the
graue, according to the custome of the Countrey,
hee caused the Act to bee registred downe for his
owne safety, alledging that howsoeuer the Emperor
(when he heard this blacke and vnnaturall
deed reported) would happily bee moued vnto
wrath, yet inwardly he would be highly contented
with it.
            
               Mahamet being thus feared and loued of his subiects,
wanted nothing that (according to humane
Iudgement) could make a Prince happy: pleasure
was his slaue and waighted on him whensoeuer
he lusted for her company: Riches flowed into
his houses of treasure in large & Goldē streams:
his Court was ful of counsellors; his Cittyes full

Merchants, his Castles full of souldiers: he was
a mightie King himselfe, & had sonnes that were
as mightie as hee, their Dominions were ample,
they were full of men, and full of all thinges that
maintaine men. It seemed that the Father lost
much of his imperiall state and dignitie, when hee
placed his three sonnes (like three great lights) to
shine equally in his kingdome, considering that all
the beames of maiestie that came from them, might
(if he had pleased) haue beene sent foorth from the
centred glory of his owne head, but euen this borrowed
reflexions of theirs, made his brightnes the
greater: and his sonnes yeelding acknowledgement
of all their royaltie to flow from him, did (like
Riuers paying tribute to the Sea) seeme not a
whit the lesse for such homage and fealtie.
            Fortune hauing turnd the wheele of this Emperours
fate along time with steddie hand, had now
brought it about to the vppermost point & highest,
on which she meant he should sitte: he should be no
more her darling, and therefore shee tooke her fauours
from him. Or to speake of a power that cō
               trolls
Fortune, and whose very finger throwes
downe kingdoms to vtter confusion, or holdes thē
vp in their greatnesse, whether the generall sinnes
of the whole Nation deserued it, or whether the
people were punisht for the particular faults of the
king and his Courtiers, as many times it falls
out, and as it hapned to the Grecians, for Quicquid
delirant Reges plestantur Achini: or for what other
faultes soeuer, the rodde of vengeance was made

readie: it is in man to thinke vppon and feare, but
not to examine, yet sure it is, that as a fire catching
hold at first but of some meane cottage, in some
one end or corner of a Cittie, hath oftentimes (ere
the furie of it could bee put out) swallowed vp in
his flames, the goodliest and most beautifull buildings
that stoode euen fardest out of reach, so did
the clowdes of infection burst open their vaines,
and let fall the poyson of them, on this kingdom of
Barbary.
            
            If euer the Plague in any place got his true
name, there he had it. At the beginning it strooke
(like an Arrowe) on the head but of one Citty, but
in a short time after, it fleme from Cittie to Citty,
and in the end stucke in the very hart of the whole
kingdome. Insomuch, that Death came (like a
tyrannous Usurper) to the Court gates, & threatned
to depose the Emperour himselfe.
            Hee that before sate in his throne of maiestie,
greatly feared of other Nations round about him,
and strongly garded by his owne, is on the suddaine
daunted, and (beeing accounted one of the
mightiest amongst the Kings of the earth) is ready
to submit to him, with whom euen Infants doe euery
howre fight hand to hand.
            See the authoritie, fame and terror of that Inuader
(Death) hee strooke but vp an Allarum in
this Emperous Pallace, and the Emperour himselfe
trembled through feare thereof: his conceites
that stood before like so many aged Oakes, bowed
presently to the earth like so many ranks of young

Willowes: yet his Citties shooke at the voyce, no
lesse then if it had beene at an Earth-quake. And
so hardly did the pestilence pursue Mahamet, that
he durst not sleep for it in one place twice together:
euery night was he compelled (for safety) to flye
vnto a contrary lodging.
            As his Court remoued so did the plague: whersoeuer
the one kept his standing house, there the
other pitched vp his Pauilion as a proud and daring
Challenger to all commers. Insomuch that
sicknesse in the end (though weake of himselfe)
wrastled with so many that were neere and about
the Princes person, and still got the better of thē,
that Mahomet had not men to remoue those tents
which hee was inforced to carry vp and downe
with him for his owne houshold to lye in: fourescore
Barbarians (being all attendants and Officers
in Court) falling euery night, in this mortal
and pestiferous massacre. So that the Emperour
for want of Seruants was glad to take chained
slaues from the Oare (out of their gallies) and to
make them his guard.
            What a strange alteration is here of a Court?
He that had seene this prince so royally attended,
so maiestically attyred, with such God-like reuerence
kneeled vnto: so guarded, so followed, so
circled round with a Nation in number infinite:
Would that Man haue euer thought that such a
Prince could haue beene driuen out of his stately
pallaces, and beene glad to lye abroade in the
fields? Or that he shold euer submit to such humility,

as to put his life into the hands of slaues and
miserable Captiues? The onely dispised wretches
of his Kingdome: the beggerliest: the most
discontēted, the worst-minded to him & his Nation:
yea, such whom he knew could haue been glad
to cut his throat, to ransome themselues from the
bondage and Hell of the gally? Yet euen these
most forlorne Creatures, (which before like Oxen
were yoaked by the Neckes with Iron) was this
great Monarch faine to make much of, and to
turne them into his best and fayrest courtiers. So
easily and so low can the hand of Heauen pull
downe the mightiest vpon earth, and make them
stoope euen to the weakest.
            The hart being thus sicke, was not the whole
body (thinke you) in danger to perish? The eye of
the Kingdome being so much blemished, did not
the Uniuersall land dwell in darkenesse? Was it
possible that the Court should pyne, and that the
Citties should flourish? No, no, Alasse! Full houses
were emptied there of whole families: whole
streetes of their housholds: yea, euen the Citties
themselues were left desolate of inhabitants.
            Had all the Artifiers in the Land, layed by all
other worke, onely to haue made Coffins, they
could not all haue builded roomes fast enough, for
the dead to dwell in: For sicknesse was euen weary
of throwing downe bodies, and Death euen
glutted with killing them. Doe but imagine
how the World shewed, when all Creatures that
were drowned in the Uniuersall floud, lay heaped

together, after the waters were shrunke into the
earth, such a Mount Caluary was Barbarie: the carkases
of vnburied men were so many, that a far off
they might be taken for hills, yea so numberlesse
were they, that it seemed as if all the Nations vppon
earth had sent their dead thether, and that Barbarie
had beene the common Church-yard.
            When Vespasian besieged Ierusalem, Famine fed
vpon the Cittie within, and warre without, yet did
the Iewes choose rather to steale forth, and trust
the doubtfull mercy of an Enemie, then to perrish
vnder the crueltie of their owne countrymen. At
length, such multitudes of them got daily through
the gates, that Tytus (to be ridde of them, & fright
them from comming) crucified them all, and sixt
the bodies so put to death, round about the Cittie,
before their walls, as a terror to those within: so
that in the end, (they pressing forth for all this continuallie
vppon him) there coulde be found neither
wood enough for Crosses to nayle them vpon, nor
ground enough whereon to set Crosses.
            The like miserie fell vpon this royall kingdom
of Barbarie, for the people in it were strooke downe
so fast by the Pestilence, that the liuing were not
able to inter the dead, neither could there be found
ground sufficient enough (about theyr Citties) to
affoord them buriall, so that the earth did not (as
in other Countries) couer and burie them, but they
buried and couered the earth.
            Let vs muster the dead together, and take a view
of this disordered Armie. In Morocco the cheefest

Cittie of Barbarie, died in one yeere seauen hundred
thousand Moores, and seauen thousand seauen
hundred Iewes, as by bills daily sent to the Emperour
did appeare.
            What Nation in the Worlde would not haue
trembled, hearing of such an invinsible host marching
against them, yet Death with one Arrowe
slew all these. In the Cittie of Far, died (the same
yee
                  •
               e fiue hundred thousand, beside those that fell
in the Country.
            Yea so terrible and fierce was Death in his execution
of those in Morocco, that in the space of one
day and a night, hee slewe there with his owne
handes, foure thousand, seauen hundred and odde.
A mercilesse and tragicall conquest, an inglorious
victorie, for he made them away in their beddes.
            O what a number of graues must haue beene opened,
if all these thousands should haue had their
rites of buriall? Howe many fathers for children,
wiues for husbands, sonnes and daughters for
Parents, and kinsfolkes for friends, should heere
haue wept, if the dead had beene paid their due lamentations?
But Mourning heere had so wasted
it selfe, that it quite forgot truly howe to mourne.
Sicknes & griefe grew so familiar with men, that
to be ridde of such lothsome company, they sought
out Death, when they knewe not where to finde a
Graue.
            O thou beautiful Kingdome, how couldest thou
chuse but looke vnlouely, hauing so many children
dead in thy wombe? how could thy body be otherwise

then vnwholesome, hauing so mortall a disease
running vppon thee, yea, all ouer thee seuen
years together! And O your Citties that were the
fairest Daughters to so Noble a Mother; What
shrikes, and soule-afflicting passions did not you
breath forth, seeing all your Marchants (that had
wont to court you bee your loues) and forsaking
you to see your buildinges stand in their wonted
height, but robbed of their wonted ornamentes!
to see Foxes and wilde Beastes (instead of Men)
inhabiting in your goodliest streetes and meeting
daily vpon your Exchanges! A more then Widdow-like
lamentation must you needes put one, to
behold your selues vtterly bereaued of those that
were your best-beloued: What Kingdome
(thogh neuer so farre remoued) is not heauy at the
heart, hearing these sad stories of your sorrow?

                  —Quis talia fando,
                  Mirmydonum, Dolopumùe, aut Durimiles Vlissi
                  Temperet àlachrimis?
               
Your enimies cannot bee so barbarous as not to
yeeld to your condolement. We will therefore no
longer let out your teares within-doores, nor no
more stand wondring to see all your buildinges
shew like so many hearses; but will suruay your
filds abroad, & try if they can afford any better cō
               solation,
Alasse they cannot: calamity there trauels
vp and downe in the same wretched habilyments,
that she weares within the walled Citties,
People fly in numbers vp to the Mountaines, to
dwell amongst beastes, and to dispossesse them of

their inheritance: they flie thinking Death would
not follow them, but hee like a politicke Generall,
lay so close in Ambush at their returning backe to
their Citties, that he cut them off faster then at the
first, & left their bodies to be a pray to those beasts,
who not many daies before ranne into their Caues
as beeing afraid of them.
            O what a miserie was it, to see high-wayes
strewed with dead and infected carkases, as if the
whole kingdome had beene sacked, and the enemie
had had all the people in execution? A rich and abundant
haruest couered the face of the earth, but
the Husbandmen in steade of filling their Barnes,
were busied in filling vp graues: the fruites which
the ground brought forth, shee herselfe did againe
denoure. A strange haruest was it, for Corne was
had in without Reapers, it was gathered & sowed
againe all at one time, for the Earth did now play
the good Huswife, shee saued all to herselfe, and
yet euen in sauing it, did she spill all: there were not
handes enough to gather the foode, which she out
of her plenteous lappe bestowed amongst her children,
nor mouthes enough to eate it.
            The Country-Lasse sate not nowe singing by
her Milking-payle, for the poore beastes ran bellowing
vp and downe with swolnevdders, mourning
before their Maisters doores, because they
could not be eased of their burdens.
            The Pestilence hauing thus (like a mercilesse
Inuader) destroyed both Citties & Uillages, and
hauing oftentimes made the greatest Lords in the

kingdome stoope to his commaund, and determining
to conclude his conquest, with taking the Generall
ouer so great a Nation prisoner, did at the
last set vpon the Emperour Mahamet himselfe, and
with her venemous breath kild him. Which glorious
victorie beeing gotten, Death and his Liefetenant
(Sicknes) beganne to sound a retra
                  •
               te, to
march from their walls, and to let them liue in
quiet.
            No sooner were their backes turnd, but againe
in multitudes came the people downe from the
Mountaines, and as all Riuers (when Land-waters
haue opprest thē) flie to the bosome of the Sea
for safety, so did the Nation of this great Empire,
frō all parts thereof come marching ioyfully, (and
yet fearefully) to fill vp & make good againe theyr
disinhabited houses. What stories are now tolde
of lamentable Funeralls? what friends and kinsfolkes
are missing? what sorrowe there is for so
much Acquaintance lost? what gladnes to meete
with any, whom they heard or doubted were in
their graues? Their Citties doe now looke with
cheerefull countenaunces, streetes are filled with
men, houses with families: euery one applies himselfe
to his former labour, euery Merchant to his
trafficke. But behold, in the heate of all this Sunshine,
when no wrinkle could be seene in the browe
of Heauen, when all was calme, and that men lay
safely snorting on their secure pillowes, a seconde
storme burst out of the clowdes, a second & a more
fearefull: God poured another vengeance on the

heads of this people, he sent Famine to breath vpon
them, and to suck the life-blood out of theyr bosoms,
so that they that before durst not come neere
one another, for feare of beeing infected with the
Pestilence, are now ready to lay hold each of other,
and to turne their owne bodies into nourishment.
The Plague was mercifull to them, in dispatching
them quickly out of the world, but this tyrant
put thē to lingering deaths. They had once more
meate then mouthes, now they had many mouthes
and no meate. O Hunger! how pittilesse art thou?
a monster thou art of a most strange condition, for,
how small a thing will appease thee, and yet what
wilt thou not destroy to satisfie thy rauenous appetite?
thou art most cruell to them that most seeke
to relieue thee, and when thou hast nothing to feede
vpon, thou plaiest the murderer, and eatest vp thy
selfe. How tirannous hast thou shewed thy selfe to
this great Nation? thou hast heard children crying
for bread to their Parents, yet wouldest not
relieue them, whilst the Parents went mourning
and pyning vp and downe that they wanted foode
themselues. Men that were strong of body, didst
thou by thy sorcerie bring so lowe, that they could
scarce stand on their legs: Weomen that had fresh
blood in theyr cheekes, and were louely to be lookt
vppon, didst thou make leaue, and turnedst them
into Anatomies.
            O Famine, thou cruellest executioner of Gods
wrath, thou dishonest guest, for into what house
soeuer thou commest, thou destroiest all that is set

before thee: thou traytor to Plentie, enuious hag,
malicious Witch, that with thy vnsauorie breath
blasteth whole fieldes of Corne: away, gette thee
gone, the hand of Heauen keepe thee from landing
vpon the English share, hide thy head for shame, in
the graues of those whom most vnmercifullie thou
hast slaughtered, bee buried there for euer: for if
thou shouldest set footing vpon this little Ile, thou
wouldest quickly turne it into a great Land of miserie.
            But was the terrible Iudge of the world, satisfied
with punishing this people twice in this manner,
had their offences towardes him deserued no
more blowes? It seemes they had run into a most
proude rebellion, and that hee had sworne in his
indignation to be reuenged vppon them for it: for
loe, the spirit of his rage comes nowe in a consuming
fire, it is wrapt vp in clowdes of lightning,
and the thunder of it breakes into Ciuill warre.
The three sonnes of so great an Emperour, shine
now like three Meteors in the firmament, all in
steele, their Courts now are Campes, and none are
Courtiers but Souldiers. Three Brothers beeing
all three Kings, are vp in Armes, only to make
of three but one, miserie vpon miserie. They that
escaped the stripes of the Pestilence, were eaten to
death by Famine, they that saued themselues out
of the Iawes of Famine, are now in danger to perish
on the Sword.
            O noble France, if I should bid thee onely to tell
the horror, the terrors, the vnbounded mischiefe

and calamity that come marching in with intestiue
Broyles, thou needest to say nothing, but to open
thy bosome, and shew those deepe scars which
thine owne sons haue set there. There are teares
yet in thine eyes, for those sad funeralls which the
Ciuill sworde prepared. The Low-Countries haue
beene in labour a long time, and are not yet deliuered
of that Monster: if they could not expresse the
paynes and pangs that followe this inward disease
of a kingdome, this griefe about the heart of a
Land, this very Earth-quake that hath power to
ouer-turne Townes and Towers, wee haue too
many leaues in our own Chronicles, spotted with
the inuenomed Inck of Ciuill discord. Too many
of our Kings haue beene too famous by that miserie:
too many of our noblest Families, haue shaken
their ancient Houses by that thunder.
            This fire of Discention hath now taken holde
of Barbarie, a kingdome full of people, abundant in
riches, flowing with Arts and trafficke with all
Nations: how happy therefore are we, that haue
peace in our Citties, and plentie in our fieldes? yet
doubtlesse, our sinnes are in number infinite, in nature
abhominable, wee deserue as little pardoning
as they, yet is our wickednes as blacke and detestable
as theirs. Let vs therfore stray aside awhile,
and by comparing the heauy afflictions which the
Diuine Iusticer hath layd vpon other Countries
in times past, acknowledge an incommensurable
loue and mercy of his, to this Iland of ours, nowe
in these present dayes. For in the yere of Christ 81.

and in the yeere 188, the breath of the Pestilence
was so strong, and so contagious, that in Rome
there died daily two thousand people. In the yeere
254, fifteene Prouinces of the Romaine Empyre
were almost cōsumed with the like calamitie. Nay
in Constantinople the rage of the disease was so
great, that in the yeere 530, there fell euery day (for
many dayes together) fiue thousand, & sometimes
tenne thousand. Within tenne yeeres after that,
(which was in Anno 540,) there began an vniuersall
plague ouer the whole world, which continued
50 yeeres with hot violence.
            In the yeere 1359, so mortall a blow did Death
giue to Italy by infection, that there was scarce left
tenne of a thousand. And to Rome (in the yere 1521)
that shee made graues for a hundred thousand.
Millan likewise, Padua and Venice, in the yeres 1576
and 77, opened the Earth to receiue into her womb
a hundred thousand dead carkasses, that were left
breathlesse in each of those Citties, by the tyrannie
of this pestiferous disease. And in Bohemia (beeing
but a small kingdome) there died three hundred
thousand the same time. In the yeere 1596, fel such
a plague in Constantinople, that it strooke downe in
sixe moneths space, seauen hundred thousand persons.
And this misery was seconded by so terrible
a Famine, that a penny loafe of breade of English
mony, was worth a crowne in golde, by reason of
which, the people were worse consumed thē before
by the Pestilence.
            We will now set forth some of our owne homeborne

tragedies wrought by the Plague, of which
take this as Prologue to the rest. In the raigne
of K. Edward the third, the Infection spred it selfe
in the East Indies, amongst the Tartars, Saracens and
Turks, which had a hand ouer them by the space of
7 yeeres: and this vengeance which was poured
downe from heauen vpon this people, strooke their
soules into such amazement and terror, that many
of the Heathen (with the very feare thereof) offred
to be conuerted and turne Christians. Shorthe
after, by reason of Passengers from one Prouince
to another, the same mortall plague was dispersed
in many Christian kingdoms, & (amongst others)
brought into England, where it was so forcible
all ouer the Land, that not onely men, but also
beasts, birdes and fishes were smitten there-with,
and found dead with botches vpō them. Yea, such
a massacre did it make amongst the liuing, that
they were scarceable to burie the dead. At which
time, (with the rest that then died of the Plague,)
Henry Duke of Lancaster, Blanch Dutchesse of Lancaster,
and the Earle of Warwick ended their liues.
So that in one yeere, in a little plot of ground of 13
Acres compasse (then called Spittle-croft, and nowe
the Charter-house) were buried 50000. persons, besides
all them that were then buried in the Church
yards & diuers other places. Our late calamities
infliced vpon vs for our sinnes are fresh in memory,
the eyes of many people are yet wet with mourning
at burials, the rod is stil held ouer vs, the stripes of
it are euen nowe to bee seene sticking in our flesh.
            
               
Yet you see howe the Great Father of Nations,
keepes vs vnder his wing, he is loth to chide, more
loath to strike vs, let vs not therefore, like foolish
haire-braind children, prouoke him too often, and
too much to anger, least he take vp his triple Mace
of hote vengeance, and with it bruze our people, as
hee hath already stretcht out his Arme to smite
those of Barbarie.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   