
      
         
            
            
            Thesaurus Ecclesiae:
that is,
The treasure of the Church consisting
of the perpetuall intercession and most
holy praier of Christ, set forth in the 17. chapter
of the Gospel by S. Iohn:
            Which in this treatise is plainly interpreted, with necessarie
doctrines enlarged, and fit applications
enforced.
            
               1. Iohn, 2. 1, 2. If any man sinne, we haue an aduocate with the father,
Iesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation
for our sinnes, &c.
            Printed by IOHN LEGAT, Printer to the
Vniuersitie of Cambridge,
1604.
            And are to be sold at the signe of the Crowne in
Pauls Churchyard, by Simon Waterson.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
honorable the Lord Thomas
Howard, Earle of Suffolck, Baron of
Walden, Knight of the honorable order of
the garter, Lord high Chamberlaine to
the kings most excellent Maiesty,
and of his most honorable
priuie Counsell.
            
               IT is an vsuall thing (Right
honourable) for subiects
to imitate their prince, &
for inferiours to conforme
themselues to the
example of great persons: as Abimeleck
said to his soldiers:Iud. 
                     •
                  . 4
                     •
                  . 
               what ye haue seene
me doe, make hast and doe the like: for as
Ambrose saith,lib. 
                     〈…〉
                  
                amplius proficitur exemplo:
nec difficile redditur quod iam fact
                  ••
               
est, & vtile, quod probatum: men profit
much by examples, for neither seemeth
that hard, which is done before, nor vnprofitable
that is tried by others:
            
            Thus should we all set before our eies

the example of our master Christ, and
tread in his holy steppes: I haue giuen you
an example saith our blessed sauiour
Iohn 13. 15. this it is to run after the sauour
of his ointment,Cantic. 1. 2. to followe his
sweete example. As Aarons ointment
ranne down from his head to the skirtes
of his cloathing:Psal 134. so Christs holy vestures
are from him as our head dispersed among
his members: therefore Christ
vouchsafeth to call his faithfull seruants
his fellowes or partners. Psal. 45. 7. because
they partake of his goodnes, and sauour
of his vertues.
            Heere then is set forth vnto vs in this
treatise the example of Christ praying:
that we should therein be like our heauenly
master, to be occupied in earnest
and faithfull praier: wherein in particular
diuerse profitable points are to be
obserued.
            I We are taught how necessary a
thing it is to be suters vnto God by praier:
for if Christ praied, who in respect
of himselfe needed not to pray, but for

our example: who neither wanted any
grace to pray for▪ nor yet had any imperfection
to pray against, if he notwithstanding
praied for vs, much more haue
we cause to pray for our selues, both to
receiue graces, which we haue not, and
to be released of the euills which we
haue. Ambrose saith well: quid pro
tua salute facere oportet,Lib. 5. in L
                     ••
                  . quando pro te,
Christus in oratione praeuertat? what
should we doe for our selues seeing Christ
watched for vs al night in praier?
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . wherefore
as the saying is, it is more necessary
for vs to pray then to breath.
            
            II We learne also by this holy prayer
of our sauiour, which was fulfilled in
euery part thereof, how effectuall the
praiers and teares of the faithfull are:
whatsoeuer they desire (saith our sauiour)
shall be giuen them of my heauenly father
Math. 18. 19.Ad Cel
                     ••
                  tium. vim faciebat precum
tuarū fidelis ambitio: the faithfull ambition
of thy praiers did as it were force
God: saith Hierome Alexander said
to Antipater,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . that made great complaints

of his mother: knowest thou not
that she with one teare will blot out all thy
complaints? much more auaylable with
God are the teares of his seruants, which
as precious liquor he preserueth in his
bottles.Psal 56. 8.
            
            III In that our Sauio
                  •
               r praied often,Luk. 
                     〈…〉
                  .
and continued in praier, it teacheth, that
we also should therein be daily exercised,
and as the Apostle saith,1. Thes. 5. 17. 
               pray continually:
quia semper accipis semper inuoca: because
thou hadst need alwaies to receaue,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   de obit. Theodo
                     •
                  ii. Xen. lib. 1. de Cyri. 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               alwaies pray: Xenophon writeth o
                  •
                Cyrus,
that would neither dine nor supp,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                before he had swett; neither
should we eate or drinke before we had
shed teares vnto God.
            IV Christ when he praied, was wholy
intent and fixed vpon that holy action:
so should our thoughtes be setled in
prayer, that then most of all men should
follow the wise mans counsell,Prou 4 23. 
               to keepe
our hart with all diligence that we shew
our selues in praier not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                but

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                as Zeno said of his schollers,

not bablers of words, but vtterers of matters:
Hierome foūd this to be his infirmitie,
that oftentimes in my praier saith he,aduer Luciferius
aut per porticus deambulo, aut de faenore
computo: I thinke I am walking on the
streates, or accounting my mony: so it is
an easy matter for the thoughts to roue
in praier, which we are taught to settle
by Christes example.
            V Our blessed sauiour had therefore
free recourse to praier, because he was of
an holy and innocent life: soe if we would
haue our praiers heard, we must lift vp
pure hands as the Apostle saith 1. Tim. 2. 8.
Basilo saith well: that the presence of an
honest life doth make our praiers to haue
a loud sound.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            VI Our sauiour also by his example
teacheth vs for what things we should
cheifely pray: not for temporall, but spirituall
blessings: as v. 17. he saith sanctifie
them with thy truth:
               1 King 3. Salomon, because
he asked wisdome rather then honour
or riches, pleased god, and receiued them
all, euen those temporall things▪ which

he had not asked: Hierom saith well: auarus
sum ad accipienda beneficia, quanto
plus bibero,
                  
                     •
                  d C
                     •
                  esiphon
                     •
                  . tanto plus sitio: we should
be euen couetous of spirituall blessings:
& the more we drinke, the more to thirst,
for he that craueth temporall blessings,
often asketh them to his owne hurt: as he
that is sick of a feuer,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               as one saith, craueth
for wine.
            
            VII Lastly our Sauiour praieth confidently
v. 24. father I will: soe hath he
taught vs to pray without doubting:Mark. 11 3
                     •
                  .
               whatsoeuer you desire beleeue you shall
haue it and it shall be done vnto you: we
should not be discouraged, though at the
first one request be not granted. Deus differt
desiderium, non ausert: God differreth
our desire he dissolueth it not: Bias
that heathen philosopher could say,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . that
a good conscience is without feare: soe
should our conscience in praier be free
from fearefull doubting.
            Thus this example of our Sauiour as a
rich store-house affordeth infinite treasure,
and as a bundle of mirrh sendeth

forth a most fragrant smell. This Christian
exercise, is the supporter of princes,
the sheild of defence for nobles, the hauen
of rest for all: This maketh honourable
persons truly noble indeed, when
they acknowledge him, by whome they
are innobled: and indeed the greater the
affaires of state are, wherein your honours
are imployed, the more need haue
your honours of spirituall direction: as
Daniel that great Regent vsed to pray
thrice in the day. Herein his Christian
maiestie, imitating the diuine and highest
maiestie may be an example to all both
honorable and inferior subiectes, who as
he practiseth in his royall person,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 11. soe prescribeth
to his princely sonne to pray often,
and in what manner, and for what
things to pray. And indeed what can be
more honourable then to talke with the
most high? what more comfortable, then
for God to speake to our hartes? for
when we drawe neere vnto God by praier,
he draweth neare vnto vs, and as one
saith: a pure praier is Gods temple:
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . luctare

ergo cum deo sicut Iacob, vt ipse se
gaudeat superati:Lib 1. de Genes. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               striue therefore with
God in praier (as Augustine saith) with
Iacob, that he may ioy to be ouercome.
            This treatise I haue beene bould to
present to your honour, and to make
you the honourable patron of these my
poore trauailes: beeing mooued therevnto
both in respect of that dutie which
I owe in generall for your noble affection
& true loue to the vniuersity of Cambridge
whereof I was once a member, &
euer remaine a welwiller, and in particular
for your honorable fauour to a brother
in law of mine, your honours seruant:
I say no more at this time, then to
wish vnto you encrease of true honour
and loue of the truth in earth, and afterward
euerlasting honour and an endlesse
reward of your faith in heauen.
            
               Your honours readie to be
commanded in the Lord.
Andrew VVillet.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CHRIstian
Reader.
            
               AS euery action of Christ is
for our instruction, soe especially
his earnest supplications
made in the daies
of his flesh, are for our edification:
And as our blessed sauiour came
into this world annointed to be our king,
our prophet, and preist, soe accordingly
hereunto all his principall actions were
sorted out: in his holy workes & miracles,
he shewed his diuine power as a king, in his
heauenly sermons, he ma
                  •
               e knowne his
diuine wisdome as our prophet: and in his
praiers he testified his diuine loue as a
mercifull high preist.
            Three of Christs praiers are especially
commended vnto vs: that at Lazarus
graue,Ioh. 11. the other in the garden before his
passion,Math. 26. this in the 17. of Iohn, as a preparation
thereunto: the first made with

sighes and grones, the second with droppes
of blood and teares, the third with great
zeale and affection: the first shewing commiseration,
the second making a way to
our redemption, the third the fruite of
his mediation.
            In three things this praier of Christ differeth
from the requestes of his members:
first in respect of the person that praieth,
secondly in the manner of the praier,
thirdly in the matter prayed for: the first
was with authoritie, he praieth as our mediatour
both God and man, the second was
with all sanctitie, whereas we can not tell
how to pray as we ought. Rom. 8. 16. the
third with great efficacy: the force of this
praier continueth to the end of the world,
whereas our praiers are weake, and had
need often to be iterated and repeated,
and therefore the Apostle biddeth vs pray
without ceasing.1. Thess. 5. 17.
            
            Three principall benefits are conferred
vpon vs by this praier 1. our protection
from euil and danger: keepe them from
euil v. 15. 2. the collation or bestowing of

all spirituall grace; sanctifie them with
thy truth v. 17. 3. the impetration or obtayning
of our seuerall praiers and requestes:Math. 14. 31.
in the first Christ stretcheth forth
his hand as to Peter, to helpe vs that we
sinke not: in the second he looketh vpon vs
with the eyes of mercie as vpon the same
Peter,Luk. 22. 61. to giue vs his grace: in the third
his eares are open to heare vs, as they were
at the crie of blind Bartimeus.Mar. 10. 4
                     •
                  .
            
            Salomon hauing built God an house,1. King. 8.
did dedicate it by his praier vnto God: here
a greater then Salomon, by praiers better
then Salomons, doth consecrate vnto God
an house more glorious then was Salomons,
the spirituall temple of the church.
This praier of our Sauiour is the foundation
of our praiers, the propp and stay of
our requestes, the very life of our supplications
vnto God:E
                     ••
                  d▪ 17. as Aaron and Hurr held
vp Moses hands, soe our feeble handes are
hereby strengthned: it is vnto our praiers
as the fiery chariot and horse to Elias,2. King. 2. to
carrie them vp into heauen: And as the
Eagle beareth vp her young ones vpon her

wings. Deuter. 32. 11. soe this praier of
Christ giueth wings vnto our praiers: &
it is as the censor,Apoc. 
                     ••
                  . wherein the odors of
our praiers are censed vp vnto god. Therfore
when we addresse our selues to our
praiers let vs remember this praier, as
the Israelites looked vp to the brasen serpent
in the wildernes,Numb. 
                     •
                  1. 9. and as Stephen saw
Iesus sitting at the right hand of God:Act. 7. 56. let
vs lay it vp in our hart, as the tables of
stone were kept in the arke,H
                     •
                  b. 9. 14. let it be as incense
to be laid alwaies vpon our spirituall
offerings,Leuit 1. 15. and as salt,Leuit. 2. 13. whereby to season
our sacrifices.
            Thus this holy praier of our Sauiour, if
we be in heauines, it will comfort vs, if in
perill, deliuer vs: if we want any grace it
will releeue vs: in this life it will guiavs,
and in the next saue vs: Amen.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               
               The Methode or order of the 17. chapter of the pag. 1.
Gospel according to S. Iohn.
               The Chapter
containeth
the
praier of
Christ,
whereof
there are
two parts:
he praieth
for

                     himselfe, where
we haue the

                           
                              request it selfe, father glorifie thy sonne, v. 1.
                           reasons.

                                 1. à fine, from the ende, that thy sonne
may glorifie thee. v. 1.
                                 2. à pari, from the like: as thou hast
giuen him power, &c. v. 2. so giue him
glorie: here the power giuen vnto
Christ is described by the

                                       ende or vse of it, to giue eternall life to
all them, that thou hast giuen him, v. 2.
                                       the matter subiect, namely, eternall life,
which is set forth by the helping causes
thereunto, the knowledge of God and
Christ, v. 3.
                                    
                                 
                                 3. à causa meritoria, from his desert or merit: I haue glorified thee, v. 4 therefore
glorifie me also.
                                 4. aeb aequo, from the equitie: he asketh but his owne, that glorie which was his
before the world was. v. 5.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
either

                           then present, namely his
Apostles: where is shewed

                                 why he praieth for them?
because they were

                                       Gods by election: Thine they were, v. 6.
                                       Christs by

                                             their vocation
& obedience

                                                   they receiud the word.
and beleeued in
Christ, v. 7. 8.
                                                
                                             
                                             iustification, in that they were giuē vnto
Christ, for whome he praieth, and
not for the world. v. 9. 10.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 what he praieth
for thē
for

                                       their preseruation

                                             〈◊〉
                                           the

                                             •
                                          orld.

                                             1. from their necessitie, because Christ should be no
more with them.
                                             2. from the effects, that they may haue peace and vn
                                                   ••
                                                
one with another. v. 11. and true ioy in themseues.
v. 13.
                                             3. from the vnlike example of Iudas, who fell away,
and became the child of perdition. v. 12.
                                             4. from the 
                                                   〈…〉
                                                
compassed with many enemies, the world hated
them, v. 14. & therefore he praieth, that they may
be kept in the world. v. 15.
                                          
                                       
                                       their sa
                                             •
                                          ctification,

                                             the request for
their sanctification

                                                   in generall, v. 17. to be
sanctified with the
truth.
                                                   in speciall, to be made
fit for their message,
because they were sēt
into the world, v.
18.
                                                
                                             
                                             the reason, because for their sakes
Christ did sanctifie himselfe, both by
his life and death. v. 19.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           which was afterward
to come,
v. 20. he praieth
for

                                 their sanctification
in their perfect vnion
and loue:
from the

                                       
                                          
                                             •
                                          ffects, that the world
may beleeue, &c. v. 21.
                                       originall cause, their electiō
vnto glorie, v. 22.
                                       ende, that they may be
perfect in one, &c.
v. 22.
                                    
                                 
                                 glorification

                                       it s
                                             ••
                                          e, which is described, v. 24
                                       
                                          
                                             〈◊〉
                                           meanes vnto it

                                             knowledge set
forth by the

                                                   co
                                                         ••
                                                      rarie, the
w
                                                         •
                                                      rld knoweth
not god. v. 25.
                                                   the cause, I haue
declared thy
name. v. 26.
                                                
                                             
                                             sense and feeling of Gods loue,
v. 26.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Certaine fruitful Meditations
vpon the most holy praier of our Sauior
Christ, as it is set forth by S. Iohn,
in the 17. chapter of that Gospel,
diuided into certaine
Lectures.
         
            The first Lecture, declaring the order and methode
of this Chapter, with some speciall
obseruations concerning prayer
in generall.
            
               THe prayer of our blessed
Sauiour Christ Iesus
in this Chapter cō
               prehended,
is eyther
concerning his owne
glorification, from ve.
1. to verse 6. or as touching
the confirmation of his Church, either
then present, consisting of his Apostles,
& other Disciples, from v. 6. to v. 20.
or which was afterward to bee called by
their preaching, from v. 20. to the end.
            The summe of Christs prayer is for his
glorification, which is expressed v. 1. v. 5.
The reasons which our Sauiour vseth for
this his request, are four, 1. à fine, from the
end, v. 1. Glorifie thy Sonne, that thy Sonne

also may glorifie thee. 2. à pari, from the
like, v. 2. As thou hast giuen him power ouer
all flesh: and as power is giuen vnto him, so
also glory belongeth vnto him. 3. à causa
meritoria, from the meriting or deseruing
cause, v. 4. I haue glorified thee on earth,
and now glorifie mee: he was worthy of this
glory which was due vnto him. 4. ab aequo,
from the equitie of it: it was his owne
glory before the world was.
            But before I descend to intreate particularly
of this Scripture, or any part therof,
there are three necessarie considerations
first to be handled: two of them concerne
Christs prayer in particular: first of
the validitie and efficacie thereof; whose
force and vertue extendeth to the worlds
end: secondly, of the qualitie and difference
betweene Christs prayer and ours,
betweene Christs prayer then in the daies
of his flesh, and the prayer or intercession
of his Mediatorship now. The other point
is, of the vse of Praier in generall, namely
of the necessitie thereof.
            First concerning the force and efficacy
of our Lords prayer,Doctr. 1. it is euerlasting, it is
not yet either extinct or slaked, but remaineth
still, and shall till the worlds end:
for though there are now sixteene hundred

yeares well nie, since this praier was
vttered by our Sauiour, yet the benefite
thereof doth extend it selfe vnto this age:
for we also, as many as beleeue in Christ
through the word of the Apostles, are
comprehended in this praier, verse 20.
            1 Thus the Apostle testifieth, that our
Sauiour offered vp in the daies of his flesh,
praiers and supplications with strong cries and
teares, and was heard, Hebr. 5. 7. As he was
heard in that zealous prayer which hee
made in the Garden before his passion,
whereof the Apostle there chiefly speaketh;
so also he was heard in all other his
praiers, Iohn 11. 42. I know thou hearest me
alwaies: and especially in this praier, which
he powreth forth in the behalfe of his vniuersall
Church, then being, or which was
to come.
            2 If Abels voice spake after his death:
(for by saith yet being dead hee speaketh,
Heb. 11. 5.) much more doth the voice of
Christ in this praier yet speake vnto God,
which as the Apostle saith, speaketh better
things then the bloud of Abel, Hebr. 12. 24.
If Abels voice was heard after his death
crying for vengeance, much more Christs
voice yet soundeth in the eares of GOD
calling for mercie. Salomons praier, which

he made at the dedication of the temple,
1. Kin. 8. did consecrate the temple to that
holy vse, not during his time, but so long
as the temple stood: for thus he praieth,
v. 38. What prayer or supplication soeuer shall
be made of any man, &c. and shall stretch forth
his hands in this house, heare thou in heauen.
If Salomons prayer did transferre the benefit
thereof to the succeeding ages, much
more auaileable is the power of Christ.
            3 Then like as the Manna was laid vp in
the Arke, though it was of it selfe but as a
melting dew, which faded by the heate of
the Sunne, yet by Gods blessing endured
many hundred yeares: so the voyce of
Christ,Plutarc. de garrulitat. though it were a transitorie sound,
yet it hath a permanent force. The Grecians
doe speake much of a certaine place of
Olympia, which giueth seuen ecchoes or
reflexions of one voice, which therefore
they call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , of seuen voyces. But we
may woorthily admire this prayer of
Christ, which giueth not only seuen or seuenty
seuen voices, but cōtinually sounds
in the eares of God & reboundeth to vs.
            4 For the Preacher saith, Ecclesiast. 3. 12.
I know, that whatsoeuer God doth shall bee
for euer: and the Prophet saith, Psal. 119.
89. Thy word endureth for euer in heauen.
               
This prayer therefore proceeding from
the sonne of God, must needes be of an euerlasting
force, as the Apostle saith. This
man, because he endureth euer, hath an euerlasting
priesthood. Hebr. 7. 24. Wherefore
his prayer being an act of his priesthood,
is also euerlasting.
            5 Wherefore, this is much to the comfort
of the Church of God, that this holy
prayer of Christ is still in memorie with
God: that like as they boldely come into
the Princes presence, when their supplication
is already offered, and their suit granted;
so haue wee through the prayer of
Christ bold accesse: his prayer maketh a
way for our prayers, euen as the arke went
before to diuide the waters of Iordan, and
the people followed after, Iosua 3. 14. so
hath Christ our Arke, Altar, Priest, and
all, diuided a way for our prayers: he is the
doore, and by him also a doore is opened
to our prayers, as Ambrose well saith vpon
these words, Reue. 4. 1. I looked, and beholde
a doore was opened in heauen:
               In L
                     •
                  c. ca. 11. 
               apertum est igitur
ostium Ioanni precanti, apertum est Paulo:
A doore is opened to Iohn praying, a doore is opened
to Paul.
            
               
                  •
                Secondly we are to consider first of the
difference betweene the praiers of Christ,Doct. 2.
               
and the praiers of his church: then of the
diuersity betweene the praiers of Christ in
the dayes of his flesh, and now in his glorious
maiesty.
            For the first:Difference betwixt the pr
                     •
                  uer
                     •
                   of Ch
                     ••
                  st and of his members. 1. Christs prayer tendeth
wholly to the good of his church; he hath
no neede to pray for himselfe, as neither
did hee offer vp sacrifice for himselfe, as
the high Priest did, both for his owne
sins, and then for the sins of the people,
Hebr. 7. 27. for euen the prayer of Christ
for his glorification is for the church, that
they may behold his glorie, Iohn 17. 24.
but the scope & end of our prayers is onely
for the release of our selues.
            2. Christs prayer is perfect, without
any doubting or wauering or any infirmity
besides: for God is in him well pleased,
Mat. 3. 17. but our praiers are imperfect:
wee know not what to pray as wee ought, Rom.
8. 26.
            3. Christs praiers are meritorious, as
euerie other worke of his was: for the lamb
that was killed, is worthie to receiue power.
Reuel. 5. 14. but our prayers merite not:
for when wee haue done all, we haue done
nothing, but which was our duetie to do,
Luke 17. 10.
            4. Christ prayeth by himselfe, he needeth

none other to pray by: but our praiers
cannot bee accepted without a mediatour:
yea the Apostle dare not presume
to offer thankes vnto God, but through
Iesus Christ, Rom. 1. 8.
            5. The prayer of Christ is the prayer
not of a mortall man, but of one that is
both God and man, who is inferiour to
his father as he is man, but equall as he is
God: who prayeth not as an inferiour,
when he thus saith: Father, I will that they
which thou hast giuen me, be with mee where I
am, verse 24.
            6. Our prayers, because they are weak
and imperfect, had neede often to bee renewed:
but this prayer of Christ being
once made, hath an euerlasting force: as
the Apostle speaketh of the offering of
Christ, with one offering hath he consecrated
for euer, them that are sanctified, Hebrews
10. 14.
            Now hauing thus briefly shewed how
the prayers of the head and members differ,
let vs consider likewise of the difference
of Christs praiers:Christ praieth not in heauē now as he did in the earth. the apostle saith,
that Christ euer liueth to make intercession
for vs, Hebr. 7. 25. But wee must not imagine,
that Christ praieth now sitting at
the right hand of God, as he did while he

liued in earth: with sighes and groanes as
at Lazarus graue, Iohn 11. 38. with criee
and teares, as in the garden, Math. 26. 39.
sometime lifting vp his eyes, Iohn 17. 1.
falling vpon his face, Marke 14. 35. sometime
kneeling, Luke 22. 41. We must not
thinke that Christ prayeth now after anie
such manner, by bowi
                  •
               g the knee, or making
intreaty, or offering supplication to
his father, as Augustine well saith, that
these are the cogitations of carnal men, to
imagine,Tract. 10
                     •
                  . in Ioann
                     •
                  
                
               tanquam, in alio loco patrem, in
alio filium patri ast antem, pro nobis verba
facere, That the father is as it were in one
place, the sonne to stand by in an other speaking
for vs: and the Apostle, saying that Christ in
the dayes of his flesh did offer vp prayers and
supplications with strong cries, Hebrews 7. 5.
sheweth that this manner of prayer vsed
by Christ then in the dayes of his humiliation,
doth not beseeme him now in the
time of his exaltation: and our Sauiour
himselfe saith, At that day ye shall aske in my
name: and I say not vnto you, that I will pray
vnto the father for you, Iohn 16. 26. that is, in
such manner as he prayed in earth he shal
not then neede to pray for vs.
            Wherefore to cleare this point: these
three waies our Sauior is called our intercessour

and mediatour: first, because the
Lord for Christs sake, and together with
him doth graunt vs all things, Rom. 8. 32.
and he hath promised, that whatsoeuer we
aske the father in his name, he will giue it
vs, Iohn 
                     •
                  6. 23.
            Secondly, Christ maketh intercession
for vs, non vòce, sed miseratione, not by his
voyce, but in compassion and mercie, in
continuall succouring of his members, &
relieuing our necessities: and therefore he
is called by the Apostle, a mercifull and a
faithfull high Priest, Hebr. 2. 17. that is touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, Hebr.
4 15. Wherefore in this sense also, because
he alwayes willeth and desireth our good,How Christ is the Mediatour of his church
and doth send continuall succour and reliefe
to his members, he is worthily called
our Mediator: for his wil and desires and
his fathers are all one; & in that the Lord
God the father of our Lord Iesus performeth
the will and desire of his sonne toward
vs: as where he prayeth, Ioh
                     •
                   17. 24.
I will that they which thou hast giuen mee bee
with me, &c. herein doth his mediation
and intercession consist.
            Thirdly, the Apostle saith, He is entred
into the heauen to appeare in the sight of God
for vs, Heb. 9. 14. The very appearing then

of Christ in his humane flesh before God
in the heauen
                  •
               , is his intercession for vs:
the presence of his humanitie, the exhibiting
of his glorious bodie,How Christ appe
                     •
                  eth before God for vs. the remembrance
of his obedience, the force of his
passion, is an effectuall mediation with
God the Father for vs: there needs no other
supplication or request making. This
Daniel saw in vision, one like to the sonne of
man come in the heauens &c. and they brought
him before the auncient of daies, Daniel 7. 13.
The very approching of Christ to his father,
and exhibiting of his flesh in his glorious
presence, is our sufficiēt mediation.
As the Lord saith concerning the bowe in
the cloud, that I may see it and remember
my couenant, Genesis 9. 16. so the very seeing
of this mightie Angell, which is cloathed
with a cloud, and the Rainbowe vpon his
head, Reu. 10. 1. brings to Gods remembraunce
the euerlasting Couenant made
with vs in Christ. To this purpose Gregorie
well saith,Lib 22. mo
                  
                     •
                  al. cap. 13. 
               Vnigenito filio Deum 
                     •
                  ro homi
                  
                     ••
                  
interpellare, est apud coaeternum patrem
seipsum hominem demonstrare: For the onely
begotten sonne to pray vnto God for man, is to
shew himselfe before his eternall father to bee
man.
            
            
               This trueth then concerning the manner

of Christs mediation reprooueth the
blind superstition of the papists, who haue
these fond speculatiōs, of Mary her shewing
her breasts to her sonne, & Christ his
wounds to his father: these are their words
Securum habes O homo accessum ad Deum,
vbi pro te mater stat ante filium, filius ante
patrem, mater ostendit filio pectus & vbera,
filius patri latus & vulnera: nulla poterit
esse repulsa, vbi tot sunt charitatis insigm
                  •
               :
O man, thou hast secure accesse vnto God,
where the mother stands before her sonne for
thee, the sonne before his father, the mother
sheweth her sonne her breasts, the sonne his
father his side and wounds, there can be no repulse,
where there are so many signes of loue.
These sond conceits and idle imaginations
are not beseemi
                     •
                  g the glorious maieshe
of Christ: and the Apostle speaketh
otherwise, This man after he had offered one
offering for sinnes, sitteth for euer at the right
hand of God, Hebr. 10. 12. He sitteth as partaker
of the same maistie, he standeth not
or kneeleth in token of subiection or humilitie.
            
            In the next place the necessitie of prayer
is to be considered,Doctr. 3. which our Sau
                  •
                our
sheweth, where hee saith, Matth. 6. 33.
Seeke first the kingdome of God and the righteousnesse

thereof, and all things else shall bee
ministred vnto you: our principall seeking
whereof is, 1. by prayer, as Mat. 7. 7. Aske
and it shall be giuen you, seeke and ye shal find:
seeking there is asking: this is that vnum
necessariū, that one necessary thing, which
Christ commended in Mary, Luke 10▪ 42.
for she was occupied in hearing Christ, &
in attending vpon him: for what in the
world can bee more necessarie, then to
heare God speaking to vs in his word, and
to speake to him in prayer?
            2 Dauid held this exercise so necessarie,
that in the morning before all other
things he preferred prayer, Psal. 5. 3. in the
morning I will direct mee vnto thee, and I will
wait: hee preferred it before his sleepe,
Psalme 119. 148. Mine eies preuent the night
watches: Dauid holdeth prayer and praysing
of God so necessary, that he will not
intermit it, though it cost him his life, Daniel
6. 10.
            3 What is more necessarie for the day of
battell, then armour? so is prayer a principall
part of our spirituall armour: as the
Apostle saith, Ephes. 6. 13. Put on the whole
armour of God, that ye may be able to resist in
the euill day: and hauing set foorth the diuers
parcels of this armor, he addeth this,

v. 18. and pray alwayes, with all manner prayer
and supplications: what more requisite
for the sicke man then medicine? but the
prayer of faithfull saue the sicke, Iames 5. 15.
prayer, it is the hauen of the soule, Psal. 116.
7. Returne vnto thy rest O my soule: it is the
food of the soule, as Christ said to his disciples,
Iohn 4. 32. I haue meate to eate that ye
know not of.
            
            4 The reason of this necessitie our Sauiour
Christ sheweth, Matth. 26. 41. Watch
and pray, that yee enter not into temptation:
because wee are continually assaulted and
tempted of Sathan, wee haue neede also
continually to arme our selues with prayer:
an other reason Saint Paul giueth; 1.
Tim. 4. 5. all things are sanctified by the word
of God and praier: thy meate, drink, labour,
riches, marriage, are polluted, vnholy, defiled,
without prayer.
            5 Wherefore the negligence of this Age
is to bee condemned that so seldome vse
prayer, either priuately, or in their families,
together with their wiues, children,
seruants: when they sit downe at
meate, they giue no thankes: being worse
in this respect then the oxe and asse, which
know their masters cribbe, Esay chap. 1. ve. 3.
When they goe to bed, they do not commend

themselues vnto God, neither at
their rising praise him for their rest: but
they rouze themselues as swine out of the
strawe: when they goe foorth to labour,
they call not vpon God for his blessing:
but as it is in the psalme: the voyce of ioy
and mirth is in the habitation of the righteous:
Psalme 118. It is knowne where faithfull
men dwell, by their praying and singing
of Psalmes together: they that do not so,
shew that their heart is empty of heauenly
thoughts: they make not their treasury
in heauen, seeing their heart is not there:
they which hope to go to heauen yet send
their praiers as their agents and forerunners
before them: But as Bernard saith, Oratio
est hominis Deo adhaerentis affectio:
Prayer is the affection or desire of a man, that
cleaueth vnto God. Hierome thus testifieeth
of himselfe, Post multas lacrymas & caelo
inhaerentes:
               Ad Eusta
                  
                     •
                  h
                     ••
                  m. 
               oculos (mihi deus testis est) interesse
videbar agminibus angelorum: after many
teares fastening mine eies in heauen, I seemed
to be present among the companies of Angels.
            
         
         
            The second Lecture.
            
               THese things spake Iesus,
               Vers. 1. Doct
                     •
                   1. 
               and lift vp his
eies to heauē, &c. this gesture of lifting

vp the eies in praier, was often vsed by
our Sauiour, as Marke 7. 34. when hee
healed the deafe man, he looking vp to heauen,
               The gesture required in prayer.
               sighed, Iohn 11. 41. at the raising vp
of Lazarus, Iesus lift vp his eies, and saide,
Father I thanke thee: By this holy gesture
of our Sauiour we are taught, as to lift vp
the eies of our bodie, so to fasten the eies
of our soule, vpon God, and to eleuate the
meditations of our hearts, that they wander
not, neither bee vainely occupied
while we pray.
            This is that which Saint Paul saith, hee
would haue men lift vp pure or holie hands
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , 1. Tim. 2. 8. that is, being holily and
purely affected, to lift vp their handes as
also their eies: and Saint Iames requireth,
that the praier of a righteous man should bee
feruent, Iames 5, 16. the word is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               ▪
effectuall, that the feare thereof bee not abated
or slaked with earthly and worldly
thoughts.
            Thus praied Dauid, Psalme 121. I will
lift vp my eies vnto the hilles from whence
commeth my helpe: and not his eies onelie
were lift vp, but his heart: as hee saith,
Psalme 57. 7. My heart is fixed, my heart
is fixed, I will sing and giue praise: Thus
praied Stephen, when he looked stedfastly into

heauen, and saw Iesus standing at the right
hand of God, Acts 7. 56. Thus were Saint
Peters affections rauished, when in his praier
hee fell into a traunce, and saw that vision
of the foure cornerd vessell, &c. Act.
10. 10.
            3 For looke as the eyes of seruants looke to
the hand of their masters, so should our eyes
wait vpon God, Psalme 123. 2. as Peter
biddeth the lame man looke vpon him, Acts
3. 5. and he gaue heede vnto them, trusting to
receiue somthing of them, verse 6. so we must
looke and waite vpon GOD in our prayer,
from whom wee expect a blessing; our
eyes must be as Doues eyes, Cantic. 4. 1.
that is not vnconstant, wandering vnstedfast,
but simple, sober, chaste, staid.
            4 For the Preacher saith, Ecclesiast. 9. 10.
Whatsoeuer thou doest, pro omni facultate fac:
Do it with all thy power: therefore when we
pray, our eyes, our hands, our tongue,
our heart must all be occupied and attent
vpon God; and this it is to loue God with
all our strength, Luke 10. 27. when we pray
vnto him, and worship him with all our
inward and outward powers.
            5 Wherfore, they which pray with wandering
eyes, and wauering thoughts are
not herein like vnto our Sauiour; the wise

man saith: that the eyes of the foole are in
the corners of the world, Prou. 17. 24. but
the eyes of the wise are in his head, Eccles. 2.
14. that is, fixed and setled to looke vp
vnto God: the wandring of the eyes shew
an vnstedfast heart and running thoughts:
for death first entreth in by the windowes,
Ioel 9. 9. And the eyes which are as the
windowes of the bodie, do first minister
occasion of euill. But like as in other
things the husband is a veile of the eyes
to the wife, as it was said to Sara, Gen. 20.
16. that is, the eyes and affection of the
wife ought to be setled vpō her husband,
and his likewise vpon her: so in this spirituall
businesse of prayer, heauen and heauenly
things should be a veile to our eyes
to couer and keepe them, from looking
toward or attending vpon any thing else:
all worldly thoughts and earthly desires
should be chased away from our prayers,
as Abraham droue away the birds from
his sacrifice, Gen. 15. We all are subiect
to this temptation in prayer: I remember
Hierome thus complaineth of himselfe:
Creberrimè in oratione mea, aut per porticus
deambulo, aut de foenore computo: sic
                     •
                  ine
putamus orasse Ionam? sic Danielem? Oftentimes
in my prayer me thinke I am walking

in galleries and porches, or casting of an account
and reckoning. Do we thinke that
Ionas prayed so, or Daniel?
            
               Father] God is Christs Father after a
more excellent manner then he is called
our Father:God Christs father, otherwise then ours. he is the Son of God by nature,
non factus, sed natus, not made the
So
                  •
               ne of God, but so bo
                  •
               ne from all eternitie,
Prou. 8. 23. I was set vp from euerlasting,
vers. 25. before the hils, was I begotten.
We are the sonnes of God facti, non
nati; made, not borne: the Angels are the
sonnes of God, so made by priuiledge of
their creation, Iob. 1. 6. cap. 38. 7. and
Adam also in the same sense is called the
sonne of God, Luk. 3. 38. being created
in the state of perfection: the faithfull are
the sonnes of God, so made by adoption
and grace. Rom. 8. 15. We haue receiued
the spirit of adoption, whereby we crie Abba,
Father.
            
            From hence then this doctrine is concluded,Doct. 2.
that Christ praying vnto God and
calling him Father, (and he is his Father as
he is God) did execute his Mediatorship
not onely as he was man, but as he was
both God and man.
            This Saint Paule testifieth 2. Cor. 5.
19. God was in Christ, and reconciled the

world to himselfe. Christ then reconciled
the world, wherein consisted the office
and worke of the Mediator, not as he was
man onely, but as God was in him; that
is, as he was God: for God to be in Christ
is nothing else, but to shew that Christ is
God; as Colos. 2. 9. In him dwelleth all the
fulnesse of the Godhead bodily. Likewise
Heb. 7. 28. The Law maketh men high
Priests which haue infirmitie, but the word
of the oath, &c. maketh the Sonne, which
is consecrated for euermore: if Christ be cō
               secrated
a Priest as he is the Sonne, then
as he is God; for the Sonne is God.
            A further proofe and experience hereof,
we haue in this Chapter, vers. 24. 
                  
                     •
                  ather,
I will that they which thou hast giuen
me, be with me where I am, &c. Christ
prayeth not here as an inferiour, but as equall
vnto God, as whose will is one with
Gods: neuer any humble suppliant would
thus pray, I will this, or I will that. Againe
another example we haue in the dispensation
of the law, which was giuen by the
hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. which
most interpreters both old and new do
vnderstand of Christ. There are onely two
of the ancient Writers that I know, Theodoret
and Gennadius, that expound it of

Moses, and Maister Beza of the New. If
Christ then did in some sort performe the
office of a Mediator before his incarnatiō,
he did it then as God: for whether we say
he is called a Mediator onely Propheticè,
prophetically; because he was then designed
and appointed to be our Mediator, or
that the legall Mediation is one, the Euangelicall
(which before his incarnation
he entred not into) another; both which I
willingly grant, yet neither of these could
be affirmed of Christ, without a necessary
relation to his diuine Nature.
            
                This also is yet more euidently expressed
in that vision of Iohn, Reu. 5. 7. Where
the Lambe taketh the booke out of the ri
                     •
                  ht
hand of him that sate vpon the throne, which
was a worke of the Mediator: this Lambe
stood as though he had bene killed, (wherby
his humilitie is signified) and he had seuen
hornes and seuen eyes, which are the seuen
spirits of God, and he was in the midst of the
throne: by which three circumstances of
his power, his authoritie in sending the
spirit, his sitting in one throne with God,
his diuine Nature, is insinuated.
            
                The reason why both natures of God
and man must concurre not onely in the
constitution, but in the execution of the

Mediatorship, Saint Paul sheweth, Gal.
3. 20. For a Mediator is not of one, but
God is one: the Mediator then is not God
onely, nor man onely; but he must partake
of both, and exercise his Mediators
office in both.
            First then by this doctrine is refuted the 
opinion of the Papists, who affirme and
hold, that Christ exercised the office of
his Priesthood and Mediatorship onely
as man, not as God: because the Apostle
saith, There is one God and one Mediator
between God and man, the man Iesus Christ:
which words as they vrge them, would as
well conclude the Mediator not to be
God, as not to exercise his Mediatorship
as God. And whereas the Apostle saith,
the man Iesus Christ, though he say not,
God and man Iesus Christ; yet this name
Iesus, which signifieth a Sauiour, includeth
the Godhead also, as the Apostle
saith, vers. 3. God our Sauiour.
            
            Secondly, whereas the Arrians obiected,
that Christ was inferior and lesse
then God, because he that prayeth is lesse
then he to whom prayer is made: the answer
is readie; that all the parts of the Mediators
office, which do betoken seruice
or subiectiō vnto God, Christ performed

as man: but the power of the worke, perfection,
glorie, he executed as God:
though he prayed as man, he could not
preuaile by the merit of his prayer, but as
both God and man: and as Bernard saith,
ad hunc miseria, ad illum pertinet potentia:
to the manhood belongeth the sufferings
and sorrowes of the Mediator, to
the Godhead the honor and power: and
as Augustine, Diuina humanitas, humana
diuinitas Mediatrix: his diuine humanity,
and humane Diuinitie is the Mediator.
            
            Thirdly,Pray with confidence. as Christ in his prayer saith
Father, so he teacheth vs to pray, Our Father,
that is, with confidence and full assurance:
like as there is no father, which if
his child aske him bread, will giue him a
stone, Mat. 7. 10. much more will our heauenly
Father giue good things to those that
aske him. Our Sauiour promiseth, that
whatsoeuer we desire when we pray, if we beleeue
that we shall haue it, it shall be done
vnto vs. Mark. 11. 24. No maruell then, if
when we pray doubtfully and vncertainly,
we obtaine not our requests. Therefore
when we want any grace, and wold haue
any necessitie relieued, let vs go with a
chearefull resolution vnto God, as the
prodigall sonne did, when he was readie

to die for hunger: I will rise (saith he) and go
to my father, &c. then shall we find mercie
at our heauenly fathers hand, as he did. He
will call for the robe, for the ring, and shoes,
Luk. 15. 22. No good thing will he withhold.
            
               The houre is come] Wherby we learne,Doct. 3.
that before God euery thing is determined,The appointment of times is from God.
he hath appointed times for euery
purpose: and as the glorification of Christ,
that is, the manifestation of his glorie, was
assigned to this houre and time, which
Christ here speaketh, which followed immediatly
vpon his passion: so times are limited
of God for the comfort and deliuerance
of his Church.
            
               So the Preacher saith, that there is a
time to euery purpose, Eccles. 3. 1. and that
God hath made euery thing beautifull in his
time, vers. 11. and God hath put times and
seasons in his owne power, Act. 1. 7.
            
               Thus our Sauiour aunswered his
mother, Ioh. 2. 4. Mine houre is not yet
come: the same answer he maketh to his
kinred, Ioh. 7. 6. My time is not yet come:
and affirmatiuely, Mat. 26. 45. Behold,
the houre is at hand, and the sonne of man is
giuen into the hand of sinners.
            This is signified by that vision of Ezechiel,

1. 18. he saw wheeles full of eyes
                     •
                  
               
shewing thereby, that the motion and
gouernment of the world, and the course
of times, runneth not by chaunce, but is
ordered and directed by Gods al-seeing
prouidence. S. Iohn also saw a mightie
Angell, which had a rainebow about his
head, which is Iesus Christ the Angell of
the couenant, who sware by him that liueth
for euermore, that there should be no
more time, Reuel. 10. 6. Who then hath
the ordering of times, but he that gaue a
beginning, and setteth an end of time?
            
                The reason the Psalmist sheweth, Psa.
104. 24. O Lord, how manifold are thy
workes, in wisedome hast thou made them all.
wherfore, because all wisdome is in God,
and no man hath instructed him or was
his counseller, Isa. 41. 13. all things must
be referred to the prouidence of God.
vnlesse then that men could find out a wiser
then God, or would take vpon them
to teach and instruct him▪ his counsell and
aduice must stand, his rule and gouernement,
setting and ordering of times must
take place.
            
                First, both the Stoickes and Epicures
(which were two of the most famous sects
of Philosophers amongst the Gentiles, as

we may reade Act. 17. 18.) are confuted:
The first whereof did bring in a fatall necessitie,
making all things to depend, not
vpon the will and prouidence of God, but
vpon a certain connexion of causes, to the
which the diuine power it selfe should be
subiect:Against Astrologers. like as vaine Astrologers and stargazers
do attribute all to their constellations
and aspects of starres. But the Scripture
teacheth vs, that the Lord doth in
heauen and earth whatsoeuer it pleaseth him
Psal. 135. 6. he is not forced by, or tyed
to any such fatall coniunction of causes.
            
               The Epicures imputed all to Fortune,
so do many carnall men, that cannot look
into Gods prouidence, as the Preacher
speaketh in the person of such, Eccle. 9. 10.
Time and chance commeth to all. Ambrose
hereof writeth well: Epicurei putabant nihil
Deum curare de nobis, & Aristoteles
vsque ad lunam tantum Dei descendere prouidentiam:
sed quis operator negliget operis
sui curam? &c. The Epicures thinke, that
God taketh no care of vs: and Aristotle, that
Gods prouidence descendeth no lower then
the Moone: but what workeman doth cast off
the care of his worke? If it be a wrong to
rule them, it was a greater to work them:
for not to haue made them nulla iniustitia,

               was no iniustice: Non curare quod feceris
summa inclementia: Not to care for that thou
hasi made, is great inclemencie.
            Secondly, this doctrine hath a speciall
comfort both to Christs Church in generall,
and to euery member thereof in particular:We must wait the acceptable time.
that when the time of mercie and
deliuerance is fulfilled, they shal surely see
the Lords sauing health. Thus the Church
of the Iewes did find refreshing, Psal. 102
13. Thou wilt arise and haue mercie vpon
Sion, for the appointed time is come: thus Ioseph
with patience endured his affliction,
vntill his appointed time came, and the
counsell of the Lord had tried him, Psal.
10
                  •
               . 18. Thus euery one, whether afflicted
in mind, or humbled in bodie, ought
patiently to expect the Lords appointed
time, to visite them in mercie. How was
our Sauiour Christ himselfe turmoyled &
tossed in this world? he endured hunger,
thirst, wearinesse, he was mocked, whipped,
tormented, tasted of bitter sorrowes
of his soule, and grieuous paines in
his bodie, till his time came, that God
manifested his kingdome and glorie.
            
               Glorifie thy sonne, that thy sonne also may
glorifi
                     •
                   thee: The glorie of the Sonne redoundeth
to the glorie of the Father. Ioh.

5. 23. He that honoureth not the Sonne, honoureth
not the Father. We learne hereby,
that whatsoeuer gifts we aske of God, or
he in his mercie vouchsafeth to vs, we
should vse them to the honor and glorie
of God.
            Therefore our Sauiour teacheth vs to 
conclude our petitions thus, For thine is
the glorie, Mat. 6. 13. for we are assured
to be heard, when we make the glorie of
God the end of that which we ask. Pro. 3.
9. Honor the Lord with thy riches▪
                so euery
gift beside, either inward or outward,
must be referred to the praise of God.
            Thus Dauid sheweth how he would
behaue himselfe in his kingdome, Psal.
               
101. 2. I will walke in the vprightnesse of my
heart in the midst of my house, I will set no
wicked thing before mine eyes: as he receiued
his authoritie from God, so he vseth
it to his glorie.
            
               Achitophels counsell and wit was turned
to foolishnesse, because he imployed
it euill, in vpholding rebellious Absalom
against his father.
            Like as Manna that angelicall food,
whē the people did abuse it to couetousnesse,
keeping it till the morning, contrary
to the commaundement of God, 
                  •
               tunke

and was full of wormes. Exod. 16. 20. so
God depriueth them of their gifts that do
not vse them well: as the talent was taken
from the vnthriftie and vnprofitable seruant,
that did not imploy it to his maisters
aduantage. Mat. 25. v▪
                26.
            4. For the Lord will not giue his glory
to another. Isay 42. 8. he wil not suffer that
the praise of his giftes should be ascribed
to any beside himselfe: and therefore was
Herode stroken with wormes, because he
gaue not the glorie to God. Act. 12.
            5. By this doctrine they are reproued,All gifts must 
                     〈◊〉
                   vsed to Gods glory.
which hauing receiued any grace or gift
from God, as knowledge, wit strength of
bodie, riches, honor, do not vse them soberly
and vertuously to Gods glorie: as
rich men become proud of their riches:
they that haue knowledge, are puffed vp:
they which haue abundance offend in riot
and excesse: and this is the next way to depriue
them of that they haue. As also, whē
men aske any thing of God to a wrong
end, they misse of their desires: as S. Iames
saith, Ye aske and haue not, because ye aske
amisse, that you might consume it on your
lustes: wherefore if we would obtaine at
Gods hands those things which we want,
or would haue increased that we haue,

we must simply and vnfainedly intend
Gods glory, he will admit no partner,
nor deuide his glorie, or share it with any.
He therefore that maketh his gifts common,
that is, employing them to any other
end then to Gods honor, doth pollute his
gifts, as Origene well saith: Consu
                     •
                  tudine
scripturae commune dicitur quod immundum
est, consequenter quod sanctum separatū est,
&c. By the vse of Scripture that is said to be
common which is vncleane, that is holy which
is set apart: that which is holy doth onely appertaine
to God, and hath no fellowship with
any other. Peccator & immundus multorum
est: But the sinner and vncleane person is common
to many. He then which doth not apply
his gifts onely to the praise of God,
but maketh them common to serue his
owne carnall affections, doth pollute
and defile them.
         
         
            The third Lecture.
            
               
                  Vers. 2. As thou hast giuen him power ouer
all flesh.
            
            THis is the second reason of our Sauiour
his request for his glorification,
and it is taken a pari from the like: as thou

hast giuen him power ouer all flesh, so also
giue him the glory due vnto him, which is
an adiunct of this power. Here we haue
first the power set forth which is giuen
vnto Christ, then the end of his power,
to giue eternall life; and the meanes directing
to this end▪ which is the knowledge
of God and his Christ.
            First then, this Scripture sheweth, that
all power ouer all men is giuē vnto Christ
as he is God and man; that vnto his kingdome
of power, all flesh is brought in subiection:
the very wicked and abiects shall
tremble before him and the mightiest potentates
shall stoupe vnto him. This is testified
by our Sauiour himselfe. Iohn 5. 27.
The father hath giuen him power to execute
iudgement in that he is the son of man. Mat.
28. 18 All power is gi
                     •
                  en vnto me in heauen
and earth. Act. 17. 31. He will iudge the
world by that man whom he hath appointed.
            
            An experience of this great power, we
haue Act. 9. when Saule breathing out
threatnings and slaughter against the Disciples
of the Lord, was cast downe to the
ground, as he went to Damascus, & smitten
blind: this power here executed by Iesus
himself he also exerciseth sometime by
his Ministers, as the Angels who smote

               Herode that killed Iames the brother of
Iohn, Act. 12. and was a cruell persecutor
of Christs Church▪ by the Apostles, as Peter
by this power pronounced the sentēce
of death against Ananias and Sapphira for
their hypocrisie, Act. 5. and Paul smote
Elymas the sorcerer with blindnesse. Act.
1
                  •
               . 11.
            In respect of this great power, our Lord
Iesus is said to haue a 
                  •
               od of yron in his
hand, and vnder the same the people of
the world are as a potters vessell, Psal. 2. 9.
And as he that treadeth the wine-presse,
with great facilitie doth presse out the
grapes: so Christ saith by the Prophet,
Isay 63. 3. I haue troden the wine-presse alone,
&c. I will tread them in mine anger,
and tread them vnder foote in my wrath.
            
            The reason of this great power committed
vnto Christ, the Apostle sheweth
Heb. 1. 2. whom he hath made heire of all
things, by whom he also made the world
                     •
                  :
wherefore it is iust that Christ should inherite
that he made, and beare rule ouer
the workes of his owne hands, and be
Lord ouer his owne creatures: for Christ
God and man being but one person, euen
his humanity is made partaker of that power
which belongeth vnto him as God.

Againe, the Apostle further alleageth out
of the 45. Psalme, Thou hast loued righteousnesse
and hated iniquitie, wherefore God
thy God hath annointed thee with the oile of
gladnesse aboue thy fellows. Christ in respect
of his perfect obedience and absolute
righteousnes, euen as he is man, is iudged
meete and worthy to be exalted aboue all
creatures, and to haue all power committed
to him.
            
                First then this doctrine of Christs soueraigne
power, doth ouerthrow that
proud conceit of the Bishop of Rome,
who challengeth to be Christs Vicar in
earth,The Pope not Christs Vicar. and the ministeriall head of his vniuersall
Church: it is blasphemy to say that
any mortall man can execute this great
power of Christ ouer all flesh: Christ saith
all power is giuen vnto me, it is not giuen to
any else, neither will God giue his honor
to another: yet the Pope vsurpeth Christ
power, to command Angels, to canonize
Saints, to open and shut the kingdome of
God to whom he list; wherein he sheweth
himself to be the prince of pride, and very
Antichrist. S. Paul saith, We will not reioyce
of things which are not within our measure,
but according to the measure of the line,
whereof God hath distributed vnto vs a measure
               
to attaine vnto you. 2. Cor. 10. 13.
But the Bishop of Rome doth extend him
selfe beyond the line of his measure: he
might content himselfe with his own Diocesse
and go no further. Ambrose saith:
Gratia Christiana non contenta est eosdem
habere limites,
               Lib. 2. de vocat. gent. cap. 6. 
               quos Roma, &c. The Christian
faith is not contained within the same
bounds that Rome is, &c.
            
            Secondly, seeing all power and iudgement
is committed to Christ, who is able
alone to take vengeance of his enemies,
let carnall and profane men stand in awe
of Christ, take heed how they do blaspheme
his name, contemne his word, and
persecute his members: as the Prophet
exhorteth Kings and Princes, to serve the
Lord in feare, to kisse the son, that is to honor
& embrace his name, l
                     •
                  st he be angrie,
and 
                     •
                  e perish out of the way, Psal. 2. 12.
            
               Thirdly, to the faithfull seruants of
Christ this doctrine yeeldeth speciall cō
                  fort:
that our Lord and Sauiour is able to
defen
                     •
                   his Church, to succor his afflicted
members, and to deliuer them from euerlasting
wrath: as it followeth in the same
place: If his wrath be suddenly kindled, blassed
are all they that trust in him. Ambrose
well saith: Veni Domine Iesu, sed non iam in

vmbra, sed in sole iustitiae: si corporis vmbra
saluauit, quantum conferre poterit alacritas
aperta virtutis?Ser. 19. in. Psal. 119. Come Lord Iesus, but not
now in the shadow, but in the Sunne of righteousnesse:
if the shadow as it were of his bodie
saued vs, how much more the cleare
brightnesse of his power?
            
               That he should giue eternall life to all,
               Doct. 2. 
               that
thou hast giuen him] Besides that generall
power which is giuen to Christ ouer all
flesh, he doth exercise a peculiar soueraigntie
toward his Church, in conferring
euerlasting saluation vpon his faithfull
members.
                  
                     •
                  ternall life onely giuen to those that are giuen to Christ. So that from hence we are
taught, that eternall life is onely giuen to
those that are giuen out of the world to
Christ, that is, the elect: so our Sauiour
saith, Ioh. 6. 39. It is the Fathers will that
hath sent me, that of all which he hath giuen
me, I should lose nothing, but should raise
it vp againe at the last day, Ephes. 5. 23. He
is the Sauiour of his bodie: they then
which are not of Christs bodie, haue no
part in him, he is not their Sauiour, Rom.
8. 30. Whom he predestinated, them also he
called: whom he called, them also he iustified:
whom he iustified, he also glorified. None
then are brought to glorie, but they which
are iustified in Christ; none are iustified or

called in him, but they which before were
predestinate, elected, and chosen of God.
            This we see perfourmed in the Apostles 
of Christ, how he giueth life to those
that are giuen him▪ Mat. 19. 18. You that
haue followed me in the regeneration, shall
sit vpon twelue thrones, and iudge the twelue
Tribes of Israel, Ioh. 17. 12. Those that
thou gauest me haue I kept, and none of them
is lost, but the child of perdition: who was
giuen vnto Christ, and not giuen; giuen,
in respect of his outward vocation, not giuen
by eternall election.
            Christ herein is worthie of more glorie 
then Moses, Heb. 3. 3. for Moses could
not bring all those that were giuen him
out of Aegypt into the land of Canaan,
nay he could not bring himselfe thither:
onely two of 600. thousand, Caleb and
Iosua came into the land of promise. Neither
could Nehemiah bring all those that
came out of the captiuitie, to be true Israelites▪
not giue them to God, whom the
Lord had giuen out of the hand of their
enemies: for amongst them were many
hypocrites that were sworne and confederate
with Tobiah, that hindred the building
of the temple, Nehem. 6. 17. and
that maried wiues of Ashdod & Ammō,

Moab, &c. like as Iacob saith to Laban,
These twentie yeares haue I bene with thee,
thine ewes and goats haue not 
                     •
                  ast their yong:
whatsoeuer was torne of beasts I made it good
my selfe▪
                Gen. 3
                  •
               . 48. 49. So Christ is a
most faithfull shepheard, maketh good
vnto his Father al those sheepe which are
giuen vnto him: none of them is wanting
or perisheth.
            
                Our Sauiour himselfe sheweth the reason
hereof, where eternall life is onely giuen
to those which are appointed of God
thereunto, and giuen vnto Christ to be redeemed
by him. Mat. 20. 23. To sit at my
right hand and my left is not mine to giue, but
it shall be giuen to them, for whom it is prepared
of my Father: that is, Christ is not to
giue eternall life, but vnto those that are
thereunto ordained of God, Ephes. 1. 5.
Who hath predestinate vs to be adopted
through Iesus Christ vnto himself: no more
are adopted by Christ, then are predestinate
of God: election is the foundation
of our vocation & iustification by Christ.
Like as the Israelites only passed through
the red sea, the Egyptians aduenturing to
go the same way were drowned in the
waters: so Christ is a way onely to true Israelites,
that is, beleeuers, to passe by vnto

heauen.
            First then their error is here confuted,Christ died not for all.
that hold, that Christ died for all men, for
Turkes, Iewes, vnbeleeuers, for the reprobate
as well as the elect: this is the opinion
of the Papists, and some Lutherans:
whereas Christ vouchsafeth not to
pray for the world, Ioh. 17. 9. much lesse
died he for them: if they haue no part in
his prayer, neither haue they in his sacrifice.
Againe, if Christ giue eternall life to
all those that are giuen him, then none of
them can perish:
                  
                     •
                  lection certaine. then is the election of
God certaine and infall
                  •
               ble, none can fall
away from it: contrarie to the opinion of
some, that thinke the elect of God may
become reprobates, contrarie to the Scripture,
Ioh. 13. 1. whom Christ loueth, he
loueth to the end.
            Further, we are taught hereby▪ so many
as desire to be made partakers of euerlasting
life, to examine themselues, whether
they be giuen vnto Christ: for whosoeuer
is not giuen vnto Christ, hath no part in
saluation, 2. Corin. 13. 5. Examine your
selues, know you not, that Iesus Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates? And to be giuen
vnto Christ, is not to be baptised: so
was Simon Magus, and yet Peter said vnto

him: Thou hast no part nor fellowship
in this businesse, Act. 8. 21. nor yet sometime
to pray: so did the Pharisie, and yet
was not iustified, Luk. 18. nor to be an
hearer of the word: so was Herode, and
yet an hypocrite. Mark. 6. 20. Nor yet
doth it suffice to preach the word: for so
did Iudas, and yet was the child of perdition.
This it is therfore to be giuen vnto
Christ, to be separate from the world, and
to cleaue vnto Christ by a liuely faith, and
to be guided by the spirit of Christ, to be
mortified in the flesh, and sanctified in the
spirit, as the Apostle saith, Rom. 8. 10.
If Christ be in you, the bodie is dead because
of sinne, but the spirit is life for righteousnesse
sake. They therfore which behold
Christ by faith, and leade their life thereafter:
who do not onely behold as in a
mirror the glorie of God, but are changed
into the same image, 2. Cor. 3. 18. they are
truly giuen vnto Christ, as the Apostle
saith of the Macedonians: They gaue them
selues first to the Lord, and after to vs by the
will of God: by their fruitfull workes in releeuing
the necessitie of the Church, they
did professe themselues the faithfull seruants
of Christ, truly giuen vnto him and
dedicate to his seruice. Origen saith well:

               Quemadmodum in corporalibus naturalis
quidam attractus mest quibusdam ad alia, vt
Magneti ad ferrum, bitumini ad ignem, sic
fidei ad diuinam virtutem:
               In Mat. Homil. 13. 
               As there is in corporall
things a naturall attraction, as of the
Loadstone to iron, of brimstone to the fire, so
there is of faith to the diuine power. Euen so
faith draweth vs, and giueth vs to Christ,
and Christ giueth vnto vs eternall life.
         
         
            The fourth Lecture.
            
               
                  Vers. 3. This is life eternall.
            
            THis verse sheweth the end, which is
eternall life; and the way to the end,
the true knowledge of God in Christ: the
knowledge of God and of the Mediator
that bringeth vs to God, which is Iesus
Christ.
            First then we do learne,Doctr. 1. that there is
an euerlasting state after this life is ended:
set foorth by these two names. First, it is
truly called life, being exempt from all
trouble, sorrow, griefe, and calamitie: so
that this which we leade in this world is
not to be called a life, being full of all miserie
and calamitie. Secondly, it is eternal,
without any alteration, end, or change: so

is not the state of this world, which is
subiect to mutabilitie and mortalitie.
            
                There be then foure things which make
this life miserable,What things make the life o
                     •
                   man miserable. Iniquitie, Necessitie,
Calamitie and Mortalitie: all these the
next life shall free vs from. There shall be
no iniquitie or sinne any more, Isa. 
                  •
               8. 8.
That way shall be called holy, the polluted
shall not pas
                  •
               e by it: there shall be no
necessitie, as to sow, to plant, to labour, as
it was said to Adam, that he should eate
his bread in the sweate of his browes: 
                  •
               or
they shall then rest from all their labours,
Reuel. 14. 13. There shall be no calamitie,
no oppression, sorrow, or griefe, Isa.
60. 18. Violence shall be no more heard
in the land, Reuel. 21. 4. Neither sorrow,
neither crying, neither paine shall be any
more. There shall be no mortalitie or mutabilitie,
death or sicknesse, Reuel. 21. 8.
there shall be no more death.
            
            
                Thus we reade of Lazarus, that being in
Abrahams bosome (that is in the place of
euerlasting rest & refreshing) whether his
saith (being the child of faithfull Abrahā)
brought him: Lazarus was there comforted
from all the paines & sorrowes which
he before in his life endured. Lake 16. 25.
Againe, Mat. 17. 2. we haue an excellent

representation of the blessed estate of the
Saints after this life: there our Sauior was
transfigured in the presence of his Apostles,
and his face did shine as the Sunne.
Moses also and Elias talked with him, who
were now deliuered from this vale of miserie,
and were entred into glorie: for if
Moses face did so shine when he was yet
mortall, that the Isaelites were not able
to behold him: 2. Cor. 3. 7. how much more
glorious was he now.
            This celestiall place is that mountaine of
               
               mirth, and hill of incense, spoken of in the
Canticles 4. 5. and Mons aromatum, the
mountaine of spices, Cantic. 8. 14. This is
indeed that land of Canaan that sloweth
with milke and honie: this is our fathers
house, where is bread inough, where with
the lost child now returned, we shall haue
the best robes giuen vs, and rings put vpō
our singers, Luke 15. 22. This is the hauen
and rest, where the soules of the righteous
after the tempests and stormes of the sea
of this world do happily arriue: as it is said
in the Psalme, He bringeth them to the hauen,
where they would be, Psal. 107. 30.
            The reasons why God prouideth for his 
eternall life out of the Scripture, are these:
first, from Gods iustice, 2. Thess. 1. 6. it is a

iust thing with God to recompence tribulation
to those that trouble you, and to
you that are troubled, rest. Secondly, from
Gods honour, Mat. 22. 32. he is not the God
of the dead, but of the liuing: seeing then
that God is God of the faithful departed,
they therefore are aliue vnto him, for it
were not for the liuing Gods honour to
be the God of the dead. Thirdly, from the
state and condition of the faithfull, which
were of all other most miserable, if in this
life onely we haue hope. 1. Corint. 15. 19.
Fourthly, from the priuiledge of our profession:
we are the holy temples of God
which shall not be destroyed. 1. Cor. 3. 17.
            
                Wherefore first we reproue the vaine
opiniō of the heathen, who were grossely
deceiued concerning the state of the soule
after this life.Enemies to euerlasting life confuted. The Epicures beleeued no
immortalitie, nor yet any being of the
soule after death. Of like opiniō were the
Sadduces among the Iewes, and the Atheists
among vs. The Pithagoreans did
thinke that the soules did passe out of
one bodie into another, yea into the
bodies of bruite beastes, such as they
were like vnto in condition of life and
manners. The Platonists did hold the
immortalitie of the soule, but not of

the bodie. The Peripatetickes and Poets
imagined the soules of good men to become
starres. None of them beleeued aright
concerning the immortalitie both of
soule and body, and of eternall life with
God. This knowledge we haue from the
scriptures, and God reuealed these things
to vs by his spirit, 1. Corin. 2. 10. that both
our bodies and soules shall be made inheritors
of life through Christ, as the Apostle
sheweth: We shall be eaught vp with
him in the clouds, to meete the Lord in the
aire. 1. Thess. 4. 17.
            B
                  •
               rnard doth very well describe the
happy state both of our bodies and soules
in the kingdome of God, agreeable to this
doctrin of Paul: first for the soule he saith:
whereas there are three faculties thereof,
rationalis, concupiscibilis irascibilis, the reasonable
part, the election or will, the affection:
Implebit Deus rationale nostrum luce
sapientiae, implebit concupiscibile nostrum
fonte iustitiae, implebit irascibile nostrū summa
pace & tranquillitate: He will replenish
our reason with the light of wisedome and
knowledge, our electiue facultie with iustice,
that it shall desire nothing but what is to be
desired, our wrathfull and boyling affection
with peace and tranquilitie. Concerning

the bodie, whereas it consisteth of foure
elements: Habebit terra nostra immortalitem,
Our earthly part shal haue immortality.
Habebit aqueum nostrum impassibilitatem,
Our watrie part sh
                  •
               l be without passion: Habebit
aereum leuitatem, Our airie part shall
haue agilitie or lightnesse: Habebit igneum
nostrum perfectam pul
                  •
               hri
                  •
               udinem, Our fiery
part shall haue most perfect beautie or glory.
            Secondly, the dulnesse of our affections
is here to be quickned, and our desire to
be inflamed toward the attaining of this
happie estate, we should be still groueling
vpon the earth, but eleuate our hearts to
heauen, and to haue our conuersation in heauen,
from whence we looke for our Sauiour,
Phil. 3. 20. It is recorded by the heathen,
that one Cleombrotus reading Plato his
booke of the immortality of the soule, was
so rauished with the desire thereof, that
presently 
                  •
               e cast himselfe into the sea:
like master, like scholer; like teaching, like
following. But it may be a shame to vs,
that hauing so pure doctrine reuealed
concerning true eternitie,The desire which we ought to haue to euerlasting life. which they but
dreamed of, are not touched with an earnest
desire thereof, as S. Paul was, who desired
to be dissolued, & to be with Christ,
Phil. 1. 23. Wherefore the assurance and

hope of euerlasting life, ought to be the
chiefe scope of all our studies, the drift of
our desires, the marke to aime at, the race
to run at, the prise to striue for, the hauen
to saile vnto, the pearle to be purchased,
the inheritance to be desired▪ the country
to be trauelled vnto: & this is that wherein
we ought chiefly to reioyce, that our
names are written in heauen, Luke 10. 20.
thy riches, honour, strength, beautie, wisedome,
wife, children, ease, prosperitie, are
not to be ioyed in, in comparison of this
blessed estate; the which if we earnestly desire
now, we shall vndoubtedly possesse
then through Iesus Christ, to whom be
praise for euer.
            
               That they know thee to be the onely very
God. Our Sauiour saith not, to know thee
only to be very God; for if the father only
were God, then the Sonne and the holy
Ghost should be excluded: but the Father
is that onely God, and so is the sonne and
the holy Ghost, they all three are but only
one very God: as where the Apostle calleth
Iesus Christ the onely Lord, Iude 4.
neither the Father nor the holy Ghost are
excluded, for they are all the onely Lord,
though they be deuided in person, yet the
vnity and essence of the diuine nature and

power is not deuided.
            The knowledge then of God the Father,Doct. 2. Of the necessitie of the knowledge of God.
sonne and holy Ghost is necessary to
saluation: the ignorance whereof is sufficient
to depriue vnbeleeuers of eternall
life.
            
                So the Apostle saith, that they which
are without Christ, and without God in
this world, are strangers from the promise
and from the common-wealth of Israell.
Ephes. 2. 12.
            
                Such a one was Pharao, who wickedly
said: I know not the Lord, neither will I let
Israel go, Exod. 5. 2. Because he knew not
God, the Lord would not vouchsafe to
know him, but gaue him ouer to hardnes
of heart, and got vnto himself great glory
in his destruction and confusion. Thus our
Sauiour also testifieth of the Samaritanes,
speaking to the woman of Samaria, Iohn
4. 22. Ye worship that which ye know not,
we worship that which we know, for saluation
is of the Iewes. Saluation then is not of
them that ignorantly worship they know
not what, as the Athenians did, who erected
an altar to the vnknowne God, and
ignorantly worshipped they knew not
whom. Act. 17. 23.
            
                For like as the beasts that had no knowledge

to go vnto Noahs Arke, perished in
the waters: and as the Doue, if she had not
knowne the way of returne to the Arke
when Noah stretched out his hand and
tooke her in, had likewise miscaried: and
as the oxe and asse not knowing their masters
crib, are like to want their food; so all
they which know not God their Creator,
are in the high way to destruction, and are
barred from life.
            The reason hereof S. Paule sheweth,
Rom. 10. 13. Whosoeuer shall call vpon the
name of the Lord shal be saued: but how shall
they cal vpon him on whom they haue not beleeued;
how shal they beleeue in him on whom
they haue not heard? They then that neither
beleeue in God, nor pray vnto him, nor
worship him, because they know him not,
nor haue not heard of him, cannot be saued.
Ignorance then and want of knowledge
of God, because it is the fountaine
of vnbeleefe and prophanenesse, doth
iustly exclude from the kingdome of
God.
            First then if the knowledge of the blessed
Trinitie be necessary vnto euerlasting
life,Heretickes enemies to the Trinitie confuted. we see in what damnable state all heretickes
do stand, that beleeue not aright
in the Trinitie, whether they impugne any

one of the three glorious persons, as the
Manichees the person of the father, who
was the author of the law, which they refuse
and reuile him that gaue it, making
him the author of euill. The Arrians dishonor
the Sonne, affirming him to be vnequall
to his Father. The Macedonians
blasphemed the holy Ghost, denying him
to be God: or whether they are aduersaries
to the whole Trinitie, as the Sabellians,
which did hold but one person of
the godhead: as the Tritheits that do wickedly
teach, that there are three Gods as
well as three persons.
            Secondly,Against Atheists. all Atheists are here condemned,
that beleeue no God at all, such as
were Diagoras and one Theodorus among
the heathen. Likewise the Gentiles are reproued,
who worshipped those which
were not Gods, Gal. 4. 8. and brought in a
multitude of gods, for they did not acknowledge
the onely very God, both
worshipping many gods, and those also
false gods.
            Thirdly, as heresie and prophanenesse
condemneth▪ so also ignorance: for that
whosoeuer knoweth not, nor yet beleeueth
aright in the Trinitie, cannot be saued:
as our Sauiour Christ saith, Iohn. 3. 19.

               This is the condemnation, that light is come
into the world, and men loued darknesse rather
then light.
               Ignorance dangerous. Hearken then ye ignorant
persons, ye simple men and women,
though there were no other matter against
you, your owne ignorance & darknesse
is sufficient to condemne you: say
not, mine innocencie shall saue me, I do
hurt to none, I do no wrong, I am harmelesse,
&c. For the ignorant person cannot
be innocent, seeing by his ignorance and
vnbeleefe he dishonoureth God: it is in
vaine to say. I dishonour not man, when
thou dost dishonour God. Ambrose saith
well: Innocentia & scientia beatum faciunt:
Innocencie and knowledge make happie: if either
be wanting, there is no true happines.
Wherefore let euery one labour for the
knowledge of God: parents instruct your
children, maisters your seruants, husbands
teach your wiues; do not nourish your
selues in ignorance, and cast away your
soules for want of knowledge.
            
               And whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ]
It is not sufficient to saluation to acknowledge
God the Creator,Doct. 3. No saluation without faith in Christ. yea to confesse
one glorious God, and three persons, vnlesse
also we beleeue in Iesus Christ God
and man, the Mediator betweene God

and man; and so beleeue in him, that we
liue by faith in him.
            
                This our Sauior further testifieth: he that
beleeueth not is condemned alreadie, because
he beleeueth not in the name of the onely begotten
Sonne of God, Ioh. 3. 18. And again,
ye beleeue in God, beleeue also in me, Ioh. 14
1. It is not then enough to beleeue in God
the Almightie and omnipotent Creator,
vnlesse also we beleeue in Iesus Christ our
mercifull Sauiour. Saint Iohn accordingly
saith: Euery spirit that confesseth not Iesus
Christ to be come in the flesh, is not of
God, 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
            
                Peter is commended for this faith, for
confessing Christ the sonne of the liuing
God, Mat. 16. 16. And after Thomas had
said to Christ, Thou art my Lord and my
God: Iesus said to him, Because thou hast
seene, thou beleeuest, blessed are they that
haue not seene and haue beleeued, Ioh. 20.
28. 29. Yea this was the faith of Abraham
Ioh. 8. 56. Abraham (saith our Sauiour)
reioyced to see my day, he saw it and was glad.
            
            
                So like as when Moses was absent, who
was a mediator that went betweene God
& his people, the whole host went astray,
and committed most grosse Idolatrie, Exod.

                  •
               2. so and much more are we like to

perish, if we haue not the presence of
Christ our Mediator. Moses also said vnto
God, when he told them, that he wold
not go with them, because they were a
stiffe-necked people, but he would send
onely an Angell before them, Exod. 33.
2. 3. If thy presence go not with vs, carie vs
not hence, vers. 15. If then the presence of
the Mediator was necessarie to conduct
them vnto that terrestriall Canaan, much
more to the celestiall.
            For in Christ onely is the Lord appeased 
toward vs, Mat. 3. 17. This is my welbeloued
Sonne in whom I am well pleased.
Without Christ thē there is no reconclliation,
no peace or attonement with God.
Like as princes offended must be dealt
with by Mediators, as the cities of Tyrus
and Sidon desired peace of Herod by the
mediation of Blastus his chamberlaine,
Act. 12. 20. so God being displeased
with vs for our sinnes, there is no accesse
to be had into his presence without Christ
the Mediator.
            First then all heretikes are condemned 
that beleeue not aright in Iesus Christ, either
denying his natures, blaspheming
his person, or derogating from his offices.
Of the first sort are the Arriās & Paulians,

that denie his Godhead:Diuerse heresies against the natures & person of Christ. the one saying,
that Christ is not equall vnto God: the other,
that he took beginning from Mary.
The Valentinians denied his humanitie,
saying, he tooke nothing of his mother,
but passed through her as water through
a pipe. The Eutichians also are of this
kind, who confound the natures of Christ,
and affirme in him the diuine nature only
to remaine. Of the second sort are the
Nestorians, who make two persons in
Christ, one person of God-Christ, another
of man-Christ, saying: that Marie
was the mother of the man-Christ, not of
God-Christ. Of the third ranke were the
Angelici, so called, because they worshipped
Angels, and made them their Mediators:
such are the Papists, that pray vnto
Saints, and ioyne them with Christ in the
office of the Mediatorship: all these acknowledge
not Iesus Christ truly, whom
God hath sent.
            
               Secondly, we must know, that it is not
sufficient to haue a general and superficial
knowledge, but liuely and effectuall: such
as Saint Paul had, confessing thus of himselfe,
Gal. 2. 20. Thus I liue, not I now, but
Christ liueth in me: and in that I liue now in
the flesh, I liue by faith in the Sonne of God,

who hath loued me, and giuen himselfe for
me. Such a faith and knowledge of Christ
then is requisite, whereby the soule liueth
vnto God, working alwaies by loue, Gal.
5. 6. For there are two things necessarie
to saluation: the inward beleefe of the
heart, and the outward confession and
demonstration of it, as Saint Paule sheweth,
Rom. 10. 10. With the heart man beleeueth
vnto righteousnesse, with the mouth
man confesseth to saluation.De Isaacho cap. 8. 
               And Saint
Ambrose writeth well vpon these words,
Cant. 8. 6. Set me as a seale vpon thine hart,
as a signet vpon thine arme: signaculum
Christ us in corde vt semper diligamus, signaculum
de brachio, vt semper operemus, luceat
imago eius in confessione nostra, luceat in
operibus & factis, vt si fieri possit, tota eius
species exprimatur in nobis, &c. Let Christ
be a signet in our heart alwaies to loue him,
a bracelet vpon the arme alwaies to be working
for him: let his image shine in our faith
and confession, let it shine in our workes and
actions, that if it be possible, the whole image
of Christ may be expressed in vs.
         
         
            
            The fifth Lecture.
            
               
                  Vers. 4. I haue glorified thee in earth, &c.
            
            THis is the third reason which our Sauiour
vseth, for the obtaining of his
glorification: that because he had glorified
his Father in earth, and finished his
worke, that his father would glorifie him
againe. He reasoneth from the desert to
the reward, which are relatiues, that is,
haue respect and mutuall relation the one
to the other.
            That Christ sought the glorie of his father,
both himselfe saith it, Ioh. 4. 34. My
meate is, that I may do th
                     •
                   will of him that
sent me, and finish his worke: and his Father
from heauen approueth the same: for after
our Sauiour had said: Father, glorifie thy
name, there came presently a voice from
heauen, saying: I haue both glorified it, and
will glorifie it againe, Ioh. 12. 28. Whereby
it is euident, that as God had bene
glorified by the heauenly sermons and
diuine miracles shewed by Christ in his
life, so also he would set foorth his glorie
in his blessed death.
            From hence then we learne,Doct. 1. that they

which will be assured to receiue glorie at
the hands of God in heauen, must indeuour
to set foorth his glorie here in earth.
            This our Lord promiseth, Reuel. 3. 27.
               To him that ouercometh, will I graunt to sit
with me in my throne, euen as I ouercame &
sit with my Father in his throne. He that
shall set foorth the kingdome of Christ in
this world in ouercoming of sinne, and
subduing his owne affections, shall be
made partaker of Christs kingdome in
heauen.
            
               Thus our Sauior saith to his Apostles,
               
               Mat. 19. 28. Verily I say vnto you, that whē
the Sonne of man shall sit in the throne of his
maiestie, ye which followed me in the regeneration,
shall sit vpon twelue thrones, and
iudge the twelue tribes of Israel. As they in
their regeneration expressed the spirituall
kingdome of Christ, so they shall enioy
the fellowship of his euerlasting kingdome.
Saint Paule doth confirm the same
by his owne example, 2. Tim. 4. 8. I haue
fought a good fight, I haue finished my course,
I haue kept the faith, from hence foorth is
laid vp for me the crowne of righteousnesse.
            For like as they that runne in a race 
and striue for maisteries, obtain a corruptible
crowne, 1. Cor. 9. 25. so they which

contend for the Lord, and runne the way
of his commaundements, shall receiue an
incorruptible crowne. The great king of
the Persians hearing out of the Chronicles
of the faithfulnesse of Mordecai,
which had reuealed the conspiracie of
two of the Kings Eunuches against him,
presently said: What honour and dignitie
hath bene giuen to Mordecai for this? Esth.
6. 3. He thought it vnreasonable that his
faithfull seruice should go vnrecompenced.
Much more is it iust with God to reward
the faithfull seruice of his.
            
                So the Apostle saith, that God the righteous
Iudge shall giue him the crown of righteousnesse,
2. Timot. 4. 8. This iustice of
God is the ground and cause of our reward:
which his iustice dependeth not vpon
the merit of our workes, or worthinesse
of our obedience, but vpon the free
and most gracious promise of God in
Christ: which his most free and mercifull
promise, to fulfill and accomplish to his
seruants, it standeth with his stable and
inuiolable iustice.
            
                First then we see a difference by this
doctrine betweene Christ and his members▪
for thogh Christ our head by the desert
and merit of his obedience, is worthy

of all glorie, Reuel. 4. 11. and might thus
pleade with his father for his glorificatiō,
because he had glorified him: yet the mē
               bers
cannot challenge any thing at the
hands of God,Man cannot chalenge any thing from God by his merits. for any worthinesse that is
in them, but onely for their Mediators
sake. Nehemiah thus praying, Remember
me, O my God, in goodnesse, according to all
that I haue done for this people: Nehem. 5.
19. requesteth not to be remembred of
God because of his faithfulnesse, but according
to the same: his faithfulnesse is the
rule or measure, but Gods mercie is the
cause: or else where he confesseth, cap. 13.
22. Remember me ô God concerning this, and
pardon me according to thy great mercie: but
where merit is challēged, there is no mercie
but iustice shewed: so that as Bernard
well saith, Opera non sunt causa regnandi,
sed via regni: Good workes are not the cause
of raigning, but the way to the kingdome.
            
            Secondly we do learne, that whosoeuer
wil be assured to receiue glory in the kingdome
of God, must seeke to glorifie him
here. He then that dishonoureth God in
this life, how can he looke to receiue honour
at the hands of God? Consider this
well all ye whom God hath honoured in
this life, with riches, authoritie, wit, knowledge,

take heed that ye rob not God of
his glorie, in abusing these gifts to your
owne pleasure: as riches to pride and wantonnesse;
authoritie, to oppresse or do
wrong; wit to deceiue; knowledge, to
maintaine errour: for they that thus hide
their talent, shall haue the reward of the
vnthriftie seruant, both to lose the talent,
and to be cast themselues into vtter darknesse,
Mat. 25. 30. How shall blasphemers
that prophane Gods name, drunken and
gluttonous persons that make their bellies
their gods, proud men that make flesh
their arme, how shall they escape, or with
what faces can they appeare before the
throne of Christ, whō they haue so much
dishonoured? Happie then are they which
make Gods glorie the end of their life, the
scope of all their actions, as the Apostle
saith: Whether ye eate or drinke, or whatsoeuer
ye do else, do all to the glory of God. 1. Cor.
10. 30. Then, come death, come sicknesse,
come hell it selfe, such a one shall not be
dismaid, his faithfull seruice shall not be
forgotten, the remembrance of his obedience,
and testimony of his conscience shal
be as the anker-hold of his soule: as the
Prophet Dauid saith, Psal. 119. This I had
because I kept thy commaundements.
            
            
               
               I haue finished the worke which thou gauest
me to do. Christ did not onely begin
the worke committed vnto him, but did
finish and make an end thereof, as he him
selfe said vpon the crosse: Consummatum
est, it is finished, Iohn 19. 30.
            This Scripture teacheth vs,Doct. 2. Continuance to the end. that it is not
sufficient to make a good beginning, or to
enter into the professiō of Christs seruice,
but we must continue & proceed therein,
and hold out vnto the end. So our Sauior 
saith, Math. 24. 13. He that endureth to the
end, shall be saued. Reu. 2. 26. He that ouercommeth
and keepeth my works to the end, to
him will I giue power ouer nations. What did 
it profit Herode to reuerence Iohn, and to
heare him gladly, and to do many things, and
after to cut off his head, Marke 6. or the
yong man to haue bene trayned vp in the
keeping of the law, and afterward to depart
from Christ for the loue he had to his
possessions, Marke 10? Therefore Dauid
saith, Teach me thy law, and I will keepe it to
the end, Psal. 119. 33. He wel knew that his
constant and enduring seruice should be
acceptable vnto God.
            Like as he that runneth in a race, vnlesse 
he hold out to the gole, obtaineth not the
price: and therefore S. Paul saith, I haue finished

my course. 2. Tim. 4. 7. As it auailed
not Lots wife to haue gone out of Sodom
and after to looke backe, nor yet the Israelites
to haue departed out of Egypt, and
afterward to long for the fleshpots again:
so they shall neuer come to Canaan that
are wearie of weldoing, and do as it
were runne themselues out of breath before
they come to the end of their race.
            
                The meanes then whereby we may be
strengthened to continue, and make our
obedience perfect, are these: first to renounce
our owne strength, & to acknowledge
all our power and actiuitie to goodnes,
and our abilitie to proceed to perfection,
to be of God, as the Prophet saith,
Isay 26. 12. Thou hast wrought all our works
for vs: and▪ therefore the Church prayeth,
Psal. 68. 28. Thy God hath appointed thy
strength: stablish, O Lord, that thou hast
wrought in vs. So shold we pray vnto God
to assist vs with his grace, and so vphold vs
by his spirit, that we fal not. Secondly, we
must take heed, that we rashly enter not
into Christs seruice, but do beforehand
ca
                  •
               t all the perils and daungers that may
ensue, as he that buildeth an house will
count the cost that it will stand him in.
Luke 14. 28. This is the cause that many

making a shew of zeale, hauing not layed
a good foundation, are constrained with
shame to giue ouer. Thirdly, a continuall
circumspection and watchfull care is necessary,
that we walke on by feare, alwaies
doubting our owne weakenes, and suspecting
our strength, as the Apostle sayth:
Let him that standeth take heed lest he fal. 1.
Cor. 10. 12.
            Wherefore let vs endeuour to be like 
out maister Christ, to grow to perfection,
and to finish the worke which God hath
imposed vppon vs. Many haue good
thoughts and spirituall motions, but they
do not nourish them: they are as vnripe
grapes, or as vntimely fruit. Such are compared
to negligent builders, who are next
to pullers downe. Prouer. 18. 9. He that is
slouthfull to do his worke, is the brother of a
great waster. Ye are wasters thē, not workmen;
destroyers, not repairers; pullers
downe, not setters vp, that giue ouer in
your course, and faint in weldoing.
            
               Vers. 5. And now glorifie me thou Father
with thine owne selfe, with the glorie
which I had with thee before the world was.
This is the fourth reason of our Sauiour
his request for his glorification, and it is
taken ab aequo from the equitie thereof,

and the right which he had to this glorie,
it was his owne from all beginning: so that
he prayeth onely for the manifestation of
that glory in his whole person of God and
man, which was due to his godhead before
the world was.
            From hence then this comfortable doctrine
is concluded,Doct. 3. that as this great glory
of Christ, being due frō al eternity to his
godhead, was decreed to be manifested
also in his humane nature: so likewise the
glorie of Christs members, which shal be
giuen vnto them in the kingdom of God,
was before ordained & appointed in the
counsel of God before all worlds.
            
               
               This Moses testifieth in the Psal. 90. 2.
Before the mountaines were made, and before
thou hadst formed the earth and the
world, euen from euerlasting to euerlasting
thou art our God. Thus the Apostle witnesseth,
That we were predestinate in Christ
to be to the praise of his glorie. Ephes. 1. 12.
            
                This the scriptures testifie of the brethren
of Antioch, that as many as were ordained
to eternall life, beleeued. Act. 15. 48.
S. Paul also testifieth of Clement and other
his fellow labourers, that their names
were written in the booke of life, Phil. 4. 3.
            
                Therefore in the Reuelation 4. 6. is the

world compared to a sea of glasse, because
all things are open before God, and he
from the beginning did foresee and appoint
whatsoeuer shoud fall out in the
world: as all things in a glasse are conspicuous
and euident. Like as Mat. 20. 2. the
husbandman agreeth aforehand what to
giue to the labourers, before yet they had
wrought in the vineyard: so the Lord in
Christ appointed saluation to his elect
before they had done either good or euil.
            The Apostle sheweth the reason hereof,
why the Lord according to his gracious
purpose hath chosen vs in Christ. Eph.
3. 10. That the manifold wisedome of God
might be made knowne, according to the eternall
purpose which he wrought in Christ Iesus
our Lord. As the vnspeakable wisdome
of God herein appeareth, so also his infinite
loue, in chusing of vs before yet we
were: and therefore the Apostle saith, He
hath predestinated vs through Iesus Christ
according to the good pleasure of his will, to
the praise of the glorie of his grace. Eph. 16.
Gods wisdome then, and his gracious fauour
and loue are manifest in the decree
of predestination vnto glory.
            First then, whereas the same glorie is 
now giuen vnto Christs whole person, as

before was due to his godhead. Hereby a
certaine erronious opinion of the Papists
is confuted, which affirme that Christ merited
his owne glorification: for this were
to say, that the glory of the godhead could
be merited. And againe, all that Christ did
he wrought for vs:Christ merited not for himselfe. as he prayed not for
himselfe, but for vs: as Iohn 11. 41. Father
I thank thee that thou hast heard me, I know
that thou hearest me alwayes, but because of
the people that stand by, I said it. So likewise
when a voice was heard from heauē, (whē
Christ had said, Father glorifie thy name)
I haue glorified it, and will glorifie it againe.
Iesus answered, this voice came not because
of me, but for your sakes. Iohn 12. 30. Again
our Sauiour saith, For their sakes sanctifie
I my selfe. Iohn 17. 19. His precious death
and sacrifice, wherin he did offer and sanctifie
himselfe vnto God, was wholly for
vs. Ambrose saith, Non suae emerendae graetiae,
sed nostrae eruditionis causa ieiunauit: He
fasted not to merite grace for himselfe, but to
instruct vs. Non sui sed nostri causa pauper
factus: He became poore, not for his owne but
for our sakes. His birth, life, death, resurrection,
were all for our sakes, not to gaine
any thing to himselfe, for the glorie of the
godhead was due vnto Christ, at the very

first instance of his incarnation: as the Apostle
saith, when he bringeth in his first
begotten Sonne into the world, he saith:
Let all the Angels of God worship him, Heb.
1. 6. but the manifestation of this his glorie
came afterward. So that where the
Scripture saith, Reuel. 4. 11. Thou art
worthie to receiue honor, &c. it is to be vnderstood,
not of the purchasing of any
honour which he had not, but of the manifestation
thereof: yet to vs, and for our
cause, he hath worthily and infinitely merited.
            Secondly, seeing the Lord hath appointed
a kingdome of glorie for his, this
ought to comfort and establish vs against
all temptation, as our Sauiour saith: Feare
not litle flocke, it is your Fathers will to giue
you a kingdome, Luk. 12. And it ought to
be our chiefest care to rise vp, grow, and
increase in the assurance and vndoubted
expectation of this heauenly glorie: that
we may at the length be perswaded with
Saint Paule, that neither life nor death,
height nor depth, things present, or to come,
are able to remoue vs from the loue of God in
Christ▪
                Rom. 8.
         
         
            
            The sixth Lecture.
            
               
                  Vers. 6. I haue declared thy name to the
men which thou hast giuen me out of the
world.
            
            THe request of our Sauior being now
made for his glorification, he commeth
to make request for his Church: and
first for his Apostles and other beleeuers
then being, from vers. 6. to vers. 20.
where we haue first the preparation to the
prayer, vers. 6. to 9. then the petition it
selfe for his disciples, that God would
keepe them in the world from euill, vers.
9. to vers. 20. In the preparation is set
foorth the obedience of the Apostles in
receiuing & keeping the word of Christ:
and the causes thereof: the principall their
election, vers. 6. Thine they were: the instrumentall
meanes, Christs doctrine and
preaching, I haue declared thy name vnto
them.
            
            The declaring of the name of God is
nothing else, but the manifesting of the
will of God, and publishing of his counsel
concerning the saluation of the world
by Christ.
            
               
First then we are taught here,Doct. 1. that the
word of God is onely effectually declared
to those that are giuen vnto Christ out of
the world, and are marked vnto saluation:
others may heare it,The word of God profitable onely to the elect. but it is not profitable
vnto them.
            1 Thus the Apostle saith: If our Gospell
be hid, it is hid to those that are lost, 2. Cor.
4. 3. to them then that are not lost, it cannot
be hid.
            2 Christ saith to his Apostles, Mat. 13
11. It is giuen to you to know the secrets of
the kingdome of heauen, but vnto them it is
not giuen. It appeareth then that the Gospell
shall be reuealed vnto, and receiued
by all them to whom it is giuen: the rest,
(though the word of God be offered vnto
them) they shall not haue grace to beleeue
it: As the Apostles Paule and Barnabas
said to the Iewes, Act. 13. 46. It was necessarie
that the word of God should first haue
bene spoken vnto you: but seeing you put it
from you, and iudge your selues vnworthie of
eternall life, loe we turne to the Gentiles.
            
            3 Like as the Ma
                  •
               na did not profite
those that vsed it not as God commaunded
them; for it stunke, and was full of
wormes, Exod. 16. 20. and they which
lusted after quailes died; the flesh being

yet betweene their teeth, Num. 11. 33. so
the word of God profiteth not those,
which thankfully receiue it not.
            4 The reason the Apostle sheweth,
Heb. 4. 2. The word which they heard profited
not them, because it was not mixed with
faith in those that heard it. Hereof it is, because
all men haue not faith, 2. Thes. 3. 2.
but only those that are giuen vnto Christ,
to such onely is the word of God effectually
taught. Like as the bread of the house
is onely for the houshold, as the prodigall
child faith: In my fathers house is bread enough,
Luk. 15. 17. so the word of God
is ordained for none but those that are of
Gods house, that is, true members of his
Church.
            5 Hereby then, as by a most sure mark,
euery man may learne to discerne of his
election,The attentiue hearing of the word, a marke of our effectuall vocation. if he haue a desire too, and a delight
in the word of God. For like as a
man is iudged to be sicke and diseased,
when his stomacke cannot brooke nor
digest wholesome meates: so the soule of
that man cannot be sound, to whom the
word of God hath no pleasa
                  •
               t tast. But
when a man can say with the Prophet
Dauid, Psal. 19. 10. Thy word is sweeter
to me then the honie or honie combe. By this

we may gather an assured trust, that we
are giuen vnto Christ, if we do continue
in hauing delight stil, and finding comfort
in the word: for otherwise a sicke man
may haue some while a rellish of his meat,
when there is some intermission of the
disease, but it holdeth not long: so is it
with them, that haue for a while some tast
of the word of God, and afterward fall
away. Ambrose saith well vpon those
words:In Psal. 119. 
               Let him kisse me with the kisses of his
mouth: Osculatur nos verbum Dei, quando
sensum nostrum spiritus cognitionis illuminat:
the word of God doth kisse vs, when the spirit
of knowledge doth illuminate our minds.
            
            
               Thine they are, and thou gauest them me,
and they haue kept thy word:] Thine they
are by election, giuen vnto me by their
spirituall vocation and calling: they keep
thy word, which is the fruite of their sanctification.
            The keeping then of the word of God,Doct. 2.
is the fruite and effect of our election, not
the cause or foundation thereof: therefore
we do good workes, because we are elected
thereunto: we are not elected because
of our good workes.
            1 This Saint Paule sheweth, Ephes. 1.
4. He hath chosen vs in him, before the foundation

of the world, that we should be holy
and without blame before him in loue: our
holinesse is an effect and consequent of
our election in Christ, not a precedent
cause thereof.
            2 This is exemplified in Esau and Iacob
Rom. 9. 11. Ere the children were borne,
when they had done neither good nor euill,
that the purpose of God might remain according
to election, not by workes, &c. The Apostle
directly noteth, that the election
of Iacob depended not vpon his workes,
which as yet were not, but onely vpon
Gods gracious purpose. Saint Paul confesseth
so of himselfe, that he was not called
to be an Apostle, or put into Christs
seruice, for any thing that God saw to be
in him; but the grace of God was exceeding
abundant with faith and loue, which is in
Christ Iesus, 1. Tim. 1. 14. and I was receiued
to mercie, vers. 13. And the Apostle
ascendeth to the very first originall and
beginning of his calling, Reuel. 1. 1. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
separated (in the eternall counsell
of God) to preach the Gospell.
            
            3 The Prophet Ezechiel doth set foorth
this truth of Gods free and gracious election
by an allegorie, of a child, that in
the birth was cast foorth, forlorne, and

forsaken, the nauell not cut, nor yet washed
with water, or swadled in clowts; but it
lay wallowing and tumbling in bloud: the
Lord passed by, and had compassion vpon
it, tooke it as his owne: so it grew
and became comely and beautifull, &c.
Ezech. vers. 4. 8. What cause was there in
this child, that the Lord should haue respect
vnto it? but onely the Lords loue and
fauour which he had vnto it: as it followeth,
vers. 14. Thy name was spread abroad
among the heathen, because of thy beautie:
for it was perfect through my beautie, which
I had set vpon thee. Euen so in vs the Lord
saw no cause, why he should elect vs vnto
life, onely through his owne mercie he
saued vs.
            4 Saint Paule sheweth the reason of our
free and gracious election, Ephes. 1. 5.
He hath predestinate vs to be adopted
through Iesus Christ vnto himselfe, &c. to
the praise of the glorie of his grace: that is,
now God onely hath the glorie of our election,
when it is imputed wholly to his
grace.
            5 First then the doctrine of the Papists
is confuted, who teach, that men are elected
vpon the foresight of their faith and
workes: which is flat contrarie to the doctrine

               of the Apostle, Rom. 9. 14. It is not
in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth,
but in God that sheweth mercie. Thus the
Church beleeued in Ambrose his time:
Dignatione sua olim decreuit Deus peccatores
saluos facere,In 2. Tim. cap. 1. &c. vt neque merito suo, qui
saluantur, neque horum per quos vocantur,
&c. God by his owne vouchsafing hath long
ago decreed to saue sinners, &c. so that not by
the merit of those which are saued, nor of
them by whom they are called, but by the
grace of God, this gift is conferred.
            Secondly, seeing God hath shewed vs
so great mercie, as before we were any
thing, to decree vs vnto saluation: we
hereby should be stirred vp to walke worthie
of our vocation. Ephes. 4. 1. and to
shew our selues thankfull vnto God againe
by liuing vnto his praise.
            
               Vers. 7. Now they know,
               Doct 3. 
               that all things
which thou hast giuen me, are of thee.] From
this verse this doctrine is gathered, that it
is not possible for any to receiue the word
of God, vnlesse they be perswaded and
assured indeed, that it is the word of God,
and that he which deliuereth the same,
speaketh from God. As here this reason is
giuen, why the Apostles receiued the
word of God, because they knew that

Christ came from God, and that all things
which he spake and did were of God.
            1. This the Apostle sheweth, 1. Cor. 14.
25. speaking of the power of the word of
God: If all prophecie, and there come in one
that beleeueth not, the secrets of his heart are
made manifest, and he will fall downe and
worship, and say plainely that God is in you
indeede. This perswasion of the hearer
that God is in the preacher, doth make
the word pierce into his heart, that the
secrets thereof are discouered.
            2. This appeareth by that confession of
Peter, when Christ had said to the twelue,
will ye also goe away? Iohn. 6, 67. Maister,
saith he, to whome shall we go, thou hast
the words of eternall life. Peter will not go
from Christ, because he beleeued, that he
was a teacher from God, to shew the way
to eternall life. This made Nicodemus
come vnto Christ, because he knew he was a
teacher come from God. Iohn. 3. 2.
            3. Like as the embassadour is reuerenced
& his message willingly receiued, because
he commeth in the name, and with the authoritie
of the Prince: so saith S. Paul, we
are Ambassadors for Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 20.
4. The reason the Apostle sheweth, Heb.
4. 12. The word of God is liuely and mightie

in operation, and sharper then any two edged
sword, and entreth thorough to the deuiding
of the soule and the spirit: such operation
hath the word, whereas it is receiued and
acknowledged for the word of God.
            The people are taught, that where the
truth is preached, and the word of God
manifestly taught, they should receiue it
with all reuerence as Gods word: as the
Apostle testifieth of the Thessalonians, 1.
Thess. 2. 13. For this cause I thanke my God
without ceasing, that when ye receiued of vs
the word of the preaching of God, ye receiued
it not as the word of men, but as it is indeed
the word of God, which also worketh in you
that beleeue.
            
         
         
            The seuenth Lecture.
            
               
                  Verse 8. I haue giuen vnto them the word
which thou gauest me.
            
            IN this verse our Sauior amplifieth that
which in the former verse was more
briefly expressed, declaring the obedience
of the Apostles in receiuing his doctrine,
and his owne faithfulnesse in giuing vnto
them no other words then which he had
receiued of his father.
            
               
Our Sauiour then teacheth all Ministers
byh is example, that they should not aduenture
to preach any thing to the people
but that which they haue receiued from
God, and are able to warrant by his
word.
            Thus the Apostle saith, Be ye followers
of me, as I am of Christ, 1. Cor. 11. 1. not only
for example of life, but also in his doctrine.
The Apostle will be no further followed,
then he himselfe did tread in the
steps of Christ. Againe the Apostle saith,
I certifie you brethren that the Gospel which
was preached of me, was not after man. Gal.
1. 1
                  •
               .
            2. Hereof the Apostle giueth himselfe an
example, I haue receiued of the Lord that
which I haue deliuered vnto you. Likewise
the Prophets preached not to the people,
till the word of God came vnto them: as
Isay 2. 1. The word that Isaiah son of Amos
saw vpon Iudah and Ierusalem.
            
            3. Like as when our Sauiour fed the people
in the wildernesse, first he himselfe
brake the loaues, and then gaue them to
the Disciples, and they to the multitude,
Iohn 6. so the Lord Christ must first break
vnto vs of the bread of life, before we can
breake it to you. And like as he that heareth

speaketh continually, Prou. 21. 28. A
man must first heare the cause before he
can giue sentence: so must the Ministers
first hearken to God to be instructed by
his word, before they deliuer any doctrine
to the people.
            4. For it is required of such as are disposers,
dispensers, and stewards of Gods misteries,
to be faithful, 1. Corin. 4. 2. Like as
the embassador of the Prince must deliuer
nothing but by warrant and commission
of the Prince: so must Ministers do being
the Lords embassadors, 2. Cor. 25. 20.
            5. They then are reproued by this doctrine,
that presume to preach the doctrines
and commaundements of men in
stead of the word of God: as the Pharises
in our Sauior Christs time did, Marke 7. 7.
and the Pharises of this age the papists
do, who in most articles of religion, the
doctrine of the Trinitie excepted, do set
forth humane inuentions and traditions.
            Secondly the Ministers learne, that they
should not rashly vtter whatsoeuer at the
first sight offereth it selfe, or commeth sodainly
into their mind, but examine euery
doctrine how it is agreeable to the word
of God: to waite vpon God with the prophet
Isay, and to heare from him what we

should crie: as Ambrose saith, Cum audisset
clama, non prius clamauerat quàm audiret
quod clamare deberet, Isay 40. in psal. 119.
serm. 2. he would not cry before he had heard
what he should cry.
               Examination of doctrines. The people of God also
are taught to compare with the scriptures
euery doctrine which is brought vnto thē,
as the Berrhaeans did, Act. 17. to receiue
the good doctrine as currant coine, to refuse
the contrarie as counterfeit stuffe.
            
               And they haue receiued thē.
               Doct. 2. By this readines
in Christs Disciples to receiue his
doctrine,Gods word is chearfully to be heard. we are taught with all chearefulnesse
and alacritie to yeeld obedience to
the word of God.
            1. So the Apostle saith, Let the word of
God dwel in you plenteously, Col. 3. 16. It can
not dwel with vs vnlesse we receiue it into
the houses and habitations of our hearts.
And again, despise not prophecying. 1. Thess.
5. 2
                  •
               , that is, contemne not, neither neglect
the preaching of the word.
            2. Thus the Apostle commendeth the
obedience of the Galathians, that they
receiued him as an Angel of God, Gal. 4.
14. and consequently his doctrine as angelicall.
Such were the Disciples of Antioch,
When they heard the word they were
glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, Act.

13. 48. the willing then and chearefull receiuing
of the word, is a glorifying, a dignifying
of it, an ornament and an honour
vnto it.
            3. Like as he that tasteth the hony or cōb,
findeth a pleasantnesse and a delight in it:
so the word of God should be sweeter to
the spirituall tast, then the hony or honycomb,
Psa. 19. 10. And as the thirsty ground
waiteth for the raine, and drinketh it in
gladly: so should the word of God be
heard, as Iob saith, They waited for me as
for the raine, Iob 29. 23.
            4. Christ therfore is with all forwardnes
and earnest desire to be heard, because he
hath the words of eternall life, Iohn 6. 68.
We willingly heare men that counsell vs
for our worldly profit, much more when
for our soules health, and for that the contempt
of the Ministers of Christ, redoundeth
vnto Christ himselfe: He that heareth
you, heareth me: he that despiseth you, despiseth
me, Luke 10. 16.
            There are then three sorts of men, that
come farre short in the practise of this doctrine:
first, they which are contemners &
despisers of Gods word, that of an obstinate
and wilfull mind refuse to heare vs:
such were they that stopped their eares

against Stephē, Act. 7. and that cast off their
garments, and threw dust in the aire, while
Paul preached, Act. 22. 23. Such are the
obstinate popish Recusants at this day.
Secondly, there are others that preferre
their worldly businesse, as the Gergasenes
that because of the losse of their swine,
would haue Christ preach no longer among
them, Mat. 8. 34. Such are they that
coming to faires and markets wil not be
spared one halfe houre from their worldly
traffick to heare the word of God. Thirdly
there is another sort, that come to heare
but profit not: such as Ezechiel speaketh
of, They heare thy words but do them not. Ezech.
33. 31. Neither do these receiue the
words of Christ: for though the word
pierceth the eare, yet they shut the dore of
the heart against it. Wherfore if we wilbe
the true Disciples of Christ, let vs neither
obstinately reiect his words, nor carnally
refuse them, nor negligently heare them,
but willingly receiue them: that euen as
we with a bodily appetite do take our
corporall food, so with a spirituall desire
we receiue our heauenly sustenāce, which
doth sustaine our soules, as the other
strentheneth our bodies: as Ambrose wel
noteth vpon those words of our Sauiour,

               Giue ye them to eate, lest they faint in the
way: Habes Apostoli
                     •
                  um cibum, manduca illum,
& non deficies: You haue Apostolicke
foode eate it, and you shal not faint.
            
            
               They haue knowne verily or surely 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               that I came out from thee.]
               Doct 3. To come
out from God is all one with that which
followeth, to be sent of God, which
Christ vttereth of himself, as now our Mediator,
the Minister and messenger of God
in his humane nature: for as he is God, he
was neither sent of God, nor came out frō
him into the world.Our knowledge of Christ must be certaine. We learne here that
our knowledge of Christ must not be wauering
or vncertaine, but sure and stedfast:
the Apostles knew verily, &c.
            1. Saint Paul would not haue vs as children
to be caried about with euery wind of
doctrine, Ephes. 4. 
                     •
                  4. but to be rooted and
grounded in loue. Ephes. 3. 17.
            2. Such constancie was in Iohn Baptist,
Who was not as a reed shaken with the wind,
Mat. 11. 7. that is readie to be ouerturned
vpon euery occasion: but he continued
stedfast and vnremoueable in the confession
of Christ euen vnto death. Saint Paul
was so sure of his doctrine, that if an Angel
from heauen should preach otherwise,
he would hold him accu
                  •
               sed, Gal. 1. 8.
            
               
3. We should be in respect of our constant
faith as nailes surely fastened, Eccl.
12. 11. and as the pillars of the temple,
Reuel. 3. 12. that cannot be remoued.
            4. For as God is faithfull and altereth
not, and Christ is not yea, and nay, he
changeth not, 2. Cor. 1. 18. 19. so the
faith of Christ is also certaine, and we
ought to be as certaine of it.
            5. Two sorts of men are here reproued:
first, they which suffer themselues to be
seduced and corrupted in religion, and do
leaue their first faith. Such in Saint Paules
time were Philetus and Alexander, 1. Timoth.
1. 20. Phygell 
                  •
               s and Hermogenes,
2. Timoth. 1. 15. which turned away frō
Paule and departed from the faith: such
there are in these dayes, that being vnstedfast
in faith, & vnsetled in iudgement,
are caried headlong as with a whirlewind
into the downefall of dangerous errors
& corrupt doctrines, that fall into schism,
and are infected with popish superstition.
Secondly, they are here touched, that althogh
they be not seduced or mis-led into
any other beleefe, yet are not resolute and
constant in that faith which they professe:
but vnto many our redemption by Christ▪
is as the deliuerance & returne of the Israelites

from captiuitie, euen as a dreame,
Psal. 126. 1▪ Or the storie of the Gospell
is vnto many but as a thought or phantasie,
or a tale that is told, Psal. 90. 9. So I
know not how the most of the world are
in a dead sleepe▪ they slumber and dreame
in Religion, neither being certaine of that
they haue,Against carnal professors nor yet resolued against that
they haue not, and by Gods grace I trust
shall neuer haue. Let vs therefore labour
to be constant, and setled, and fully perswaded
in matters of faith, as builded vppon
a rocke, that neither the wind of persecution,
waues of temptations, nor the
raine of strange doctrines, be able to remoue
vs from our foundation. Ambrose
saith well: Similes simus Nazaraeis, quorum
capilli non defluebant, & Christus Nazaraeus
erat: Let vs be like the Nazarits, whose
haire did not shed, such a Nazarite was
Christ: that we may perseuere vnto the
end, and be as Christs mother: multi enim
conceperunt Christum, sed non genuerunt:
for many haue conceiued Christ, but
not brought him foorth: such are they
which fall away from their faith.
            
               And beleeue that thou hast sent me] The Apostles
wold not so readily haue receiued
Christs words,Doct. 4. but that they were perswaded

he came from God: so it is necessarie,
that the people shold know and approue
the calling of their teachers and Ministers
before they can subscribe and giue consent
to their doctrine.
            1. So the Apostle alleadgeth out of the
Prophet: How beautifull are the feete of
those which bring glad tidings of peace, &c?
Rom. 10. 15. before the message be receiued,
the messenger must be approued.
            2. This perswasion brought Nicodemus
to Christ: We know that thou art a teacher
come from God. And that consession
of the Pharisees and Herodians of Christ
was true, though vttered by them in deceipt
and hypocrisie: We know thou art
true, and teachest the way of God truly. Mat.
22. 16. A man must first haue a true calling
before he can teach truly.
            3. Like as Dauid said of Ahimaaz, that
came running to bring him newes of Absaloms
ouerthrow: He is a good man and
bringeth good tidings, 2. Sam. 18. 27. so
must the minister haue a good and lawful
calling, though he be not alwaies (as he
should be) a good man, before he can be
a publisher of the ioyfull tidings of the
Gospell.
            4. Our Sauiour Christ saith: Euery plant

which my heauenly Father hath not planted
shall be rooted out. Such then as are not set
of God into his seruice▪ but intrude themselues,
can haue no prosperous successe
in their callings.
            5. First the Ministers of God are here
taught,The Minister must be assured of his calling. that they should haue assurance in
themselues of their calling, and the inward
testimonie of their conscience, that
they are appointed of God to labour in
his vineyard; which they may know by
these two arguments: first, by their gifts:
for they which are deputed to the Lords
seruice, are in some good measure enabled
thereunto: as the Apostle saith, 2 Corinth.
3. 6. God hath made vs able Ministers
of the new Testament.
               How Ministers are acertained of their calling. Secondly, by the employment
of their gifts: if they carefully
and diligently vse those graces wherwith
they are endued, to the edifying of Christ
his Church: as Saint Paule againe saith:
If I do it willingly (that is, preach the Gospell)
I haue a reward. Ambrose saith: Voluntarius
Minister habet praemium, coactus
di
                     •
                  pensat obsequium: the willing Minister
hath a reward, he that is forced is onely employed
and vsed. So then they which either
want gifts to furnish them, or willingnes
to prouoke them, can neuer be sure of

their calling, nor secure of any good ensuing
effect.
            Secondly, the people of God are taught
to acknowledge their faithfull and vigilant
Pastors to be sent of God, and not to
doubt of their lawfull calling, the seale of
whose Apostleship and ministerie they
find in themselues, in the fruitfull and powerfull
effects of the Gospell, wrought in
their hearts by the spirit of God. Giue ye
not eare then to the Papists or Schismatickes,
that would perswade you, that ye
haue neither Ministers, Church, nor Sacraments:
For as Saint Paule saith: We
need no Epistle of recommendation vnto you,
&c. you are our Epistle written in our harts,
which is vnderstood and read of all men, in
that ye are manifest to be the Epistle of
Christ ministred by vs, &c. The spirituall
comfort, increase of knowledge, edifying
in the faith, sanctifying in good life, which
are wrought daily in your hearts (that
feare God) by the preaching of the word,
are euident seales and signs of our calling.
But they in whom the word of God worketh
not these effects, as they are enemies
to their owne saluation, so they are the
cause why the glorious ministerie of the
Gospell, is blasphemed and daily traduced,

and euill spoken of by the common
aduersarie.
         
         
            The eighth Lecture.
            NOw followeth the request it selfe,
which our Sauiour maketh for his
Apostles; wherein we are to consider, first
for whom he prayeth: secondly, for what.
            Our Sauiour prayeth for his Apostles,
which first he amplifieth à disparatis, frō
things diuerse or opposite: I pray for them,
I pray not for the world, vers. 10. Secondly,
he confirmeth the same by certaine
reasons: First, from the right and property
which God hath in them: They are thine:
and the reason thereof, because all mine
are thine, vers. 11. Secondly, from their
fruites and effects, I am glorified in them.
Thirdly, from their present necessitie: because
Christ was no more in the world,
he commendeth them to his Father.
            
               Vers. 9.Doct. 1. 
               I pray for them, I pray not for the
world; but for those which thou hast giuen
me.] By this Scripture it is euident, that
onely they which are giuen vnto Christ,Christ a Mediator onely for the elect.
and elected of God, haue part in the mediation
and intercession of Christ.
            
               
1. So the Apostle saith: He is able perfectly
to saue them that come vnto God by him,
seeing he euer liueth to make intercession for
them, Heb. 7. 25. He maketh intercession
then onely for them, that by him shall be
saued.
            2. Thus our Sauiour prayed for Peter
that his faith should not faile, Luk. 22. 32.
Thus he prayed for Lazarus: Father, I
thanke thee, that thou hast heard me, Ioh. 11
41. Thus still he prayeth for his owne, but
for the reprobate world he no where
prayeth.
            3. Like as Zacharie saw in that heauē
               ly
vision two Oliue trees dropping oyle
through the pipes into the bowles of the
golden candlesticke, Zach. 4. 2. 3. so
Christ this Oliue tree doth not conuey his
graces vnto any by the vertue of his prayers,
which are as the pipes, but to those
that belong to the golden candlesticke of
his Church. And as the precious oyntment
vpon Aarons head, ranne downe vpon
his beard, and to the borders of his
garments, Psal. 133. 2. so Christ our head
giueth influence of grace, and spirit of life
onely to his members.
            4. For seeing the prayers of Christ are
alwaies effectuall, and he is alwaies heard

of his Father: I know that thou hearest me
alwaies, Ioh. 11. 42. It followeth, that the
reprobate haue no part in Christs holy
prayers, because they receiue no benefite
by them. Christ also is the Sauiour of his
bodie, Ephes. 5. 23. he guideth it by his
grace, and preserueth it vnto saluation.
They then which are not of his bodie,
haue no interest in his death, nor part in
his prayers.
            5. First, by this doctrine their errour is
discouered, which affirme that Christ died
for all men, as well for the reprobate
as for the elect; as well for Iudas, as for
Peter and Paule: because Saint Iohn saith,
that Iesus Christ is the propitiation for
the sinnes of the whole world, 1. Ioh. 2. 2.
            But seeing that our Sauiour vouchsafeth
not to comprehend the world in his
prayers, much lesse doth he extend vnto
them the fruite of his death: he would not
offer himselfe to death for those, for
whom he offereth not his prayers: neither
can they be admitted to his redemption,
that are excluded from his intercession.
And further,There is a world onely of the elect and faithfull. wheras Christ is said to take
away the sinnes of the world: here the
world onely, that is, the vniuersall companie
of the elect, which are taken from

all degrees and callings in the world, is to
be vnderstood, as where our sauiour saith,
Iohn 14. 31. That the world may know that
I loue the father: he meaneth the world of
the faithfull: for vnto the rest of the world
Christ doth not shew himselfe. Iohn 14.
22. So Ambrose well saith, Est in electis &
praescitis specialis quadam vniuersitas, vt de
toto mundo totus mundus liberatus, & de
omnibus hominibus omnes homines assumpti
videantur: there is in the elect and foreknown
a speciall kind of vniuersalitie, that the whole
world out of the whole world, and all men frō
all men seeme to be taken vnto life.
            
            Secondly it may be doubted, whether
herein we are bound to follow this forme
and president of Christs praier, to exclude
some out of our prayers, and not to remē
               ber
the wicked in our requests vnto God.
I answer that there is a speciall consideration
to be had of this prayer which here
our Sauiour maketh, which in all respects
cannot be folowed of vs, nor made a patterne
of our prayers: for here our Sauiour
prayeth as God and man, hauing the perfect
foresight & knowledge of euery man,
and according to that knowledge he directeth
his prayers. In this his prayer, as
Ambrose saith,Lib. 5. in Luc▪
                
               Et aduocatus est & iudex,

in altero pietatis officium, in altero insigne potestatis:
He is both an aduocate and iudge; in
the one he sheweth his pietie, in the other his
power and maiestie. That prayer rather of
our Sauiour is set forth herein for our imitation,Whether the wicked may be prayed for
which he made vpon the crosse for
his enemies: so we in charitie and pietie
ought to pray for all: seeing now that gift,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the discerning of spirits,
whereof the Apostle speaketh 1. Cor.
12. 10. is ceased, by the which S. Peter
could say to Simo Magas, thy mony perish
with thee. And vnlesse we did see a man
sinne a sinne vnto death that is, to sinne against
the holy Ghost, for the which the
Apostle would not haue vs to pray, 1. Iohn
5. 16. which case is very rare, and hard it is
to say, who is guiltie of that sinne: otherwise
then in these cases, we in Christian
charitie (which thinketh not euill and hopeth
the best of all) may pray for the conuersion
of all; yet making a difference,
preferring alwayes the Church of Christ
in our prayers.
            Thirdly, this doctrine giueth vnto
worldly minded and carnall men a fearful
caueat,Worldlings without the compasse of Christs praier that they looke vnto themselues,
and in time turne vnto God: for as yet
while they are of the world, that is, profane

persons, irreligious, without the feare of
God, they are out of Christs protection,
and barred from his prayers, and depriued
of the vertue and efficacie of his holy mediation.
To them therefore be that saying
spoken in the Psalme, Kisse the sonne
lest he be angry▪ and ye perish in the way. Psal.
2. 12. Kisse the sonne and embrace him by
faith, which is the kisses of his mouth▪
Cantic. 1. 1. and so by Christs powerfull
mediation and almightie protection, we
shall be preserued from perishng.
            
               Verse 9.Doct. 1. 
               For they are thine, and all mine
are thine, and thine are mine. Hence we
learne, that they which are giuen to Christ
belong vnto God his Father, & the whole
blessed Trinity taketh charge of them, and
careth for them.
            1. So the Apostle saith, Ye are Christs,
and Christ Gods, 1. Cor. 3. 23. Al then that
is Christs, is also Gods; and as Christ is
the head of euery faithfull man, so God is
Christs head, 1. Cor. 11. 2.
            2. Thus our sauiour saith to his Apostles:
The Father himselfe loueth you, because ye
haue loued me, and haue beleeued that I came
out from God. Iohn 16. 27.
            3. Like as the father in the parable saith
to his sonne, Thou art euer with me, and all

that I haue is thine, Luke 15. 31. So Christ
being the heire of all, whatsoeuer his father
hath is his, and whatsoeuer he hath
is his fathers. Like as Iacob saith concerning
the two sonnes of Ioseph, Ephraim
& Manasses: They shall be mine, as Reuben
and Simeon are mine, Genes. 48. 5. and let
my name be named vpon them. v. 16. so all
the children of Christ are his fathers.
            4. Our sauior sheweth the reason hereof,
that they may be one as we are one, I in them
and thou in me, Iohn 17. 22. 23. Because
Christ is equall to his Father, and they are
one God, of one power, eternitie, wisedome,
glorie, therfore all which the sonne
hath is the fathers.
            5. First by this doctrine the wicked Arrians
are confuted, who made the son of
God vnequall and vnlike vnto his father,
and their heresie was, that, suit tempus quā
                  do
non fuit filius, there was a time when the
sonne was not: for if all the fathers be the
sonnes, and all the sonnes the fathers, as
here our sauiour saith, there can be no inequalitie
betweene them; there must be the
same power, wisedom, and euerlasting being
of them both.
            Secondly, the opinion of the Church
of Rome is also refelled, which holdeth

that Christ is not God of himselfe,Christ God of himselfe. as the
father is, but that he is God with and of
his father, Rhemist. annot. Iohn 1. sect. 3.
We confesse indeed that Christ is not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
sonne of himfelfe, but that he is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
God of himselfe is consonant to the
scriptures.August. tract. 19. in Ioann. Iohn 5. 26. As the father hath
life in himselfe, so he hath giuen to the sonne
to haue life in himselfe: if the sonne hath life
in himselfe, then he is God of himselfe:
Vitam in se habet, vt ipsa vita sibi sit ipse: He
hath life in himselfe, and he himselfe is life
it selfe to himselfe. It is a principle in diuinitie,
that diuina essentia nec gignit nec gignitur,
The diuine essence neither begetteth
nor is begotten. It is the person of the son,
not the Godhead, that is begotten of his
father from all eternitie.
            Thirdly, if they onely are Gods that are
Christs, their carnall securitie is reproued,
who flatter themselues that they belong
vnto God, and hope to be saued though
they beleeue not in Christ. We see then
that it is farre otherwise then some imagine,
that euerie man may be saued
by that faith and religion which he professeth,
and that controuersies about faith
are needlesse and superfluous. Our Sauior
saith, he that honoureth not the sonne, honoureth

not the father,
               No accesse to God without Christ. Iohn 5. 23. Whosoeuer
then beleeueth not aright in the sonne,
neither careth to know him, and walke in
his wayes, hath no part in God, neither cā
enter into life. It is therefore a vaine perswasion
which they haue of saluation, that
thinke to come to God without Christ.
The heauens cannot be scaled without a
ladder, nor entrance into the house but by
the doore: Christ is the doore and the ladder.
Stephen saw the heauens open, and
Iesus standing at the right hand of God,
both together. Con
                     •
                  iteamur ergo Iesum ad
dextram, vt coelum nobis aperiatur, as Ambrose
saith:De Fide lib. 3 cap. 3. let vs confesse Iesus at the right
hand of God, that heauen may be opened
to vs.
            
               And I am glorifi
                     •
                  d in them.]
               Doct 3. This is another
reason why Christ prayeth for his Apostles,
because they were to the praise of
Christ, and instruments of his glorie. So
then they which intend and seeke the honour
and glorie of Christ, and none other,
are priuiledged by his holy prayers, and
made partakers of his intercession, and
the power and vertue thereof.
            1. Hereof it is that our sauiour teacheth
vs thus to conclude our prayers, For thine
is the glorie, Math. 6. 13. whereby we referring

all to the glorie of Christ, are assured
to be heard in our petitions.
            2. Thus the Apostles praying to the honor
of Christ, Act. 4. 30. so that thou stretch
forth thine hand, that healing signes and wonders
may be done 
                  •
               y the name of thy holy son
Iesus: found the present effect of their prayers,
the place was shaken where they were
assembled together, and they were filled with
the holy Ghost.
            3. Like as it is said of the good houswife,
Giue her of the fruites of her hands, and let
her owne workes praise her in the gates. Pro.
31. 31. the costly rayment wherewith others
are clothed, redoūdeth to the praise
of the worker: so the graces which God
bestoweth vpon his faithfull seruants, are
referred to the praise of the author.
            4. This is the cause why God respecteth
not the wicked, He will not giue
his glory to another, Isay 42. 8. because they
are enemies to Gods glorie, and therefore
God will not giue vnto such the honor of
his gifts.
            5. This doctrine sheweth then in what
miserable state they stand,All must be re
                     •
                  erred to Gods glorie which we ask in our praiers that s
                  •
               eke not
Christs honor, they are out of the protection
of Christs prayers. All such as blaspheme
the name of Christ, and cause the

Gospell of Christ to stinke before the
world by reason of their euil life that professe
it: be it knowne vnto them that they
stand as outlawes before God, and cannot
be assured either of direction to good,
or protection from euil from Iesus Christ.
VVherefore let vs first make the glorie of
Christ the scope and end of all our requests
and endeuours, and then we shall
be sure that the Lord will heare vs. This
then is the cause why many faile of their
requests, because they ask amisse, as Iames
saith, Ye aske and receiue not, because ye aske
amisse, that ye might consume it vpon your
lusts. For this reason the Lord saith, he
would not hide any thing from Abraham,
because he would commaund his sonnes
and his houshold after him to keepe the way
of the Lord, Gen. 18. 19. VVe are therfore
assured that if we aske any thing of God
with a simple heart, purposing to referre
the same to his glorie, that the Lord will
denie vs nothing.
         
         
            
            The ninth Lecture.
            
               
                  Vers. 11. And now am I no more in the
world, but these are in the world, &c.
            
            NOw followeth the petition it selfe,
which Christ maketh for his Apostles,
that God would keepe them: and of
this request diuerse reasons are giuen by
our Sauiour. First, frō their present necessitie,
because Christ was to leaue them
concerning his humanitie. Secondly, from
the end or effect, that they being thus
kept, might be ioyned together in amitie
and loue: that they may be one, as we, &c.
            
            First then this truth is here deliuered,Doct. 1.
that Christ as touching the presence of
his flesh is gone out of the world.Christ not present now in the world in his flesh.
            
            1. So Saint Peter further witnesseth:
Whom the heauens must receiue till the time
that all things be restored, Act. 3. 21. Christ
is not to be expected from heauen till his
second coming to iudgement.
            2. Stephen saw Iesus standing at the
right hand of God, but in heauen: Behold,
I see the heauens open, and the sonne of man
standing at the right hand of God, Act. 7. 56
Paule also as he went to Damascus heard

the voice of Iesus, but speaking from heauen:
for he saith: Suddenly there shone a
light from heauen round about me, Act. 22.
6. Paule further saith, I saw him, saying vnto
me, &c. but he was in a traunce in the
temple: he saw him onely in vision or in
spirit, Act. 22. 17. as Peter saw the foure
cornered vessell let downe from heauen,
Act. 10. 11. For in both places the same
word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , an Ecstasie or traunce, is vsed.
            3. Then like as after Elias was taken
into heauen, the Prophets and Disciples
supposed he had bene conueyed to some
other place, and sought him three dayes
but were deceiued: so they which suppose
to find Christ in the earth, are erroniously
seduced.
            4. Diuerse reasons of Christs absence in
the flesh,The reasons of Christs bodily absence. in the Scriptures are alleadged:
first, because of the present expediencie
for the Church of God, Ioh. 16. 7. It is expedient
for you that I go away: for if I go not
away, the comforter will not come. Secondly,
because of the future vtilitie: I go before
to prepare a place for you, Ioh. 14. 2. Thirdly,
the Angels said to the women: Why
seeke ye the liuing among the dead? Luk. 24.
5. It was not conuenient for our immortall
and euerliuing Sauiour to be conuersant

still among mortall and sinfull men,
and to cōuerse with those which are dead
in sinne.
            5. First, the Popish fantasie is here discouered
concerning Christs carnall presence
in the Eucharist. For if the heauens
must still receiue and containe him, how
can his bodie be out of heauen,Against the carnall presence in the Sacrament. if it be alwaies
in heauen? vnlesse they will make
Christ to haue many miraculous bodies:
for his naturall bodie it cannot be, which
is but in one place at once. The words also
of this text are euident, that Christ in
his flesh is no more in the world: so that it
is neither visible nor inuisible here: for if
either, then it were vntrue that Christ
saith, I am no more in the world. And therefore
Origen soundly writeth: Secundum
diuinitatis suae naturam non peregrinatur
Christus, sed peregrinatur secundum dispensationem
corporis, &c. sicut homo ergo peregrinatur:
Christ is not a stranger or a pilgrim
in his diuine nature, but he is a stranger in
the dispensation of his bodie, &c. therefore as
a man he is a pilgrime and a stranger fr
                     •
                   vs.
            
            2. We are taught, that seeing Christ is
gone out of the world, we in affection
and desire should follow after him: and
as the Apostle saith: Seeke those things that

are aboue,
               Our desires must be in heauen. 
               where Christ sitteth at the right
hand of God, Coloss. 3. 1. Where a mans
treasure is, there will his heart be, and
where the carcasse is, thither will the Eagles
be gathered together. If Christ be
our treasure, if Christ be our desire, our affections
must be set vpon heauenly, not
vpon earthly things: that we may say
with the Prophet: The desire of our soule is
to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee;
with my soul haue I desired thee in the night,
and with my spirit within me, will I seeke
thee in the morning, Isa. 26. 8. 9.
            
               I come vnto thee] Christs comming to
his Father here,Doct. 2. is by prayer:Our comming to God is by prayer. so then by
faithfull prayer we draw neare vnto God.
            1. So our Sauiour saith: Where two or
three are gathered together in my name,
there I am in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20.
Christ cometh to vs in prayer, and we
come vnto him: then specially is our conuersation
in heauen, as the Apostle saith,
Phil. 3. 20. when our minds and affections
in prayer are set vpon heauenly
things.
            2. Thus Peter while he prayed fell into
a traunce, he was rapt in the spirit, and
saw an heauenly vision. Saint Paule was
taken vp in spirit to the third heauen, 2.

Cor. 12. But these examples may seeme to
be extraordinarie: but that of Hanna is vsuall
to all the faithfull, who is said to pray
before the Lord, 1. Sam. 1. 12. And Salomon
when he had made an end of that effectuall
prayer made at the dedication of
the temple, said: These my words which I
haue prayed before the Lord, be neare vnto
the Lord our God night and day, 1. King.
8. 59.
            3. Like as, when the woman that had
the bloudie issue, came in the preasse behind
and touched Christs cloathes, and
Christ asked who had touched him; that
woman onely is said to touch Christ, because
she did it in faith, wheras al the multitude
did throng him, and many touched
his cloaths beside outwardly, Mar. 5. 30.
31. So although in respect of his power he
be present to al, yet they which draw nere
vnto him in faith, are specially said to
come into Gods presence.
            4. Because God is a spirit, and will be
worshipped in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 24.
they therefore do come vnto God, which
draw neare in spirit. God being a spirit, is
onely discerned and appoched vnto in
spirit: and they onely see him, whose eyes
are annointed with the eye-salue, Reuel.

3. 18. which is faith.
            5. This doctrine reproueth two sorts of
men: first, prophane persons, that haue
no care nor desire to enter into Gods presence,
which very seldome remember to
pray vnto God. When we heare in Scripture
that Dauid praysed God seuen times
a day,Against neglect or discontinuance in prayer. and Daniel (notwithstanding the
great affaires of so large a kingdome) yet
could find time thrice a day to pray vnto
God, what shall we thinke of those men
that pray not seuen times in so many
daies; nay, some not thrice in so many
weekes. O good God, how is the Christian
exercise of prayer neglected! as
though men neither knew any God to
pray vnto, nor had any Mediator to pray
by. The Euchites were condemned, because
they did nothing but pray: but men
now adayes are more to be misliked, because
they neuer pray. If they which call
vpon the name of the Lord shall be saued,
I doubt whether they that call not vpon
God, can be saued. How should a man
thinke his labour can prosper, which beginneth
not with prayer? how should a
mans meate do him good, that is not blessed
with prayer? How can a man thinke,
that wife, children, and seruants should

do their duties, not being exercised and
trayned vp in prayer?
            Secondly,Against hypocriticall prayers. the prayer of hypocrites is
condemned, which pray with their lippes
but draw not neare vnto God in their
hearts. As the Lord by his Prophet complained
of the old Israelites: This people
honoureth me with their lippes, but their
heart is farre away from me, Isa. 29. 13. such
are the superstitious prayers of ignorant
Papists, praying vpon their beades in Latine
without vnderstanding: such are their
prayers that haue an ordinarie stint, morning
and euening to runne ouer, hauing
no deuotion or holy feeling at all.Conc. 2 in Psal. 33. Augustine
saith well: Ad Deum acceditur fide
sectando, corde inhiando, charitate currendo:
we come vnto God following by faith, desiring
in heart, and running in charitie: these are
the feet which the Preacher biddeth vs to
looke vnto, when we come into the house
of God, Eccl. 4. 17.Doct. 3.
            
            
               Keepe them in thy name, euen thē whom
thou hast giuen me, &c.] Then we haue no
power of our selues to be kept from euill,
but our strength and preseruation must
proceed from God.Man hath no power of himselfe to keepe himselfe.
            
            1. So the Prophet saith: Thou ô Lord,
hast wrought all our workes for vs, Isa. 26.

12. Saint Paul saith, The Lord will deliuer
me from euery euil worke, and preserue me to
his heauenly kingdome. 2. Tim. 4. 18.
            2 The Lord saith to Abimelech king of
Gerar, who had taken Abrahams wife into
his house, I kept thee also that thou shouldest
not sinne against me, therefore suffered I
not thee to touch her, Gen. 20. 6. Abimelech
was not preserued by his owne power frō
the sin of adulterie, but by Gods generall
grace, which yet is much different from
the grace of renouation and sanctificatiō:
for as Abimelech here, so diuers of the
heathē had this general grace of restraint,
whereby they were kept from notorious
sinnes, as of oppression, iniustice, adultery,
murder, and such like, though they wanted
the true worke of regeneration. Dauid
by a greater gift and grace confesseth that
the Lord kept him from laying his hand
vpon the Lords annointed. 1. Sam. 24. 7.
26. 11.
            3. For like as Peter had sunke downe
into the waters, if Christ had not stayed
him with his hand: so the flouds of temptation
are like to ouerwhelme vs, if we be
not vpheld by Gods grace: Our owne nature
is such a guide and nurse vnto vs, as
Mephiboseths nurse was to him, that let

him fall, as she fledd away, and thereupon
he became lame, 2. Sam. 4. 4. If we stay vpon
the direction of nature, we shall be
deceiued.
            4. For seing all the imaginations of the
thoughts of mans hart, are onely euil continually,
Genes. 6. 5. what help is to be
expected from our nature? And least any
man should thinke, that it is otherwise
with vs now, then it was with the old
world: the Apostle in himselfe sheweth,
that we are by nature of the same mould.
I know that in me, that is in my flesh, dwelleth
no good thing, Rom. 7. 18.
            5. First then that popish doctrine of
free will is here refelled,Against free will. who doe ascribe
vnto man by nature great strength to apprehend
that is good, to beleeue, to doe
many workes morallie good, contrarie to
the scripture: for our Sauiour saith: without
me yee can do nothing, Iohn. 15. 5.
            
               Secondly, we are taught to depend vpon
God for his direction in all our actions,
and to giue him thanks, that he preserueth
vs from the great offences of the
world: This was the praier of the prophet
Dauid: te
                  •
               ch me the way of thy statutes, direct
me in the path of thy commaundements,
incline my heart vnto thy testimonies, Psal.
               
119. 33. 35, 36. all our direction, instruction,
and inclination is from God. Augustine
well saith, Deus sanctum in me semper
opus spira vt cogitem, compelle vt faciam,
suade vt diligam te, confirma vt teneam, custodi
ne perdam:De Ecclesiast. docum. c. 56. Lord inspire me to thinke
well, compell me to do well, perswade me to
loue thee, confirme me to hold thee, keepe me
not to loose thee.
            
               That they may be one as we are] not that
there can be in euery respect such vnion
between the members,Doct. 4. as there is between
Christ and his Father, which is a substantiall
and identicall vnion, but our vniting
and knitting is in affectiō, not in the same
substantiall condition. But here is a limitation
and qualification of vnitie, that it
must haue relation to God; for peace and
vnitie, vnlesse it be in the truth, is no true
vnitie.
            1. Saint Paul therefore saith,The loue of Christians must be in the truth. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
following the truth in loue, Ephes.
4. 15. and S. Iohn saith, whom 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
I loue in the truth, Epist. 2. 1.
We must then loue in the truth, and truth
it in loue: loue without truth is erronious,
and truth without loue is not efficacious.
            2. Thus Iehu well answered Iehoram,
who asked if it were peace: What peace
               
(saith he) while the whoredomes of thy mother
Iesabel and her witchcrafts are in great
number, 2. King. 9. 22. There is no peace
with the wicked. So Iehosophat was chastised
of God, his ships were broken, because
he ioyned himself with Ahaziah the
idolatrous king of Israel. 2. Chron. 20. 37.
            3. The confederacie of the wicked is
compared to the mixture of iron and clay,
which cannot be tempered together, Dan.
2. 43. like vnto the ropes wherwith Sampson
was bound, which he brake in sunder
as burnt towe. Iud. 16. 9.
            4. For whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne.
Rom. 14. 23. therefore the peace of the
wicked being not seasoned with faith, can
not be pleasing or acceptable vnto God.
            5. Let vs therfore loue in truth. Nothing
ought more to moue vs to vnitie, then that
we professe one God, one faith, one baptisme.
Ephes. 4. 6. nunquam vidimus trinitatem
litigantem, we neuer saw the trinitie at
variance, as Augustine saith: neither ought
we, that worship one God, to be at variance
among our selues.
         
         
            
            The tenth Lecture.
            
               
                  Verse 12. While I was with them in the
world, I kept them in thy name.
            
            THese words shew another reason
why our sauior Christ prayeth for his
Disciples, that God would finish that
worke which was begun in them, that as
Christ had hitherto preserued them all,
except onely Iudas, so that God would
keepe them to the end.Doct. 1. They then which
are giuen vnto Christ to be kept,They which are once truly graft into Christ cannot finally fall away. cannot
possibly perish or finally be lost.
            1. So the Prophet Dauid saith, My shepheard
is the liuing Lord, I shal want nothing:
though I walke through the valley of death,
I will feare no euill, for thou art with me, thy
rod and thy staffe they comfort me, Psal. 23.
1. 4. He was perswaded that the sheepe
which were vnder the conduct and custodie
of this shepheard, could not possibly
miscarry.
            
            2. Saint Paul was thus perswaded, that
nothing could separate him from the loue
of God in Christ, Rom. 8. 39. and he was
fully assured that there was layed vp a
crown of righteousnes for him. 2. Tim. 4. 8.
            
               
3. Like as none of those perished which
were saued in the Arke; nor any lost of all
the host of Israel, which were led vnder
Moses through the red sea: so much more
shall they be preserued which are committed
to the sole keeping of Christ.
            4. The Apostle giueth the reason hereof,
Heb. 7. 25. He is able perfectly to saue
them that come vnto God by him, seeing he
euer liueth to make intercession for them:
Christ then is yesterday, and to day, and the
same for euer, Heb. 13. 8. Therefore seeing
Christ neuer dieth, neither of his kingdom
is there any end, his sheepe cannot perish,
that are vnder his happie gouernement:
his kingdome is not as the kingdome of
earthly Princes, who can no longer care
for their subiects thē they are in the world:
but Christ the King of his Church, not
onely when he was in the world, but now
and for euer is able to preserue those that
belong vnto him.
            5. First then this doctrine discouereth
a popish error, that faith may be lost, and
that they which beleeued in Christ may
fall away and perish, which is contrarie
to the Scriptures,Iustifying faith cannot be lost. Ioh. 14. 16. Whosoeuer
beleeueth in him shall not perish, but haue euerlasting
life: they that beleeue aright in

Christ cannot be lost. Indeed an vnfruitfull
faith, and which is in show rather then
truth, may be lost; but a right faith whereby
the heart is purified, and the beleeuer
iustified, cannot fall away: for then they
which are giuen vnto Christ, might belost.
            Secondly, though Christ do surrender
vp his disciples here into his fathers hand,
it thereby is not gathered, as though he
were not sufficient to protect them now:
but our Sauiour here speaketh of his visible
protection in the world, in which respect
he is gone from vs now: but in respect
of his diuine power, and euer-during
Mediatorship, he is alwaies present, and
continually careth for his Church. As at
this present this Church and Commonwealth
of England hath most comfortable
experience, for whom the Lord hath
prouided a Princely shepheard to gouern
his people: that although our nurcing
mother be taken from vs, he hath sent vs a
nursing father: a Baruch for a Deborah,
a Moses for a Mirriam, a Iosias for an Huldah,
which singular mercie we cannot sufficiently
praise the name of God for.
Wherefore blessed be God, that of his fatherly
& tender care hath so prouided for
vs; & blessed be his annointed, that he may

many yeares gouerne the Church & people
of God in all pietie, peace & trāquility.
            
               But the child of perdition] That is Iudas,Doct. 2.
which was as Augustine interpreteth,
Perditioni destinatus, ordained to destruction:
this then is an euident and certaine
truth out of the word of God,Some reiected from the beginning. that the
wicked and impenitent hypocrites and
faithlesse men, were from the beginning
ordained of God to destruction.
            1. This is testified Reu. 17. 8. Whose names
are not written in the booke of life from the
beginning of the world. If they were not appointed
of God vnto life, nor numbred amongst
the elect, then it is certaine they
were reiected of God, and excluded out
of his kingdome from the beginning.
            2. Of this decree of perdition and reprobation,
the Apostle propoundeth the examples
of Esau and Pharao, Rom. 9. the on
was hated, that is, refused of God before
he was yet borne, and left to himselfe: the
others heart according to his own wicked
inclination was hardned, that in his confusion
Gods iustice might appeare.
            3. For like as the Apostle saith, In a great
house there are vessels of honor and dishonor, 2
Tim. 2. 19. so is it in this great house of the
world: as there are some appointed to be
vessels of euerlasting glorie, so others are

worthily adiudged to eternall shame and
confusion.
            4. And the Lord doth all this for his
owne sake: Prouerb. 
                  •
               6. 4. The Lord hath
made al things for his owne sake, yea the wicked
against the day of euill. As God is glorified
in shewing mercie to his faithfull seruants
so likewise he is honored in iudging
the wicked, carelesse, and impenitent sinners.
            5. First the opinion of those is refuted,
which think that no mans end is in particular
appointed of God, but that euery
mans state and condition dependeth vpō
his owne will and choise. Yea some haue
presumed so farre to say, that God not elected
Paul or Peter more then Iudas, and so
consequently not reiected Iudas more
then Paul or Peter: but let them shew vs
if this were so, where Iudas in scripture is
called a chosen vessel as Paul is, Act. 9. 15.
or Paul the sonne of perdition as Iudas is.
            Secondly, whereas it may be obiected,
that if God in the beginning haue
cast away some, then it is needlesse for
men to endeuour to attaine to saluation,
for he whom God hath decreed shall be
damned cannot possibly be saued. To this
obiection I answer: first, that by this reason

if it concluded any thing, Gods prescience
and foreknowledge is as wel ouerthrowne,
as his decree of predestination:
for he foreseeth all things that shall come
to passe in the world, neither cā any thing
be otherwise disposed, then he hath foreseene.
Secondly, if that Gods decree were
knowne in particular, who shall be damned,
who saued, then indeed it were in
vaine for any man to striue against Gods
decree: but seeing that no man can know
his election,The doctrin of Predestination a spur to godlines. but by his workes and fruites
of faith, euery man must labour thereby to
make his election sure, as S. Peter exhorteth,
2. Pet. 1. 10. God condemneth none
but for his sinnes, the faithfull and beleeuers
he condemneth not, but such as Iudas,
hypocrites, and vnfaithfull men vnto
Christ. Wherefore seeing there are some
children of perdition, but such as are giuen
ouer to a reprobate sense, and are past
feeling, and are destitute of the spirit: we
therefore so many as God shall cal, should
labor for grace, that we may by our faith,
vertue, knowledge, loue, conscience, and
by other fruitfull workes be assured that
we belong vnto election, and are not of
the forlorne sort. And as Saint Paul saith:
Wilt thou be without feare of the power? do

well, Rom. 13. 3. So he that will be without
feare of euerlasting perdition, let him
seeke to please God, and walke before
him by a liuely faith.
            
               That the Scripture might be fulfilled] It
is then impossible,Doct. 3. that the word of God
should faile; but whatsoeuer is declared
in the Scripture, shall most certainely be
fulfilled.
            1. So our Sauiour saith: It is more easie
that heauen and earth shold passe away,
               The certaintie of Gods word. 
               then
that one tittle of the Law should passe away,
Luk. 16. 17. Yea he saith further: heauen
and earth shall passe away, but my words
shall not passe away, Mat. 24. 35.
            2. As Mat. 2. 15. that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken of the Lord by
the Prophet: Out of Egypt haue I called my
sonne, and vers. 17. Then was that fulfilled,
which was spoken by the Prophet Ieremie,
saying, In Rama was a voice heard, &c. and
in many other places the Apostles shew
the accomplishment of the auncient Prophesies
in our Sauiour Christ.
            3. Therefore are Gods words compared
to siluer seuen times purified in the
fire, Psal. 12. that as nothing is lost of pure
siluer, being now throughly tried, but euery
part thereof is laid vp safely: so the

words of God being most pure, are preserued
in heauen: as the Prophet saith: Thy
word endureth for euer in heauen, Psalme
119. 89.
            4. The reason of the stedfastnesse of the
word is taken from the author thereof,
which is God: who it is impossible should
lie, Hebr. 6. 18. neither is there any variablenesse
with God, or mutabilitie, 
                  •
               a. 5. 17
            5. First then this doctrine teacheth vs,
that we should relie vpon the credit of
Gods word: that whatsoeuer we there
find to our comfort, edifying or instruction,
we should as steadfastly beleeue it, as if
God spake vnto vs from heauen. And although
in particular the promises of God
are not made to vs, yet are they most certaine:
as here is no Scripture rehearsed,
wherein Iudas was declared to be a child
of perdition; but there is relation to those
generall predictions against the wicked.
As Psal. 69. 26. Let them be put out of the
booke of life, and let them not come into thy
righteousnesse.
               Gods foreknowledge not the cause of mens workes.
            
            
               Secondly, we must not thinke, that the
prediction of the Scripture was the cause
of Iudas perdition, as though Gods prescience
imposed a necessitie vpon mens
actions.
               De Predest. lib. 1. cap. 15. 
               But as Augustine well saith: Des

praescientiam non cogere hominem vt talis
scit, qualem praesciuit Deus, sed praescire talem
futurum, qualis futurus erat, quamuis
sic non cum fecerit Deus: Gods prescience forceth
not a man to be such as he is foreseene,
but foreseeth him to be such as he is like to
be, though God made him not such.
            
               Vers. 13.Doct. 4. 
               And now come I vnto thee, and
these things speake I in the world, that they
might haue my ioy fulfilled in them] This is
alleaged as another reason, why our Sauiour
maketh this prayer in the hearing
of his disciples; not for any necessitie
which he had, but for the comfort of his
disciples that heard him: for the hearing
of Gods word bringeth true ioy and
comfort.
            1. So our Sauiour saith elsewhere,Gods word worketh true comfort. Ioh.
6. 4. These things haue I told you, that when
the houre shal come, ye might remember that
I told you them: it is a great comfort, when
we see things to fall out according to the
word of God.
            2. In like manner our Sauiour hauing
prayed for Lazarus, said: Father, I thanke
thee because thou hast heard me, I know that
thou hearest me alwaies, but because of the
people that stand by, I said it, that they may
beleeue that thou hast sent me.
            
               
3. Like as Peter, though he had laboured
all night and caught nothing, yet was
encouraged to let downe his nets againe,
after Christ had bidden him to let them
downe to make a draught, because he
knew he should not any more labour in
vaine, Luk. 5. 5. so the Apostles here conceiued
great ioy, being themselues earewitnesses
of Christs prayer.
            4. The reason may be gathered out of
our Sauiours words, Mat. 24. 25. Behold,
I haue told you before: that is, being warned
before of dangers, we are better prepared
to beare them when they come, and
being afore assured of Gods assistance, we
conceiue the greater ioy in our deliuerance.
            5. If then the hearing of Christ in his
word,The danger of those that are ignorant of the word. as the Apostles here heard his
voice, do worke such great ioy and comfort,
iudge ye what a great benefite they
are depriued of, which are ignorant of the
word, and are not acquainted with Gods
promises, neither know the familiar and
earnest prayers and requests which Christ
maketh vnto God for his Church. And as
Saint Paule saith: Whatsoeuer things are
written, are written for our learning, that
we through patience & comfort of the Scriptures

might haue hope, Rom. 15. 4. No
maruell then if men ignorant of the Scriptures,
and not being acquainted with
Christs comfortable words, are void and
destitute of all true ioy and comfort in
their afflictions. Dauid saith: I remembred
thy iudgements of old, O Lord, and receiued
comfort, Psal. 119. 52. that is, he found
comfort by meditating of the examples of
Gods mercie and iustice declared in his
word. Their case therefore is much to be
pitied, that either wilfully contemne, or
carnally neglect the reading & meditating
in Gods word, which is called by the
Apostle, the sword of the spirit, Ephes. 6. 7.
Like as then a souldier set in the midst of
his enemies, without his sword and other
warlike weapons, is in danger to be deuoured
and destroyed of them: euen so as
much vnable is a Christian to stand against
the temptations of Sathan, being not armed
spiritually with the knowledge of the
word: which, as one well saith: Si tribularis,
consolatur te, si laetaris, accumulat gauda
                     •
                  ;
si iracūdus es, mitigat te; si paupertate deprimeris,
erigit te: If thou art afflicted it doth
comfort thee: if thou be merrie, it addeth to
thy ioy: if angrie, mitigateth thy mood: if pressed
with pouertie, doth raise thee vp.
            
         
         
            
            The eleuenth Lecture.
            
               
                  Vers. 14. I haue giuen them thy word,
and the world hath hated them.
            
            NOw followeth another reason of our
Sauiours prayer for his disciples, taken
from the great perils which they are
subiect vnto, and their enemies which are
set against them, which are the world:
that is, the generation of the wicked. vers.
14. and euill or sinne, which is readie to
catch hold vpon the best in this life, from
the which he desireth them to be kept,
vers. 15.
            In this verse two reasons are giuen of
the hatred of the world▪ because they haue
the word and professe the truth, because
in respect of their righteous life, they shew
themselues not to be of the world: for
these two things the world cannot abide,
Truth and Innocencie.
            By the world here, neither the whole
companie of men comprehending both
good and bad, is vnderstood: as it is sometime
taken, as Heb. 1. 6. When he bringeth
in his first begotten Sonne into the world: nor
yet for the number of the faithfull, which

are also called the world, Ioh. 1. 29. Behold
the lambe of God, that taketh away the
sinne of the world: but the vniuersall companie
of the wicked onely is here insinuated.
As 1. Ioh. 5. 19. The whole world lieth
in wickednesse.
            
            We are here then taught,Doct. 1. that the faithfull
in this life are hated for the word of
God and the truths sake:The faithfull hated in the world. for nothing is
more irkesome or vnpleasing vnto them,
then Gods word.
            1. As the Prophet Isay speaketh of the
people of his time: They would not heare
the law of the Lord, which said vnto the
Seers, see not: and to the Prophets, prophesie
not vnto vs right things, &c. prophecie errors.
            
            2. Thus Ahab hated Micaiah, because
he spake the truth vnto him, and flattered
him not, 1. King. 22. 8. For the same
cause did Herodias procure Iohn Baptists
death, because he would not dissemble
with her in her sinne, Mark. 6. This was
the cause of Saint Paules trouble at Ierusalem:
they obiected against him, that the
did teach against the law, and the temple
Act. 21. 28.
            3. Like as the Philistims striued with Isaacs
seruants for the wels of water which

they had digged, especially for one well
of liuing or springing water, Genes. 26. 19.
so do the children of the world contend
with the faithfull about the waters of life,
which issue frō the word. Therfore our Sauior
saith: I am come to put fire on the earth,
and what is my desire if it be already kindled?
Luk. 12. 49. The word of God is as a fire,
that enflameth the wicked, it maketh thē
to rage and fume as though they were
mad: as the people that could not endure
to heare Saint Paule, but cast off their
cloathes, and threw dust in the aire, Act.
22. 23.
            4. The reason is euident: Euery one that
euill doth, hateth the light, neither cometh
to the light, lest his euill deeds should be reproued,
Ioh. 3. 20. The wicked cannot endure
to be reproued, and therefore they
abhorre the word that discouereth them:
they are angrie with the looking glasse
that bewrayeth the wrinkles and spots of
their face: and as mad men that fall vpon
their phisitions that come to doe them
good: like as the man that had an euil spirit,
ranne vpon those that came to adiure
him, Act. 19. 16.
            5. First we see what we are to iudge of
those, and what they are to thinke of them

selues,A dangerous thing to hate the seruants of God. which do hate any for their profession
sake, or do repine at Gods ministers
because of their admonitiōs, they are
by the sentence of Christ, of the world. A
fearefull thing it is when a man spurneth
against the admonitiō of the word, which
is especially the sin of great men. As Asa
put the prophet Hanani in prison,1. Chro. 16. 10. because
he rebuked him for trusting to the king of
Aram; so did not Hezekiah, who being rebuked
by the prophet for his rashnesse in
shewing his treasures to the king of Babels
seruants, said, the word of God is good which
thou hast spoken, 2. Ki. 20. 9. Secondly, they
whome God hath called to the profession
of his word, must prepare themselues to
beare many scoffes, tauntes, and crosses in
the worlde, and to be hated for Christs
sake. Our Sauiour was no sooner baptized
and entred into his holie vocation, but
presently he is assaulted and tempted of
Sathan. Math. 4. The dragon is readie to
deuoure the childe as soone as the mother
is deliuered of it. Reuelat. 12. 4. And Sathan
euen in our new birth would deuoure
vs, and choake vs in the beginning.
Origen well noteth vpon the 17. of Exodus,
that presently after the Israelites had
eaten of Manna, and drunke of the rocke,

then began the battell with Amalek; & tu
ergo, cum coeperis manducare panem coelestem
para te ad bellum:
               Hom. 11. in Exod. 
               and thou also, saith
he, when thou hast begunne to eate of the
bread of heauen, make thy selfe readie for
warre.
            
            
               Because they are not of the world,
               Doct. 2. 
               as I am
not of the world. In this world we are all
while we here liue; but of the world (if
we will be Christs) we must not be.
            1. What it is to be of the world, the Apostle
sheweth: Loue not the world, nor the
things of the world: If any mā loue the world,
the loue of the father is not in him, 1. Ioh. 16.
To be of the world then, is to loue the vanities
and corruptions thereof, to be altogether
earthly minded, and addicted, to
earthly things.
            2. Lot though he were in Sodom, yet was
he not of Sodome, For he was vexed with
the vncleane conuersation of the wicked, 2.
Pet. 2. 7. Nehemiah though he was in the
king of Persia his court, and waited vpon
his table, yet his heart was at Ierusalem.
Nehem. 2. 3. Daniel though in the land of
captiuitie, yet opened his window to Ierusalem,
Dan. 6. 10.
            3. Like as the Doue being sent out of
the Arke, finding no rest for the sole of her

foote, returneth thither againe, Gen. 8. As
the marines, though in the midst of the
sea in bodie, yet in wish and desire are in
the hauen, Psal. 107. 30. so though we are
in the world, yet our desire and affection
must not be vpon it.
            4. For the world passeth, and the lust
thereof, 1. Iohn 2. 17. therfore it is in vaine
to settle our desire vpon vaine and transitorie
things; and where our treasure is,
there should be our heart: we should seek
those things which are aboue, because
Christ there sitteth at the right hand of
God. Coloss. 3. 1.
            5. First though we be not of the world,Against separation from the Church.
yet must we not goe otherwise out of the
world, then God hath appointed: as they
doe, which pretending corruptions of the
place, where they liue, do breake out into
schismes, & separate themselues from the
fellowship of Christs Church: we must
not thus go out of the world, but rather
leaue it by the sequestring of our desire,
thē separating of our bodies. The Apostle
saith, Haue no fellowship with the vnfruitful
workes of darknes, but reproue them rather,
Ephes. 5. 11. thus shall we not be of the
world, though we liue in it. Peter and
Iohn refused not to go vp to the temple

though it were then much abused and abounded
with corruption. Augustine to
this point saith well,Cont. Cres
                     •
                  . lib. 3. cap. 35. 
               Verbo & disciplina
Domini emendo quod possum, tolero quod non
possum; fugio paleam, ne hoc sim, non aream,
ne nihil sim: I by the word and discipline amend
whom I can, whom I cannot I suffer; I
flee the chaffe that I be not such, not the flore
lest I be nothing.
            
            Secondly,3. degrees of worldly men. if we will assure our selues
that we be Christs, we must be like him: as
he is not of the world, so neither must we:
neither to set our desire vpō the world: for
if we be risen with Christ, we must seeke those
things that are aboue, Col. 3. 1. nor to fashiō
our selues to the world, Rom. 12. 2. as many
do which conforme themselues to the
custome of the world, nor to warre after
the flesh and world, 2. Cor. 10. 3. that is
to become patrons and defenders of the
corruptions of the world; for these three
to affect and desire, to follow and be conformable
to the world, to patronize and
defend it, are though not in the same measure
and degree, the cognisance of corrupt
and worldly men.
            
               Verse 15.Doct. 3. I pray not that thou shouldest
take them out of the world, but that thou
keepe them from euill. It is not then lawfull

for the seruants of God, in regard of the
great miseries and trauels of this life, to
wish presently to be out of the world, but
rather to pray vnto God that they may be
kept in the world, and that their life may
be preserued to serue God and liue vnto
his praise.
            1. The Church of God thus complaineth,
Thou hast abated my strength in the
way, and shortened my dayes: and I said, O my
God, take me not away in the middest of mine
age, Psal. 102. 23. 24. The faithfull desire
rather that their dayes may be prolonged
to Gods pleasure.
            
            2. It was the foolish wish of the murmuring
and disobedient Israelites: Wold God
we had died in the land of Aegypt, or in this
wildernesse would God we were dead, Num.
14. 1. Iob also herein shewed himselfe impatient:
Why died I not in the birth, why died
I not when I came out of the womb, Iob 3. 11.
Neither was Elias that great prophet altogether
blameles, who being persecuted of
Iesabel, was wearie of his life, and desired to
die, and said, It is enough O Lord, take away
my soule, for I am no better then my fathers,
1. King. 14. 4.
            3. Like as the vnprofitable seruant is
reproued, because he hid his talent in the

earth, and put it not forth to aduantage:
Math. 25. 25. so they are vnprofitable,
which desire their bodies (before their
time) to be raked vp in the earth, and not
to liue to set forth Gods glorie. Like as it
were a foolish course, when as house is
decaied and droppeth through, to pull it
quite downe, and not to seeke to repaire
it rather: so is it with them that would
haue their crasie bodies, broken with the
cares and troubles of this life, to be wholly
dissolued, rather then to be strengthned
with grace against temptation.
            4. The reason, why we should not desire
to be taken out of this world, but to be
kept from euill in the world, the Prophet
sheweth: I shall not die, but liue and declare
the workes of the Lord. Psal. 118 17. Be benificiall
to thy seruant, that I may liue and
keepe thy vvord: Psal. 119. 17. The desire
which we haue vnto Gods glorie should
make vs willing to continue in Gods seruice
among the liuing.
            5. First:Life not corruptly to be desired. by this doctrine two corrupt
affections are discouered: the one, when any
man desireth life with a corrupt minde,
as that he may liue to grow rich, or to increase
in honor, or to be reuenged of his
enemie, or such like: as Ambrose noteth

vpon those words:Serm. 20. in Psal. 119. Psal. 119. 154. Quicken
me because of thy word: Alius propter diuitias
viuere cupit, alius propter filios, hic propter
verbum viuificari cupit: One desireth to liue
because of their riches, another because of
their children, but the Prophet onely would
liue for Gods word sake.
            
            The other affection reproued,Against a pre posterous desire of death. is when
one waxeth wearie of the world, not
for any desire he hath to God, but because
of his sorrow and trouble, to desire
with Saint Paul to be dissolued and to be
with Christ is a good affection: so that our
particular in seeking our owne perfectiō
yeeld to the generall in furthering the
Churches consolation, as Saint Paul doth
moderate his desire, who though it were
best of all for him to be loosed, yet wisheth
to abide in the slesh for the furtherance
of the Churches ioy. Phil. 1. 23. 24.
            Likewise we are taught by this rule,
when affliction commeth, and temptation
assaileth vs, to pray rather for strength to
resist, then for riddance, not at all to feele
it: Saint Paul praying, that the temptation
might depart from him which he felt in
his flesh, was not therein heard, but receiued
this answere, my grace is sufficient for
thee, for my power is made perfect through

nesse: Our Sauiour prayed for Peter,
not that he should not at all be winnowed
of Sathan, for how then should he
come foorth as cleane wheate, but that his
faith faile him not, Luk. 20. 31. Saint Paul
al
                  •
               o saith, that he was deliuered from the
mouth of the Lion▪ from the cruell rage of
Nero the persecuting Emperour: but he
was not sure so to be deliuered still from
externall persecution: but he saith confidently:
The Lord will deliuer me from euery
euill worke, & preserue me vnto his heauenly
kingdome, 2. Timoth. 4. 18. He was sure to
be kept from euill, as here our Sauiour
prayeth for his disciples but not to be deliuered
from the troubles of the world:
and the same also is the hope and confidence
of euery faithfull man.
         
         
            The twelfth Lecture.
            
               
                  Vers. 16. They are not of the world, as I am
not of the world.]
            
            THis verse was repeated before vers.
14. that which was there obserued
shall not need to be rehearsed againe: only
this shall be now considered: that the
Scriptures are so tempered, that to our capacitie,

and for our profite some speciall
matters and sentences are againe remembred.
            1. So Saint Paule saith: It grieueth me
not to write the same things vnto you, and
for you it is a sure thing, Philip. 3. 1.
            2 Sometime repetitions are vsed as ornaments
and graces to the spiritual songs,
as Psalm. 136. this clause (for his mercie
endureth for euer) is repeated in euery
verse, as the ground of that Psalme, and
well setting foorth the heauenly melodie
thereof.Why the Scripture vseth repetitions. Sometime repetitions are vsed
for the stirring and lifting vp of the affections:
as Psal. 135. vers. 1. Praise the name
of the Lord, praise him: vers. 3. praise the
Lord. These exhortations are againe vttered,
that our affections should be more
vehemently touched with a desite to
praise God. Sometime for doctrine sake,
and our better instruction and vnderstanding
some hard matters, and sentences
are often opened, and for our better remembrance
iterated: as our Sauiour repeateth
and expoundeth to his Apostles
the parable of the seed, Mat. 13.
            3 Therefore the words of the wise are
compared to nailes, that are sure fastened,
and driuen vp to the head, Eccles. 12. 11.

So is it, when doctrine is throughly applyed:
The word of God is as siluer seuen
times purified in the fornace, Psal. 12. 7.
The foroace is our heart, where the word
of God by fruitfull meditation must be
tried, till it become siluer, and be made
profitable to vs. And as the cleane beasts
did chew the cudde, that is, they did againe
eate and minse the meate receiued:
so by often rehearsing and meditating, the
word of (God as our spirituall food) must
perfectly be digested.
            4. The reason hereof is, our dulnesse of
hearing, and weaknesse of vnderstanding,
as the Apostle sheweth to the Hebrewes:
Whereas concerning the time ye ought to be
teachers, ye haue need againe that we teach
you the first principles of the word of God.
Heb. 5. 12. whom the Prophet compareth
to sucking babes, that had need to be
taught precept vpon precept, line after line,
Isa. 28. 10.
            5 First, though the spirit of God, that
best knoweth how to sit our affections, vseth
repetitions:Of vaine and idle repetitions. yet this is no warrant for
men to vse vaine tautologies and rehearsals
of the same things, either in prayers or
preachings: which are of three sorts; either
of negligence proceeding from loosnesse,

when men tosse and tumble vp and
downe the same things often in their indigested
prayers. Such were the long and
irkesome prayers of the Pharises, Mat. 23.
14. Either they are for ostentation, such as
were the tedious acclamations of Baals
Priests, who did cut also and launch themselues
with knifes▪ hauing nothing in their
mouthes from morning to noone, but
these wordes: Baal heare vs. Such were
the tedious Church songs vsed in popery,
full of long and vaine repetitions, and dismembred
sentences: which vse (I feare
me) is not altogether left in the seruice
and songs of some Cathedral churches to
this day. Some vaine rehearsals do shew
superstition: as the heathen did thinke to
be heard for their much babling, Mat. 6. 7.
So were people taught in poperie to say
ouer vpon their beades so many Pater nosters,
Aue Maries, so many Creedes, as
though the often saying of them had a
more holinesse, and added a greater efficacie
vnto them. Wherfore all these kinds
of fruitlesse repetitions are held to be vain
and not at all grounded vpon Christs example.
            Secondly, we are taught, that where
the Spirit of God especially commendeth

vnto vs any doctrine or sentence in Scripture,
it should so much the more of vs be
carefully remembred. Hereof it is, that so
often in the Psalmes do we find this word
Selah, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               :Of the word Selah vsed in the Psalmes. which is deriued of a word,
that signifieth to lift vp: which was a note
of singular attention to marke what was
contained in the verses so marked, and
that the voice should be exalted and lifted
vp in the singing. Hierome out of Origen
reporteth diuerse acceptions and takings
of this word: the Septuagint, Theodotian
and Symmachus, interpret it Diapsalma,
the chaunge of the tune or song: Aquila
and the fift edition, semper, alwaies: the
sixt edition, iugiter, infinem, continually,
or to the end.Hierom. Whereupon Hierome giueth
this note:Marcella▪
                
               Ex quo animaduertimus,
hoc verbum docere,
               Tom. 4. 
               sempiterna esse quae dicta
sunt: whereby we marke, that this word
sheweth, that the things vttered are eternal,
that is, for euer to be remembred. So should
we continually remember the holy instructions
so carefully cōmended in Scripture:
as this here twice beaten vpon by Christ,
that we should not be of the world, as
Christ is not of the world. That these and
the like holy precepts and counsels, we
should, as the wise man saith: bind them to

the necke, and write them vpon the table of
our heart, Prou. 3. 3. that is, keepe them
most diligently, as precious and costly
iewels.
         
         
            The thirteenth Lecture.
            
               
                  Vers. 17. Sanctifie them with thy truth, thy
word is the truth.
            
            AS hitherto Christ hath prayed for
the preseruation of his Apostles, so
now he moueth his Father by these his
heauenly prayers for their sanctification:
which is of two sorts, either generall, to
be sanctified by the word of God, that is,
made truly obedient to his will, as euery
faithfull man must be: or speciall, in
making them able and sufficient for their
calling, whom now he sent vpon his embassage
into the world, ver. 18. Then, the
reason and ground of this request is shewed,
which is the sanctification of himself,
vers. 19.
            1 Here then by this Scripture it is euident,Doct. 1.
that our hearts and affections are reformed,
sanctified, consecrated vnto the
will and seruice of God, onely by the
truth reuealed in his word. So saith the

phet:The word of God onely conuerteth. 
               Wherewith shall a young man redresse
his way, in taking heed according to thy word,
Psal. 119. 9. the reforming and redressing
of our waies is wrought by the word of
God. The Apostle also saith, that the
Scriptures are profitable, to teach, to improue,
to correct and instruct in righteousnes,
2. Tim. 4. 16.
            2. The Prophet Dauid herein sheweth
his owne experience: I vnderstood more
then the ancient, because I kept thy precepts▪
I haue not declined from thy iudgements, for
thou didst teach me, Psalm. 109. vers. 100.
102. Zacheus, by the voice of Christ was
conuerted, and of a meere worldling
made the child of Abraham, Luk. 19. 8.
So was the Eunuch cōuerted by the preaching
of Philip Act. 8. and Lydia by hearing
of Paule, Act. 16.
            3 Neither were the waters of Iordan
so wholesome to cure Naamans leprosie,
2. King. 5. 14. nor the poole of Bethesda
to heale the lame, Iohn 5. 3. nor the lump
of figges Hezechiahs sore, 2. King. 20. 7.
as the word of God is sufficient to purge
all our spirituall diseases. There is nothing
searcheth, purgeth, and purifieth, as Gods
word doth:Mat. 3 11. as a fire it consumeth the stubble
of mens affections: as a sword it cutteth

off the put
                  •
               ified parts:Col. 4. 6. as salt it seasoneth
that which is otherwise vnsauourie.Heb. 4. 12.
            
            4 For the proper worke of faith is to
purifie our hearts, Act. 15. 9. which is as
the eye salue of the soule, by the annointing
whereof our spirituall blindnesse is
cured. Reu. 3. 18. which faith is wrought
in vs by the hearing of the word of God,
Rom. 10. 17.
            5 First, in that our Sauiour saith: thy
word is the truth. We are taught, that all
truth necessarie to our sanctification and
saluation is contained in the Scriptures:
contrarie to the doctrine of the Church
of Rome,All truth necessarie to saluation to be found in Scripture. who hold many traditions necessarie
to saluation, not expressed nor reuealed
in the Scriptures. And lest they
might haue this euasion, that there is some
part of Gods word vnwritten, beside the
Scriptures. Our Sauiour himselfe sendeth
vs to the Scriptures: Search the Scriptures,
for in them you thinke to haue eternall life,
and they are they which testifie of me: but ye
will not come vnto me, that ye may haue life.
If the Scriptures then declare Christ, and
Christ giueth life: and if in the Scriptures
we may find eternall life, what other doctrine
is necessarie to saluation, beside the
truth reuealed in the Scriptures?
            
               
Secondly, if the word of God do sanctifie
vs, then they are vnprofitable hearers,
which by the preaching of the word
are not sanctified. If salt will not season a
man, what can? If the finger of God,
which did write his law in the tables of
stone, cannot write the same in our hearts,
then are they harder then flint or stone.
Gods word is as his pen, as Ambrose well
saith vpon these words, Psa. 45. My tongue
is the pen of a readie writer. Vide ne scriba
velociter scribens sit verbum Dei, quod animae
vitia procurrat & penetret, & inscribat
dona gratiae: See if the Scribe swiftly writing
be not the word of God, which pierceth the
soule, and discouereth the errors thereof,
and writeth there the graces of Gods spirit.
If Gods pen then cannot graue his will in
mens hearts, no other writing can do it.
            
               Verse 18. As thou didst send me into the
world,
               Doct. 2. 
               so haue I sent them into the world.
Now followeth the speciall sanctification
of the Apostles to their office: Christ sendeth
them into the world, and whom he
sendeth, he furnisheth with all graces
needfull for that function, wherein they
are employed.
            1 Therfore the Apostle alleaging out
of the Psalme saith,God sendeth none but enabled with gifts. he hath ascended vp

on high, &c. and hath giuen giftes
vnto men, &c. he therefore gaue some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some Euangelists,
some Pastors, some Teachers, Ephes. 4. 8. 11.
God hath not onely appointed these callings
and offices in his Church, but hath
also giuen gifts answerable, to some Apostolicall,
to some Propheticall, to other
Pastorall and Doctorall gifts.
            2 Thus Moses was furnished of God,
both with the power of miracles, and the
gift of vtterance: I will be with thy mouth,
and teach thee what thou shalt say. Exod. 4. 3
12. Thus Isay his lips were touched with a
cole frō the altar, Isa. 6. 6. Our sauior Christ
in his baptisme receiued the holy Ghost
descending vpon him in the likenesse of a
Doue, Mat. 3. The Apostles, before they
were dispersed in the world to preach the
Gospell, were assisted by the holy spirit,
which came vpon them in prayer in the
likenesse of fierie clouen tongues.
            3 For to send an vnfit messenger, not
enabled with gifts, is as if one should send
a lame man of his errant: He that sendeth
a message by a foole (that is, one that is
vnwise, and not qualified with gifts) is as
he that cutteth off the legs, Pro. 26. 6. The
Prophet Isay compareth such messengers

to dumbe dogs, that delight in sleeping,
Isay 56. 10. A man wil not keepe a dog to
watch his house, that will not barke at a
theefe: neither are the blind fit to be
watch-men, as the prophet saith in the
same place; their watch-men are blind: no
more is it fit that they should be ignorant
that watch ouer other mens soules, or
slouthfull or negligent that haue the
charge ouer others.
            4 By this distribution of gifts to his
members, our Lord and Sauiour sheweth
his great victory and triumph: That being
ascended, he hath led captiuitie captiue, and
dispoyled his enemies, and deuided the
spoile among his faithfull seruants: so that
the diuersitie of graces and gifts in Christs
Church, redoundeth to the glorie of out
victorious Captaine. And againe, as the
Lord hath appointed the end, the gathering
together of the Saints, the edification of
his bodie, Ephes. 4. 12. so likewise he hath
ordained the meanes to that end, the necessitie
of gifts working thereunto.
            5 First, by this Scripture are reproued
all they which intrude and thrust themselues
into the office and calling of Ministers,
being not with gifts thereunto enabled;
certainely let such know, that they

are not of Gods sending: they either run
then of themselues, not called of God, or
sent, as the tares were sown of the enuious
man, who enuieth the profit & feeding of
Christs flocke. The people must needs be
blind, where their guides are blind, as our
fauiour saith: they be blind leaders of the blind,
Mat. 15. 13.Ad Furiam. For as Hierom saith, detrimentū
pecoris, ignominia pastoris: The wants of the
shepheard, are the woes of the flocke. The
poore flock of Christ pincheth and smarteth
for the ignorance and negligence of
their pastors.
            Secondly, we are taught to giue thanks
vnto God for those excellēt graces which
he bestoweth vpon his Ministers: as this
Church of England shineth with a great
number of such starres, that I thinke no
Church in the world may be compared to
it. Let vs therefore praise God for such,
as the churches did for Paul: They glorified
God for me, Gal. 2. 23. and pray earnestly
vnto God to increase the number of them
that the Lord of the haruest will vouchsafe
to send forth labourers into his haruest, Mat.
9. 38.
            
               Verse 19.Doct. 3. 
               And for their sakes sanctifie
I my selfe, that they also may be sanctified
through the truth. We see then that Christ

is the sanctifier of his Church, and that
he hath receiued all graces and riches of
the spirit onely to inrich vs.
            1. So the Euangelist saith:
               All gifts deriued vnto the Church by Christ. Of his fulnes
haue we all receiued, and grace for grace.
Iohn 1. 16. Christ is a full vessell, the ouerflowings
whereof do fill all his members.
The Apostle also saith, Christ gaue himselfe
for his Church, that he might sanctifie
it and clea
                  •
               se it, Ephes. 5. 26.
            2 Thus was Paul called and sanctified
by Christ: Neither receiued I it of man,
neither was I taught it, but by the reuelation
of Iesus Christ, Galat. 1. 12. Thus the
Angel Christ gaue vnto Iohn a litle book
which he did eate, and thereby prophecied,
Reu. 10. 11.
            3 Christ is the Oliue tree that standeth
before the ruler of the whole earth,
and emptieth it self by the pipes and conduits
of his word into the golden candlesticke
of his Church, Zach. 4. He is the
head, from whence the bodie receiueth
life and power,Ephes. 4. 16. as the Apostle saith: Let
vs in all things grow vp vnto him, which is
the head, euen Ch
                     •
                  ist, by whom all the bodie
being coupled and knit together, according to
the effectuall power, which is in the measure
of euery part, receiueth increase of the bodie,

&c.
            
            4 For without a Mediator no grace is
deriued from God vnto man: like as the
nurse suckleth the child by the meane of
her breasts, a part of her selfe. As the mind
imparteth not her secrets, but the words
and voice: so Christ is Gods eternal word
to make known his wil; he by his incarnation,
as the nurse by her breasts, doth conuey
vnto vs heauenly grace. The booke of
Gods secrets could not be opened, till the
Lion of the tribe of Iuda had obtained to
open it. Reu. 5. 3. 5.
            5 First, in that Christ sanctifieth himselfe,
he is manifested to be perfect God,
who hath the fountaine of grace and life
in himselfe, who needeth not by an other
to be sanctified as man doth, but the fulnesse
of the Godhead dwelleth bodily in
him, Col. 2. 9. that is, essentially & substantially:
for God giueth him not the spirit by
measure, Iohn 3. 34. as to others. Secondly,
Christ had no need of the grace of sanctification
for himselfe, but to sanctifie vs.
Christ therefore was borne, died, rose againe,
ascended, not for himself, but for vs:
he merited not to himselfe;
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   merited not for himselfe. but all the
fruite of his merits redound to vs, contrary
to the doctrine of the Church of Rome,

who teach that Christ merited for himself.
Ambrose toucheth this point well:Lib. 5. de fid. cap. 7. 
               Ad hoc
natus est Christus, vt faceret creaturam, nec
enim sibi natiuitas sua proficit, sed nobis; quia
non eguit nasci, erat enim in Deo qui processit
de Deo: si ergo natiuitas prima illi non profuit
multò minus secunda. Christ was borne to
this end, to make the creatures; for his natiuitie
did not profite himself, but vs; he needed
not to haue bene borne or begotten, for he was
in God that proceeded from God: if then his
first natiuitie did not profit him, much lesse his
second. As Christ was euerlastingly begotten
of God, not for himselfe, but for the
creation of the world; so he was borne in
the fulnesse of time, not for himselfe, but
for our redemption.
            Thirdly▪ here may euery one learne, how
to know himselfe to be a true member of
Christs bodie▪ namely by his sanctificatiō:
for as S. Paul saith, If the first fruites be holy,
so is the lumpe; if the roote be holy, so are
the branches, Rom. 11. If then we be graft
into the true vine, the life of the tree is in
vs, and the spirit of sanctification doth
quicken vs: and as Christ did sanctifie
himselfe, so are we sanctified by him. He
then that hath not the spirit of Christ,
whereby he shold be sanctified, is not his.
         
         
            
            The foureteenth Lecture.
            
               
                  Verse 20. I pray not for these alone, but for
them also which shall beleeue in me.
            
            NOw followeth the second part of
our Sauiours prayer for his Church,
namely, for those which would afterward
beleeue in him vnto the worlds end. First
it is shewed for whom he prayeth, ver. 20.
then what he prayeth for: first for their vnitie
and perfection in this life, from vers.
20. to 24. Secondly, for their euerlasting
saluation, from vers. 24. to the end.
            First we learne▪ that to our great comfort
the prouident care and mercifull loue of
Christ is extended,Doct. 1. not vnto that age only
then present,Christ praieth for all beleeuers to the end of the world. but to all the companie of
beleeuers in all ages, so long as the world
endureth.
            1. So our Sauiour saith. Other sheepe I
haue also, which are not of this fold, them also
must I bring, and they shall heare my voice,
and there shall be one sheep-fold and one shepheard,
Iohn 10. 16.
            2. Of this sheep-fold were the Eunuch,
Acts 8. Cornelius, Acts 10. Lydia, Act. 16.
that were cōprehended vnder this prayer

of Christ, and by the holy vertue and force
thereof conuerted to the faith, and gathered
vnto Christs sheepe.
            3 For like as the waters of Iordan came
not together, till all the people of Israell
were cleane gone through, Ios. 3. 17. so
the Lord hath purposed to continue the
world, and to suspend the dissolution
thereof, till the number of Saints be fulfilled.
And as the people both before and
following after Christ riding to Ierusalē,
cryed, Hosanna, saue vs Lord. Mat. 21. 9.
so both the faithfull people before the incarnation
of Christ, and the Church also
succeeding, haue their part of saluation in
him.
            4 For as the Apostle saith, speaking by
way of comparison of the fathers vnder
the law: God prouiding a better thing for vs,
that they without vs should not be made perfect,
Heb. 11. 40. So also God hath prouided
for all beleeuers which should follow
in the world, that without them, no
not the faithfull which then liued, could
be compleat and perfect: seeing we all
make but one bodie in Christ, which is
not full and compleat, if any of the parts
and members thereof be wanting.
            5 First, this is a great comfort to as

many as do beleeue in Christ, that our
blessed Sauiour hath prayed for them, and
they are all comprehended in his prayer.
Let not any man say, would God that I
had liued in Christ time, that he might
haue laid his hands vpon me, and prayed
ouer me: that I might haue seene him, and
heard him speake. What would we more?
Christ hath prayed for vs, and by this his
prayer we liue and are preserued. Was
Thomas onely blessed, because he thrust
his hand into Christs side, and felt the
print of the nailes? Did not our Sauiour
pronounce all those also blessed, that haue
not seene, and yet haue beleeued, Ioh. 20. 29.
            Secondly, we are taught by this example
of our Sauiour, that we should not only
care for the present age, but as much as
in vs lyeth prouide for posteritie, when we
are gone. As the Lord testifieth of Abraham:
I know he will commaund his sonnes
and his housho
                     •
                  d after him, that they keepe
the way of the Lord, Gen. 18. 19. he had a
care to transmit ouer to his posteritie the
true worship of God.Care of posteritie. So Saint Peter saith:
I will indeuour alwaies, that ye may be able
to haue remembrance of these things after
my departure, 2. Pet. 1. 15. So shold Christian
Princes and Magistrates, faithfull

Ministers and godly Parents lay such a
foundation while they liue, that their subiects,
people, and posteritie may feare
God when they are gone. Many parents
themselues are well affected to religion
and godlinesse, but they are carelesse of
their children. Such an one was Ely, that
himselfe fearing God, had no great care
to plant the same in his children, suffering
them to haue their owne mind. Ambrose
saith well: I
                     •
                  rsa partus suos ad sui fingit similitudinem,
tu filios instituere tui similes non
potes? The Beare formeth her young ones to
her own shape, and by licking bringeth them
to fashion; and canst not thou frame thy children
to be like vnto thee in good things?
            
            
               Which shall beleeue in me through their
word] By the word then and preaching of
the Apostles,Doct. 2. men are brought to faith
and beleefe.
            1 Thus the Apostle testifieth: Faith is
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God,
Rom. 10. 17. The word of God preached
and by attentiue hearing receiued, is that
which ingendreth faith.
            2 There was reading of the Scriptures
vsually vpon the Sabbath in Nazareth,
but till Christ preached vnto them, and opened
the Scripture, they vnderstood it

not: but then hearing him preach: They all
bare witnesse, (and gaue consent to his doctrine)
and wondred at the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth. The Eunuch
did reade in the Prophet Isay, but he
vnderstood him not, neither beleeued, till
Philip had expounded the Prophet to
him, Act. 8.
            3 Like as a medicine helpeth not, vnlesse
there be also a skilfull man to apply
the same, and giue direction how it shold
be vsed, as the Prophet ioyneth them both
together: Is there no balme at Gilead, is
there no Phisitian there? Ier. 8. 22. it profited
not to haue precious balme, without
a Phisitian, that should prescribe the receipt
thereof: So the word of God worketh
not that effect, where by preaching
it is not applyed. The Samaritans said to
the woman: We beleeue now, not because of
thy saying, for we haue heard him our selues,
Ioh. 4. 42. The reading of the Scripture
is like the bare and naked report of the
woman; the preaching is as the powerfull
hearing of Christ himselfe.
            4 For the word of God (the Spirit working
by it) doth in preaching declare it
selfe to be mightie in operation, and sharper
then a two edged sword, which entreth

throughly vnto the deuiding asunder of the
soule and the spirit, the ioynts and the marrow,
and is a discouerer of the thoughts and
intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. This operation
t
                     ••
                   Apostle ascribeth to the word
preach If they all prophecie, &c. the secrets
of his heart are made manifest, &c. 1.
Cor. 14. 25.
            5 First, if the word of the Apostles haue
this property to beget faith, then we need
not maruell,Faith a rare thing, where is no preaching. that faith is so rare a thing
where there is no preaching: as in many
places, where yet there is a dumbe and
vnpreaching Ministerie, or else mens traditions
are preached and vrged, and not
the word of the Apostles onely, as in the
Romish Church. Such doctrines the Apostle
saith, they haue 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a shew
of wisedom: but they are of no value, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               :
vpon which words Ambrose
saith: Religio appellatur, cùm sit sacrilegium,
quia, quod contra authorem est, sacrilega mē
                  te
inventum est▪ It is called religion, being a
sacriledge: for whatsoeuer is against the author,
sheweth a sacrilegious mind of the inuenter.
            
            Secondly, whosoeuer is a contemner
and neglecter of the word of God, cannot
possiblie attaine vnto faith or beleefe. If

any man (as Iehoiakim) deface the Scriptures,
who caused the booke to be cut and
mangled, and then cast into the fire, Ier.
36. 23. or stoppe their eare against it, as
the Iewes against Stephen, Act. 7. or preferre
worldy matters before it, as the Gergesenes,
Mat. 8. 34. they may liue long enough
before euer they shall meet with
faith. For the wise man saith: If thou seekest
for her as siluer, &c. thou shalt find
the knowledge of God, Prou. 2. 4. 5. They
then which seeke not for her, shall not
find her.
            
               That they all may be one,
               Doct. 3. 
               as thou ô Father
in me, and I in thee, &c. that they also may
be one in vs] Our Sauior prayeth here for
the vnion and communion of Saints; their
vnion with God, their cōmunion among
themselues. Whereby this is gathered,
that we cannot be one among our selues,
vnlesse we be one with God: they cannot
haue peace in the world, that are not at
peace with God.
            1 Therefore the Angels thus sing in
that their heauenly song: Glorie to God on
high, peace in earth, Luk. 2. 14. The way
to obtaine peace in earth, is to giue glory
to God in heauen.
            2 Dauid first reconciled himselfe to

God: I acknowledged my sinne vnto thee:
then he is assured of the loue and fauour
of his Church: therefore shall euery one that
is godly, make his prayer vnto thee, Psal. 32.
5. 6. then the faithfull will be readie for
their parts to giue thankes vnto God for
him. The contrarie appeareth in Cham,
who first being cast off from God, and separated
by his sins, which he felt heauier
then he could beare, findeth no comfort
in earth, he was afraid, lest euery one that
met him, should kill him, Gen. 4.
            3 Christ saith: Haue salt in your selues,
haue peace one with another, Mark. 9. 50.
We must first be inwardly seasoned with
the salt of Gods grace, before we can haue
peace without: Gods grace is the salt,
peace is the sweet rellish or sauour, that
followeth vpon this seasoning. The Prophet
Dauid saith: They came about me like
Bees, and are quenched as a fire of thornes:
but in the name of God I will destroy them,
Psal. 118. 12. Faith and confidence in the
name of God, doth allay strife and contention,
as when the sting of the Bee is
doubled or pulled foorth, or as the crackling
fire of thornes is extinct and put out.
            4 Our Sauiour mooueth vs to vnitie,
by his example: because he and his Father

are one: where he speaketh not of the essentiall
vnion and consociation which he
hath with God; but of his dispensation &
mediation, who as he was man, cohered
and cōsented with his Father in all things.
We therefore should be in vnitie, consent
and agree together, because Christ our
Lord▪ euen as man, is of one accord and
consent with his Father: and the like mind
should be in vs, that was in Christ, Phil. 2.
            5 If then the vnion with God, and cō
               munion
with the Saints do concurre together
(for peace with the world followeth
not peace with God: but the more we
are loued of God, the more the world hateth
vs. But our Sauiour speaketh of that
vnion and society, which the Church hath
with it selfe) they then do deceiue themselues,
which thinke they are at peace
with God, and are not in loue and fellowship
with the Church of Christ: whether
Schismatickes, that deuide themselues
from the peace of the Church, or prophane
persons, that regard not the fellowship
of the Saints: against whom the
Apostle speaketh: Not forsaking the fellowship
that we haue among our selues, as the
manner of some is, Heb. 10. 25. Like vnto
Ismael, whose hand was against euery

man, and euery mans against him. So some
there are that think wel of none, nor none
thinke wel of them: but it is a true saying,
No
                     •
                   habet Deum patrem,
               Augustine. 
               qui non habet Ecclesiam
matrem: He cannot haue God to his
father, that hath not the Church for his mother.
He cannot haue vnitie with God,
that regardeth not the societie of his
Church, nor seeketh the loue thereof.
            
               That the world may beleeue that thou hast
sent me.
               Doct. 4. The first reason of this petition for
vnitie, is taken from the fruites or effects,
that the world and worldly men may be
drawne to confesse, seeing the concord,
vnitie, & sanctity of the seruants of Christ,
that he is the true Messiah whom they
worship.
            1. So our Sauiour saith, Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good
workes, and glorifie your father which is in
heauen, Mat. 5. 15.
            2. By this reason Moses perswadeth
God not to destroy Israel: Wherefore shall
the Egyptians say, he hath brought them out
maliciously, for to slay them in the wildernes?
Exod. 32. 12. He feared lest the heathen
might haue taken occasiō hereby to blaspheme
God: for this S. Paul reproueth the
Iewes, because the name of God was

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
blasphemed of the Gentiles through thē,
Rom▪ 2. 24. They by their euil conuersatiō
made the Gentiles more obstinate.
            3. Like as then the outward deliuerance
of the Israelites was famous among the
heathen, and made them stand in awe: as
the idolatrous Priests said to the Philistims:
Wherfore should ye harden your hearts
as the Egyptians and Pharao hardened their
hearts? 1. Sam. 6. 7. and as the heathen
praised God for the returne of the people
from captiuitie, Psa. 126. 2. So much more
occasion of praise is raised among the nations
for the spirituall deliuerance of his
Church, and redemption from sinne.
            4. Two reasons may be yeelded hereof
why God would haue made knowne to
the world the godly conuersation of his
Church:Why God would haue the holy life of his faithful knowne to the world. one for their conuersion, that they
which obey not the word, may be wonne without
the word, by the conuersation of your
wiues, 1. Pet. 3. 1. The other for their confusion,
to be a iudgement vnto them, that
they may be left without excuse, if by the
contemplation of the creatures, much
more by the conuersation of the faithfull.
Rom. 1. 20.
            5. They therefore are to be reproued,
which by their vngodly life do hinder the

beleefe of the Gentiles: what will Iewes
and Turkes say, when they see or heare of
the malice, drunkennesse, extortion, vncleannesse,
that raigneth among Christians?
Can they thinke that we worship▪ the
true God, or that we are true worshippers
being giuē ouer to such great enormities?
If a man did but sinne against his brother,
or do him wrong, it would aske recompence:
but now such sinne against God,
causing his name to be euill spoken of. If
a man did by his owne sinne but slay his
owne soule, it were an heauy case: but
now drawing other after them by their
euil example, or causing them to start aside
and go backe, greater must needs be their
condemnation.Mat. 18. 6. Our Sauiour saith, It were
better a milstone were hanged about his neck
and he drowned in the sea, then he should
offend the litle ones, the poore seruants of
Christ.The dange
                     •
                   of giuing of
                     •
                  ence. It were better for thē to be drowned
without recouerie, because it is but
the death of the bodie; whereas now by
offences, they indanger their soule: it were
better for other, because they should haue
no rub in their way, or blocke to stumble
at. Origene hereunto agreeably saith: Qui
scandali conscius est, animam dabit pro anima
eius, quem scandalizauit: He that is guiltie

of offence, shall giue his soule for his soule
whom he hath offended: It is good therefore
for euery man to take heede of offences.
         
         
            The fifteenth Lecture.
            
               
                  Verse 22. The glorie which thou gauest me
haue I giuen them, that they may be one
as we are one.
            
            HEre is another reason of Christs
petition for vnitie, taken from the
very fountaine and originall thereof,
namely▪ their election and fore-ordaining
vnto glorie: for this cause they are glorified
in Christ, that they might expresse and
shew forth this godly vnion and spirituall
coniunction.
            Hence then we learne,Doct. 1. that such as are
ordained vnto life and euerlasting glorie,
are prepared of God vnto good workes
first, and to the seruice of loue in this life
before they shall be admitted to the
next.
            1. So the Apostle saith:
               We are elected to walke in good works As he hath chosen
vs in him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in loue, Ephes. 1. 4. And

againe, Ye are his workmanship, created in
Christ Iesus vnto good workes, which God
hath ordained that we should walke in them,
Ephes. 2. 10. Then both good works were
ordained for the elect, and the elect ordained
to walke in good workes.
            
            3. The holy Apostle thus testifieth of
himselfe: Who shall deliuer me from euery
euill worke, and preserue me to his heauenly
kingdome, 2. Tim. 4. 18. He assureth himself
that God will giue him grace to abstaine
from euill workes, seeing he had ordained
him for his kingdome. Christ concludeth
Zacheus to be the sonne of Abraham, and
child of saluation, because he had expressed
liuely fruites thereof in his large restitution
and bountifull charitie. Luke 19. 8.
            3. Like as Dauid being deputed and
appointed to the kingdom of Israell, doth
in the meane time prepare and addresse
himselfe to walke vprightly, as he saith: I
will do wisely in the perfect way til thou commest
vnto me, Pfal. 101. 2. so all they which
are ordained to Christs euerlasting kingdome,
should walke in Dauids steps. As
the bride prepareth and trimmeth her self
for her husband, though alreadie espoused:
so the elected alreadie by Gods gracious
electiō espoused vnto him in Christ,

must adorne and trim themselues by holinesse
and vertue, that they may be readie
to solemnize the euerlasting mariage feast
in heauen.
            4. For they must first shew themselues
faithful in litle, whom the Lord should afterward
make rulers of much, Mat. 25. 23.
They must first shew their faithfulnesse in
seeking Gods glorie in earth, before
they can receiue glorie from God in heauen.
            5. First then, seeing glorie is first giuen
and decreed to the elect, then followeth
their godly vnitie and fruitfull loue: and
the first is bestowed, that the second may
follow; not this first foreseene, that the other
might be decreed.
                  
                     •
                  lection not of workes but by grace. We see that election
is not grounded vpon the foresight of
mens workes▪ but these are fruites and effects
of eiection, not causes and beginners
of it: as the Apostle sheweth, That the purpose
of God might remaine according to election,
not by workes, but by him that calleth.
Rom. 9. 11.
            Secondly, we haue here a certaine rule
giuen vs, whereby we may discerne our
election, namely, by the fruitfull works of
vnitie and charity, which are as seales and
pledges of that glorie which is decreed to

be giuen vs in Christ. Thus S. Peter exhorteth:
Wherefore brethren, giue rather diligence
to make your calling and election sure,
for if ye do those things, ye shall neuer fall.
2. Pet. 1. 10. And S. Iohn saith, We know
we are translated from death to life, because
we loue the brethren. 1. Ioh. 3. 14. There are
two bookes,Two books: the booke of life, the book of a m
                     •
                  ns conscience. whereby euery man shall be
iudged, the booke of life, and the book of
euery mans conscience, as S. Iohn testifieth:
The bookes were opened, and another
booke was opened, which is the booke of life,
Reu. 20. 12. The booke of the conscience
is a true copie of the booke of life, here a
man shall find how it is written there. The
record of a mans conscience, is a certaine
and infallible euidence of the record in
heauen. Thus S. Paul found written in the
booke of his conscience, that because he
had fought a good fight, & kept the faith,
he doubted not but that a crowne of righteousnes
was laid vp for him, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
Wherefore by the workes of grace let vs
striue to be assured of glorie: let vs now

                  •
               ay as the Church fertilitatis suae conscia,

                     •
                  eni frater, exeamus in agrum: Thus the
Church knowing her selfe to be fruitfull:

                  •
               s Ambrose well applieth that place, saith

                  •
               o Christ, Come let vs go forth into the field

my brother, Cantic. 7. 11. We must now
bring Christ into our field, to shew him
our fruites, that he may afterwards bring
vs into his barnes to enioy his glorie.
            
               Verse 23. I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one.] A third
reason is here contained of Christs petition
for vnitie in his members: namely,
from the adiunct of perfection: they cannot
be made perfect without it, neither
can any man be a compleat Christian and
true member of Christ, vnlesse there be a
coniunction also with Christs bodie. So
that to this perfection, there are three degrees
of vnion expressed: the first of Christ
the Mediator with God his Father: Thou
in me: the second of Christ with his
Church, I in them: the third of the members
among themselues, That they may be
perfit in one.
            
            1 Here then where Christ saith, I in thē:
we are taught that there is no true peace,
concord, or vnion, but in Christ. So our
Sauiour saith, That in me ye might haue
peace, Ioh. 16. 23. and the Apostle: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
following the truth in
loue: there is no sound and true loue but in
the truth.
            2 Dauid fretted in himselfe, and was

disquieted, he could find no rest, nor
peace, till he went into the Sanctuarie of
God, Psal. 73. 17. Thus Saint Paule sheweth,
that while he was vnder the law, he
found nothing but death and condemnation:
But I died, and the same commaundement
which was ordained vnto life, was found
to be vnto me to death, Rom. 7. 10. But after
he was come to Christ, then he found,
that there was no condemnation to them that
were in Christ Iesus, Rom. 8. 1. It did not
helpe the Apostle, that he was a Pharise,
a circumcised Hebrew, Philip. 3. 5. confederate
with the high Priest, Act. 10. 1.
all this he counted as doung in respect of
the knowledge of Christ.
            3 The peace, friendship, and confederacie
of men, is like the tempering of iron
and clay together, that will not be ioyned.
Dan. 2. 43. And like as when a man leaneth
vpon a broken staffe, the shiuers
thereof will runne into his hand, 2. King.
18. 21. such is the peace and loue of the
world, it in the end turneth to hatred.
Such was the friendship betweene Abimelech
and the Sichemites, a fire went
out from the one and cōsumed the other,
Iud. 9. 20.
            4 For peace is one of the fruites of the

spirit, Gal. 5. 22. therefore as a man cannot
gather grapes of thornes, nor figges
of thistles, so neither is true peace to be
expected in the world without Christ.
            5 First then all externall peace, which
is not combined and knit together by
Christ, can not hold: such was the league
betweene godly Iehosophat and wicked
Ahab, it brought him into daunger of his
life, 1. King. 22. 32. as the ioyning with
Ahaziah the sonne of Ahab, was the cause
of the losse of Iehosophats shippes, 2. Chr.
20. 37.
            Secondly, we learne that there can be
no true internall peace, but in Christ: there
may be a carnall securitie,Three kinds of false peace. such as was in
the old world, that gaue themselues to eating
and drinking, till the floud came and
destroyed them: but this is farre from true
peace. The hypocrite also spareth no cost
nor labour to be reconciled, he will bring
thousands of rammes, and riuers of oyle,
Micah. 6. 6. but he cannot find by his own
workes the right way vnto peace.
            A third sort there is, that haue a feeling
of this peace for a time, but it continueth
not. As Ahab found the wrath of God
somewhat appeased toward him, after he
had humbled himselfe with fasting and

sackcloth, 1. King. 21. 27. but he soone returned
to his old sinnes, and kindled the
wrath of God against him againe. The
only true peace then with God is wroght
by faith in Christ, Rom. 5. 
                  •
               . And the right
concord and vnitie among men is made
perfect by the profession of the truth: as
the heart of Dauid and Ionathan were linked
together in faith and in the feare of
God.Paulin. Tom. 4. Hier
                  •
               m. well saith: Vera est illa necessitudo,
& Christi glutina copulata, quam
non vtilitas rei familiaris, nec presentia tantùm
corporum, non subdola & palpans adulatio,
sed Dei timor, & diuinarum Scripturarū
studia conciliant: That is true friendship,
and ioyned together in Christ, which not
priuate profite or the bodily presence, or flatterie;
but the feare of God, and the studie of
Scripture doth beget.
            
            
               And hast loued them,
               Doct. 3. 
               as thou hast loued
me] Like as Gods loue was manifested to
Christ, when the holy Ghost descended
vpon him, whereby he was sanctified and
replenished in his humane nature with all
heauenly gifts and graces: at what time
God proclaimed from heauen,Gods loue best knowne by the graces of sanctification. that Christ
was his beloued sonne, Mat. 3. So Gods
loue is not in any thing more euident toward
his children, then when he endueth

them with his holy Spirit, whereby they
are sanctified: and therefore our Sauiour
prayeth for their sanctification, that the
world may know, that God loueth them.
            1 Thus the Apostle testifieth: The loue
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy
Ghost, which is giuen vs. Rom. 5. 5. that
is, hereby the loue of God is apparant toward
vs, because he giueth vs his spirit,
whereby we are sanctified.
            2 Thus was the loue of God confirmed
toward the holy Apostle, who prayed,
that the temptation of his flesh might
depart from him, and receiued this answer:
My grace is sufficient for thee. 2. Cor. 12.
9. The assistance of Gods grace was a sure
testimonie of his loue. So the Prophet
Dauid prayeth: Make me to heare ioy and
gladnesse, that the bones which thou hast broken
may reioyce: and againe, Restore me to
the ioy of thy saluation, and stablish me with
thy free spirit, Psal. 51. 8. 12. He desireth
none other testimonie of Gods loue toward
him, but that he may feele the inward
comfort of Gods spirit.
            3 For Gods loue is best knowne by his
best gifts; the best things he reserueth for
those, whom he best loueth. Now the graces
of regeneration, the spirituall giftes of

faith, hope, and loue, are without al comparison
the most principall. As the Apostle
saith: Desire you the best giftes, and I
will yet shew you a more excellent way, 1.
Cor. 12. 31. and then in the next chapter he
treateth of faith, hope, and loue.
            4 Like as Ioseph sent vnto Beniamin
more plentifull measses of meate, Gen. 43.
34. and gaue him richer gifts, and more
costly sutes of apparell, then to the rest of
his brethren, Gen. 45. 22. so the Lord
bestoweth the best gifts vpon his owne
children. As the father caused the fat calfe
to be killed for his returned sonne, Luk.
15. so the fatnesse of spirituall graces the
Lord vouchsafeth vnto such, as truly turn
vnto him.
            5 The vse of this doctrine is excellent,
that we should not grieue to see the prosperitie,
ease, and wealth of many worldly
men: like as sometime the Prophet Dauid
fretted in himselfe at that sight, Psal. 73. 2
But let vs consider how plentifully the
Lord doth recompence to his children
the want of things temporall, with the eternall
graces of the spirit. Dauid preferreth
the light of Gods countenance before
the abundance of wine, corne, oyle,
or any other worldly endowment, Psal. 4.

Augustine saith well: Si Deus tanta dat
malis, quanta seruat bonis? If God giue such
things, as riches, and prosperitie to the wicked,
how great gifts hath he in store for his?
Say not then in thine heart, why hath not
God made me rich, honorable, strong, &
beautifull? he hath giuen thee a better portion,
the knowledge of his name, an heart
to feare him, a conscience to abstaine frō
euill. Where as thou seest a rich man giuen
to oppression, a prophane person, a
senslesse ignorant man: tell me, wouldest
thou chaunge states with him? I think not:
be content then with thy best lot, and desire
still the increase and continuance of
spirituall graces.
         
         
            The sixteenth Lecture.
            
               
                  Vers. 24. Father, I will, &c.
            
            NOw followeth the other petition of
our Sauiour for the glorification of
his Church: where we haue the request
it selfe, that they may be with Christ: the
end, to behold his glorie: the assurance,
for thou louedst me before the foundation
of the world.
            First,Doct. 1. we see the efficacie of Christs

prayer, that whatsoeuer he but willeth of
God, as the Mediator of his Church, it is
accomplished.
            1 Thus the Apostle testifieth:
               The prayer of Christs mediation. He is able
perfectly to saue those, that come vnto God by
him, because he euer liueth to make intercession
for them, Heb. 7. 25.
            2 Thus our Sauiour was heard for Lazarus:
I know thou hearest me alwaies, Ioh.
11. 42. Thus our Sauiour prayed for Peter,
that his faith failed him not, Luk. 22. 32.
and it was so fulfilled: for though Peters
faith was shaken, yet was it not ouerthrowne;
though it fainted, it failed not.
            3 If Moses by the lifting vp of his hands
ruled the battell betweene Israel and Ameleck:
if Eliah by his toung gouerned
the aire, that it should not raine, but according
to his word. If Peters shadow
commaunded diseases, Act. 5. 15. how
much more effectuall is the holy will and
desire of Christ.
            4 For Christ is the beloued sonne of
God, in whom God is well pleased, Mat.
3. 17. whatsoeuer Christ therefore willeth
of his Father, he cannot denie vnto him,
for the great loue he hath toward him.
            5 First, to our great comfort we are
taught, that seeing the will of Christ is

omnipotent: whatsoeuer it pleased the Lord,
that did he in heauen and earth, Psal. 135. 6.
and his will toward his church is most
kind, louing, mercifull, and bountifull, that
nothing can fall our amisse to Gods children;
they need not feare temptation, tribulation,
trouble, all shall fall out for the
best, Christ will haue it so. Againe, so forcible
is the mediation of Christ, that
whatsoeuer we shall aske the father in his
name, he will giue it vs, Iohn 16. 23. No
man hath any such assurance in his suites
and requests which he maketh vnto men:
wherefore we ought most chearefully to
resort to the throne of grace, where our
faithfull petitions are neuer reiected and
cast forth. Hierome well saith, Peto vt accipiam,
& cum accepero rursus peto, auarius
sum ad accipienda beneficia Dei, nec ille deficit
in dando, nec ego satior in accipiendo,
quanto plus bibero, tanto plus sitio: I aske to
receiue, and whē I haue receiued, I ask again,
I am couetous to receiue Gods blessings, he
faileth not in giuing, and I am not filled with
receiuing, the more I drinke, the more I
thirst.
            
            
               That they which thou hast giuen me,
               Doct. 2. 
               be
with me where I am. This is a great priuiledge,
that our blessed sauior hath appointed

vs to no other place,The faithfull shal be in the same place with Christ in heauen. then where he
himselfe is.
            1. Thus S. Paul saith, We shall meet the
Lord in the aire, and so shall be euer with him
1. Thess. 4. 17.
            2. The Lord said to the conuert vpon
the crosse, This da
                     •
                   shalt thou be with me in
Paradise. S. Paul assureth himselfe, that
when he should be dissolued, he should be
with Christ. Phil. 1. 23.
            3. Like as it is a great honour if the master
should set his seruant at his own table:
so our Sauiour saith to his Apostles, that
they should eate and drinke at his table in
his kingdome, Luke 12. 29. Like as Iehu
took Iehonadab vp into the chariot with
him, 2. King. 10. 15. the like honor Christ
vouchsafeth vnto his Saints.
            4. Our Sauiour giueth this reason▪ they
had contiued with him in his temptations,
Luke 22. 28. And againe he saith,
Where I am, there be my Ministers also,
Iohn 12. 26. They which haue bene partakers
of the afflictions of Christ, shall also
be made partners in his glorie.
            5. If we desire then to dwel with Christ
in the kingdome of heauen, he must dwel
with vs in earth: if to be receiued into his
euerlasting habitation, then we must now

prepare for him the habitation of our
hearts. How can they then be assured
to enioy Christs presence in heauen, that
delight not to heare him present now?
who by their corrupt communication and
prophane behauior, do grieue the spirit of
God, and chase away Christ from them.
Ambrose saith wel, Proiectus est Adā è Paradiso,
nō immerito ipse, enim se prius absconderat
à facie Dei: Adā was cast out of Paradise,
and not without cause, for first he had hid
himselfe from Gods face: so they which behold
not Gods face, nor enioy the presence
of his spirit here, cannot haue the
presence of his glorie in heauen,
            
               That they may behold my glorie which
thou hast giuen me:
               Doct. 3. they shall not onely be
beholders, but partakers also of that great
glorie.
            1. So the Apostle saith, We all behold as
in a mirrour with open face the glorie of the
Lord, and are changed into the same image
from glorie to glorie. 2. Cor. 3. 18. This glory
seene here as in a glasse, shall be seene
there with open face, and so seene as that
we shall be changed and transformed into
it.
            2 Thus Moses and Elias appeared in glory
in mount Tabor, where our Sauiour was also

transfigured, Luke 9. 31. So Stephen beholding
the glorie of God, and Iesus standing
at the right hand of God, himselfe
also was partaker of that glorie being yet
vpon the earth, his face was as the face of
an Angell, Act. 6. 15.
            3. Like as Hezekiah to gratifie the king
of Babels messenger, who was sent to
congratulate with him for his recouerie,
did shew him in kindnesse all the treasure
of his house, though this were a simple
part of Hezekiah and done without
warrant. But yet like as men exalted to
honour and wealth, do delight to shew to
their friends their happie estate: so our Sauior
Christ desireth that his Church shold
behold his great glory. Like as the church
saith in the Canticles, I will leade thee into
my mothers house, I will cause thee to drinke
spiced wine, Cant. 8. 2. so our blessed sauior
will bring vs into his fathers house, and
shew vs of his best things.
            4. For this glorie which Christ hath
receiued as our Mediator, he hath to this
end receiued it, to bestow it vpō his church
Iohn 17. 22. The glorie that thou gauest me,
I haue giuen them. Christ hath not merited
or purchased any thing to himselfe by his
great glorie, but whatsoeuer he wrought

for vs as our Mediator, the whole gaine
and benefite thereof redoundeth to vs.
            5. But as we hope to behold the glorie
of Christ in heauen with open face,They that wil see Christ face to face in heauen, must see him by faith here. so
must we now see him by faith: as the Apostle
saith, We walke by faith, not by sight, 2.
Cor. 5. 7. then we shall walke by sight, not
by faith: wherefore whosoeuer now seeth
not Christ by faith, shal not then inioy his
sight and presence in glorie. We must, as
Moses, discerne the land of promise a far
off, before we can enter into it. They therfore
that want the vision of the soule in
this life, cannot haue the full contemplatiō
of Christs glorie afterward. Certaine it is,
that Christ will reueale himselfe to all his
children before they go hence, as he was
seene and embraced of Simeon before his
departure.Hom. in Mat. 13. Origene saith wel, Vt naturalis
quidam attractus quibusdam inest, vt magneti
ad ferrum, bitumini ad ignem, sic fidei ad
diuinā virtutē: as some things haue a natural
property to draw vnto them, as the lode-stone
to draw iron, brimstone to draw fire, so faith
hath attractiue force to draw diuine vertue.
Faith then will draw vs to heauen, hope
pitcheth her anker there,Heb. 6. 19. and will in good
time draw vs thither.Doct. 4.
            
            
               For thou louedst me before the foundation

of the world. Our Sauiour speaketh of that
glorie which the Lord decreed to giue
vnto him before the beginning of the
world: whereby we do learne, that as
Christ the head was predestinate vnto
glorie, so also his members were set apart
vnto life in the euerlasting decree of God.
            1. The Apostle saith,Christ how said to be predestinate▪
                that Christ was
determined or predestinate the sonne of
God, as some translate 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Rom. 1. 4.
Saint Peter sayth to the same purpose,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , knowne or ordained. Augustine
therupon doth inferre, that Christ
was Praeclarissimum lumen gratiae & praedestinationis:
The most manifest light of grace
& predestinatiō. As Christ was predestinate
as man vnto glorie, so are his members:
Who hath predestinate vs to be adopted thorough
Iesus Christ vnto himselfe, Ephes.
1. 5.
            2. So the Lord saith to Ieremie, Before
I formed thee in the wombe, I knew thee, Ier.
1. 5. God had knowne, approued, and chosen
the Prophet euen before he was
borne.
            3. For like as Dauid was annointed and
appointed to be King, long before he entred
to his kingdom: and Moses was dessigned
to be deliuerer of Israel forty yeares

before he exercised his office: so the elect
of God were long ago ordained to saluation▪
though the accomplishment thereof
they must expect with patience.
            4. And this God did, to the praise of the
glorie of his name, Ephes. 1. 6. 6. 
                  
                     •
                  or herein
appeared loue, not that we loued God, but
that he loued vs, 
               
                  •
               . Iohn 4. 10. This is Gods
great goodnesse, that hath prepared for vs
an euerlasting kingdome before as yet we
were.
            5. Seeing then that God in his gracious
decree of electiō, hath sorted out some to
euerlasting saluation, we must take heed of
2 gulfs, that we fal not into them: the one
is of superstition, not to thinke with the
Papistes, that it is presumption to be
sure of that which God hath most surely
and certainly decreed: the other is of presumption,
that men without good ground
be not too confident in their hope, thinking
to be saued whatsoeuer they do: but
that as the Apostle saith, We worke out our
saluation with feare and trembling, and labour
to adde dayly somewhat to our assurance:
that as saint Peter saith, We giue
dili
                     •
                  ence to make our calling and electiō sure,
and seale the same vnto our soules by the
fruits thereof. This assurance of saluation

is neither impossible to be had,Assurance of heauen is neither impossible, nor yet easie to be had. as the Papist
thinketh, nor yet easie to be had, as the
carnal Protestant thinketh. It may be had,
but with much study and faithfull endeuor
and godly care, by feare and trembling.
Happie are they, which by Gods grace
haue attained to this gift and heauenly
worke, as all wee which beleeue in
Christ shall in good time before we go
hence by Gods grace attaine vnto it:
then shall we with patience runne out
our course, and nothing can happen
so grieuous which this happie assurance of
heauen will not make easie vnto vs. That
we may say with Prophet Dauid: I
had fainted, if I had not beleeued to see the
goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the liuing,
Psal. 27. 13. Ambrose saith well:
Manipulis beatae vitae si quid accidit aduersi,
tanquam sterilis auena al
                     •
                  sconditur, &c. By
this bundle of our hope of eternal life, if any
thing fall out crossely, it is hid as wild oates or
weedes in an handful of corne: that like as in
a peece of good wheate a few weeds are
not seene; no more is aduersitie felt, where
heauen is hoped for.
         
         
            
            The seuenteenth Lecture.
            
               
                  Verse 25. O righteous father, the world also
hath not knowne thee.
            
            IN these verses following, the meanes
are expressed whereby we may attaine
vnto euerlasting glory, described in the
former verse, and they are two: the knowledge
of God, vers. 25. and the liuely sense
and feeling of Gods loue, verse 26. First,
in this verse our Sauior sheweth, that the
world is vtterly ignorant of God, and void
of true knowledge.
            1. As the Euangelist testifieth,
               The blindnes & ignorance of the world. He was
in the world, and the world was made by him,
and the world knew him not, Iohn 1. 10. So
the Apostle rehearseth out of the Psalme,
There is none that vnderstandeth, none that
seeketh after God, Rom 3. 11.
            2. Such a worldly man was Pharao, who
prophanely said: I know not the Lord, neither
wil I let Israel go, Exod. 5. 2. Such an
ignorant person and blasphemous wretch
was the messenger of the King sent for Elisha:
Behold this euil (saith he) commeth of
the Lord, why should I waite on the Lord any
longer. 2. Kin. 6. 33.
            
               
3. Like as a foole or ideot knoweth not
the way into the citie; such fooles are all
wordly men, that know not the way
which leadeth to the celestiall Ierusalem,
Eccles. 10. 15. who are herein worse then
the oxe or asse, which know their owner
and their masters crib, Isay 13. but these
haue no knowledge of God, who made
them and dayly feedeth them.
            4. The cause of this ignorance of the
world, is the hardnes of their heart. Eph. 4
18, because through their corrupt and froward
affections, they corrupt that light of
nature which they haue, Because when they
knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither
were thankefull, but became vaine in
their imaginations, and their foolish hart was
full of darknesse, Rom. 1. 21.
            5. We see then what a dangerous thing
it is, not to haue the knowledge of God,
and to be ignorant of his wayes: all such
are as yet of the world, and being of the
world are vnder the regiment and kingdome
of Satan: vnder Christs protection
they are not, for he prayeth not for the
world, Iohn 17. 9. This should be a caueat
to all those, who, some of contempt, some
of negligence, care not for the knowledge
of God or his word. Ambrose well saith,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               Leprae medicina verbū est,
               Lib. 5 in Luc. 
               contemptus vtique
verbi, lepra mentis est: The word is the medicine
for the leprosie of the soule, the contempt
then of the word, maketh the soule leprous.
Though a man had no other sins to condēne
him (& yet ignorāce cānot be alone,Ignorance a sufficiēt cause of condemnation.
but hath other sinnes following it) it were
a sufficient cause of condemnation, that he
regardeth not to know God: as the Prophet
saith▪ 
               My people go into captiuitie, because
they haue no knowledge, Isay 5. 13.
            
               But I know him,
               Doct. 2. 
               and these haue known that
thou hast sent me.
               Al holy knowledge deriued from Christ. We know God, because
Christ first knoweth, and by him and from
him his members also know: so that Christ
to his church is the fountaine and author
of all spirituall knowledge.
            1. No man hath seene God at any time, the
onely begotten sonne, which is in the bosome
of the father, he hath declared him. Iohn
1. 18.
            2. Nicodemus til he came to Christ, was
ignorant of the first principles of Christian
religiō, he knew not what it was to be born
again, Iohn 3. The holy Apostle could not
find out true knowledge at the feete of
Gamaliel, nor in the sect of the Pharises:
he was taught the Gospell by no other
meanes, but by the reuelation of Iesus

Christ, Galat. 1. 12. neither had Zacheus
euer be come the child of Abraham, if he
had not come downe from the figge tree
and followed Christ, Luke 19.
            3. So that as the Israelites could neuer
haue found out the way to the promised
land, through the vast and vnknowne
wildernesse, vnlesse Christ had gone before
them in a cloudie piller by day, and
a fiery piller by night: and like as Moses
could neuer haue described the forme and
fashion of the tabernacle, if the Lord had
not first shewed it him in the mount: so as
impossible it is, without Christs direction
in his word, to find out the way to eternal
life. He is therefore that oliue tree, that
doth conuey into the candlesticke of the
church, that oile and fatnesse, whereby the
light thereof is cherished and preserued,
Zach. 4.
            4. For none in heauen or in earth was
found worthy to open the book of Gods
secrets, and to looke thereon, but onely
the lambe, Reu. 5. 3. 9. The booke had remained
sealed still, if Christ had not taken
the booke out of the right hand of him
that sate vpon the throne, and opened the
seales thereof.
            5. First then their blind endeuor is condemned,

which by the light of nature
thinke to find out the truth. The Philosophers
among the heathen,A vaine labor to seeke for true wisdome without Christ. and wise among
the Gentiles, much busied themselues
to find out the truth, but they labored
in vaine. The three wise-men that
came from the East, did not content them
selues with their humane wisedome and
natural experience, but followed the conduct
of the starre to seeke for Christ. If
Saul must haue a prophet to tell him what
was become of his fathers asses; to find
out heauen, hath much more need of a
propheticall light.
            Secondly, all carnal and secure persons
are admonished, that if they desire knowledge,
they should seek it at Christs hands
in his word: it is no maruell that so many
yet continue in ignorance, seeing they despise
the meanes of knowledge. Heauen
cannot be scaled without Iacobs ladder,
the top whereof resteth vpon Christ, Gen.
28.
               Amb. serm. 14▪ in Psal. 1 19. One well saith, Nemini credas tuum,
nisi praeeunte lucernae istius luce processum, sit
fides itineris tui praeuia, sit tibi iter scriptura
diuina: Trust no man to direct thee, vnles this
light go before: let faith be the foreman in thy
iorney, and let thy way be by the scripture.
            
            
               Verse 26.Doct. 3. 
               And I haue declared vnto them

thy name, and will declare it.] Here our Sauior
promiseth the perpetuall assistance of
his spirit, and continuall declaration of his
word to his church,God will neuer leaue his Church destitute of his word. that as he had preached
and declared it, so he would still instruct
his seruants, & not leaue his church
destitute of the ministerie of his word.
            1. Thus the Lord promiseth by his prophet:
I will make my couenant with them,
saith the Lord, my spirit that is vpon thee, &
the words which I haue put in thy mouth shal
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of
the seed of thy seed (saith the Lord) from
henceforth, euen for euer. Isay 59. 21.
            2. Thus our Sauiour leauing the world,
ordained his Apostles in his stead, to be
witnesses of him to the ends of the world.
Act. 1. 8. The Apostles also constituted Euangelists,
as Timothy, 2. Tim. 1. 6. To second
their work, the Euāgelists ordained
Bishops, Pastors and Elders in euery citie
Tit. 1. 5. to finish the work of the Gospell.
            3. For like as it is not enough to sow the
corne, and cast it into the earth, but it must
haue both the first and latter raine, Ioel 2.
23. so it is necessary that Apostles & other
succeeding Ministers, should water that
which Paul and the other Apostles had

planted, 1. Cor. 3. 6. And like as after the
house is builded, it must be continually repaired,
lest through the idlenesse of the
hands the house drop through, Eccl. 10. 18.
so after the foundation laid, and building
finished by Christ and his Apostles the
chiefe builders, others must be raised vp
to repaire the ruines of Gods house.
            4. Therefore as Saint Paul saith, Christ
gaue some to be Apostles, some Prophets,
some Euangelists, some Pastors and teachers,
for the gathering together of the saints
the work of the ministery, the edificatiō of the
body of Christ, Eph. 4. 11. So that al these offices
are necessary, Prophets to assist, Apostles
and Euangelists to second Prophets,
Pastors and teachers to succeed Euangelists,
that all the Saints in all ages may be
gathered together, and the whole body of
Christ edified.
            5. How much then are we to giue
thankes vnto God, for this his prouident
care ouer his church, neuer leauing the
same destitute of his word, which we see
to the praise of God this day: for God
hath furnished this Church of England
with such abundance of learned pastors,
as I thinke few churches in the world may
compare with it. So that as Elias ascending,

left his spirit doubled vpon Elisha:
as Ambrose well noteth,Ambros. Epist. 60. 
               O haereditas preciosa,
in qua plus haeredi relinquitur, quàm
habetur: mirum in modum plus Helias gratiae
dimisit in terris, quam secum portauit ad coelos:
A precious inheritance, wherein more is
left to the heire, then was first had; Elias leaueth
more grace in earth, then he caried to
heauen: so I doubt not but many faithfull
seruants of God departed this life, haue
transmitted their spirit and giftes double
vpon their posteritie. Seeing Christ then
hath such care to instruct his flocke, as he
hath declared his word, so doth yet and
will further declare: let no man despise
this so great riches, but profit more and
more by the ministerie of the word, that
the oftener it is declared, the greater may
be our increase in faith: that as Gods graces
are doubled vpon our teachers, so they
may be multiplied also vpon the hearers.
            
               That the loue wherewith thou hast loued
them,
               Doct. 4. 
               may be in them: that is, they may haue
a liuely sense & feeling of the loue of God:Knowledge without sense and feeling fruitlesse.
that as they abound in knowledge, so they
may also be quickned in the liuely feeling
and apprehension of it.
            1. This is that which the Apostle saith:
That ye may be able to comprehend with all

Saints, what is the breadth, length, depth and
height▪ and to know the loue of Christ which
passeth knowledge. Ephes. 3. 18. 19.
            2 Such sense of the loue of Christ the
Apostle Paul had, who thus in particular
professeth of himselfe: Christ loued me, and
gaue himselfe for me, Gal. 2. 20. Thus also
the prophet Dauid spake from his inward
feeling of Gods goodnesse toward him:
how deare are thy thoghts toward me, ô God,
how great is the sum of them! Psal. 132. 17.
            3. Like as Iob saith, I haue heard of thee
by the hearing of the eare, but now mine eye
seeth thee. Iob 42. 5. so they which haue
only a speculatiue knowledge of God, do
heare as with the eare; but they that haue
an inward feeling and experience of his
loue, do see him with the eye: this the prophet
Dauid calleth, the tast of the soule:
Tast ye and see how gracious the Lord is, Psa.
34▪
                8. Like as Manna, though pleasant to
the sight, yet was more pleasant to the tast:
so is the mercie and loue of God more
ioyous felt and comprehended, then vnderstood
onely and apprehended.
            4 For we are commanded to loue God
with all the heart, soule and mind, Mat. 22.
37. God must not only haue our mind and
vnderstanding, but our heart and affectiō:

we do not otherwise honour God with
all our strength.
            5 Hence then we are taught a most nenessarie
point of Christian doctrine, that
we should labour to our knowledge to ad
affection, to our iudgement zeale, to our
vnderstanding cōscience & feeling. Many
seeme to know much, but there is withall
a coldnesse in their heart.We must not onley vnderstād the word but ioy in it. Happy it is with
those, that when they heare the word, do
not onely conceiue and vnderstand it as
Herode did, Marke. 6. 20. but their hearts
are inflamed, as the two Disciples, while
Christ preached vnto them, found their
hearts burne within them, Luke 24. The
Prophet Dauid saith: O how I loue thy law!
Psal. 119. 97.Serm. 20. in Psal. 119. whereof Ambrose well saith;
Diligere amplius est, quàm custodire, hoc necessitatis
est & timēs, illud charitatis: To loue
is more then to keepe, this is of feare and necessitie,
that proceedeth of charitie▪
                So o
                  •
               r
obedience to God should proceede from
a willing affection and louing heart. That
as God delighteth in the faithfull, My
delight is with the children of men. Pro. 8. 31
so our delight may be in God, that we
may say with the prophet, The desire of
our soule is to thy name, and to the remēbrance
               
Isa. 26. 8. So shall we be sure, that if we desire
his waies now, the Lord wil delight in
vs for euer, and cause vs to enter
into his euerlasting ioy.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   