
      
         
            
            
            NEVVES FROM Sir Roger Williams.
            With a discourse printed at Rheines containing the most happie victorie, lately obtained by the Prince de Conty, Lieutenant generall ouer the Kinges forces, in Aniou, Touraine, Maine, Poictu, Berry, Blaysois, Vendomois, Dunois, high and lower Limosin, and Perche, against the rebellious Leaguers, enemies to his Maiestie.
            Whereunto is annexed the order or agreement of the Court of Parliament, held in Normandy at sundry times, and now lastly confirmed the eighteenth of August, to the vtter abolishing of the Popes authoritie, the taking away of his reuenewes, and the burning of his Bulles.
            Printed by Iohn Woolfe, and are to be sold by Andrevv White, at the Royall Exchange, ouer against the Conduit in Cornewall. Anno. 1591.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Copie of a Letter, sent by Sir Roger Williams to the Citizens of Paris, concerning some false rumors by them lately giuen out.
            
               To the Colonels, Captaines, aswell Spaniards as others beeing at this present in Paris.
               
            
            
               HAuing receiued intelligence by men of credite and good condition, that you & your Allies in the Cittie of Paris, as well the maisters of the Sorbonistes, as all other the fauorers of the Spanish power, haue giuen foorth a false brute, that you haue challenged the English forces, lying at Hauberuiller, to the combat, number for number. Whereunto I answere, that true it is, wee are but foure of the meanest companies, which might bee chosen out of the Queenes Maiesties forces, our Soueraigne Lady and Mistrisse, the Queenes most excellent Maiestie of England: yet notwithstanding, if you please to doe vs the credite (hauing leaue of the Kings Maiestie our maister) we wil meet you with two hundred English Pike-men, and a hundred Muskettiers, betwene the Villette, and Paris. Where with the helpe of the great God, the world shall

testifie, that I, and my companies, shall not haue the least feare of you. True it is, that for mine owne part, I doe esteeme you braue soldiors, and would doe more, if you were conducted by Iulian Romero, your late Collonell, Mondragon Sentio Dauille, and the like, who of late haue beene discomfited and slaine: but I doubt, that Sir Alexander de Mantes, and those which now commaund you, do willingly perswade the Gouernors and Ladies of Paris, that ther is none other conduct in the world but theirs: onelie this I thinke, that what they doe is vppon compulsion. As for mee and my companies, we haue obtained leaue of the King, to shew that wee are resolute to defend and disproue your rumors to be false & forged, if so it please you to repaire to the place appointed, where I determine, that a hundred French Gentlemen in my companie, (who haue humbly besought the King, to permit them to trie their valour with Pikes, though it were against sixe score of you, of such as you can bring) shall proue and allowe the same to be iust, & lawful. Thus staying for your answers, I kisse your hands in curtesie. From Hauberuiller this 16 of Iuly.
            
         
         
            A Letter sent by the King, to my Lord the Prince de Conty, vpon the taking of the Cittie of Louuiers in Normandie.
            
            
               COusin, God hath so highly fauoured me, that my Cittie of Louuiers is this daye deliuered into my obeysance. The execution whereof was doone at the houre of midday, and in my

presence: for ten of mine possessed themselues with one of the gates of the said Cittie. The Baron of Biron, whom I caused to come neere with my forces, was also so soone entred therein; notwithstanding the fight was verie fierce, in regard of the resistance made by the inhabitants, and Fontaine Martel, who had his companie of an hundred Cuirasses in the said Cittie: yet it pleased God I became maister, loosing there not aboue eighteene or twentie men, among whom were fiue Captaines. Beside, I found my selfe able to make one of the gates of the Cittie to yeeld, where thorow most part of the men of warre and the inhabitants withdrew themselues. The Bishop of Eureux, and Fontaine-Martel, were found, taken by the hands of my Soldiours. There was found in the Cittie a great quantitie of Corne and Wine, beside other munitions, and the place it selfe in such estate, as it may be called one of the Forts of my realme. And heerevpon I pray God to preserue my good Cousin in his safe and holy guarde. 
            
               From the Campe at Vernon,
                   the sixt of Iune, 1591.
               
               Signed, Henrie. And a little lower. Potier.
               
            
            
               On the outside was written.
               
                  To my Cousin, the Prince of Conty.
               
            
         
         
            
            A discourse of the victory obtained by my Lorde the Prince of Conty, Lieuetenant general ouer the Kings forces in Aniou, Tourin, Maine, Poctu, Berry, Blaisois, Vendomois, Dunois, high and nether Liuosin, and Perche, against the rebellious Leagers enemies to his Maiestie.
            
               MY Lord the Prince of Conty, being come into the countrie of Poictu, with the Armie which he conducted for the Kings seruice, consisting of a great number of Noble men and Infanterie, to the end he might purge this Prouince of the oppression and tirannie, which the rebellious Leaguers (enemies to his Maiestie) exercised on his subiects: to bring those places which they vnlawfully vsed into his Maiesties obedience, and freely to deliuer this Prouince: Being aduertised the Vicount de la Guierche had besieged Belac with two Cannons, one Coluering, and a Bastard peece of ordinance: resolued with himselfe to march right & directly thither, to raise the siege of the said Vicount, or bid him battel, if he durst tarrie his comming. But his excellencie hauing attained so far as Lucac,, a very great dayes iourney, was giuen to vnderstand, that the Vicount himselfe had withdrawn his siege, and according to the naturall villanie, wher-withall the Leaguers are familiarly acquainted,

had betaken himselfe with his Cauallery to Chauuigny, leauing his Cannon and Infanterie at Mont Morillon. Which when my Lord the prince perceiued, and that he had lost the occasion of giuing a faire checke to the presumptuous Vicount (who by an extreame mischance saued himselfe from the sight of my Lord of Trimouile, he marched but a little before, and not able to be succoured by the prince, could not fight with him, but was constraind to leaue him to slight) concluded now with himselfe to fasten on the said Cittie of Mont-Morillon, which at the same time hee caused to be summoned: but they within being not willing to make any answer, his excellencie commanded to giue them certaine vollies with the cannon, after which he caused them to be summoned againe: but they stil continued in their resolution to keepe aloofe.
            On the morrowe (being the sixt day of Iune) at fiue of the clocke in the morning, his excellencie changed the batterie, which endured very furious till the tenth houre before midday, and then my Lord the prince commaunded to giue the assault, which was doone very couragiously on all sides, and continued the space of three long houres together. But in the end, our men hauing taken the high town, compelled the enemy to retire into the low towne (separated by the Riuer which passeth thorow the middest) where they hid themselues within a Chappell, and there preuailed so well, as they did greatly endamage our men on the side toward the high towne. But the Prince seeing aduisedly

into the danger, sent fiue or six charges frō the Cannon against the gate of the Chappell: which being immediatly broken, the enemie was constrained quickly to forsake it. This gaue our men occasion to pursue them so brauely & chearfully, that God (who euermore assisteth with his diuine bountie, such as in good zeale fight for his name, and in so iust a quarrell, and for the seruice of their King) fauored them so gratiously, that they conquered both the high and low Townes of the said Mont-morillon, hauing put to the sword more then fiue hundred footemen, and sixtie Cuirasses, two maisters of the field, and all the Captaines slaine, wounded, or taken prisoners, whereof my Lord the Prince caused manie to bee hanged, by example of that which the Leagers did at S. Sauin.
            
            This braue exploit was doone, without losse of aniemore on our side, then one soldiour, being of his Excellencies Guarde who was slaine, and one Gentleman, named the Seigneur of S. Martin. The Marshal of our companie of armed men, was hurt with an Harquebuze in the arme, and verie few of our soldiours beside were wounded. Three other places afterward were yelded, to wit, the Townes of Chauuigny, S. Sauin, le Blanke en Berry, with the Castles of Bourg-Archambault, Plaisance, Bel-Arbre, Auailles, Belauue, Angles, and Bisse, beside manie other that are as willing. So that more faire and fortunate effect hath not beene seene, then of this happy and signall victorie, wherin it pleased God to blesse my Lorde the Prince, as he hath euermore done in all his enterprises, returning still to the great aduauntage

of the Kings affaires and seruice, whereby his poore people shall receiue great comfort. Thus first was the siedge of Belac raised by the Vicount of Guierche, and onelie vppon apprehension of the comming of my Lorde the Prince: the Vicount with his cauallery in rout, posted away in the greatest disorder that could bee: Mont-morillon taken by assault: all the Leaguers Infanterie shamefully scattered: foure Cannons besides other munition, and seauen Ensignes taken: so many places likewise yeelded at the same time into the Kings obeysance: and infinite other, who attend nothing else, but that his Excellencie will receiue them to their first and naturall dutie, which is to obeye his Maiestie, as all good & true Frenchmen are bound to doe: to God therefore be all honour and glorie.
            The order of the assault, neither the names of the Captaines and heads of the contrary parte, is spoken of in this discourse: because it is but a letter or remembrance of the deed done and lately effected at the Campe at Mont-morillon.
            
         
         
            The order or agreement of the Court of Parlement held in Normandie.
            
            
               THe Courte and Chambers assembled, seeing the Kings letters of declaration, giuen at Mante the fourth of Iuly last, following vpon a former declaration made by the saide Lord, at his comming to the Crowne, wherein he confirmed what will he had to conserue whole and sound the religion catholike,

Apostolike and Romaine in this realme, had giuen in charge to proceed against one, naming himselfe the Nuntio of the pretended Pope Gregorie the xiiii. who contrary to the dignitie, authoritie of the said realme, and libertie of the French Church; published certaine Bulles in forme of admonition against the king, princes of his blood, and other princes, prelates, ecclesiasticall, officers of the Crowne, and all other his faithfull subiects and seruants. An other agreement was made by the Court the xxx. of Ianuarie. 1590, vpon the kings letters pattents, bearing date the fift of that moneth and yeere, against a pretended Legate come into Fraunce: whereby the said Courte made defences and inhibitious to all Curates, Vicars, and other ecclesiasticall officers, as also to all persons, of whatsoeuer qualitie or condition they were: not to receiue any charge, neither acte or expedition proceeding from the said pretended Legate. And if any were found so hardie, as to enterprise or proceed to the publication and reading thereof: it was enioined to all such as found them with the deed, on paine of being declared guiltie of high treason, to seaze vpon their bodies, and to present them in iustice before the Iudge royall. An other declaration was published in the Courte the xviii. day of August, 1591. with a coppie of the said pretended Bull, sent from the aboue named Gregorie, who calleth himselfe Pope, dated the first of March. 1590. Signed Vestrius Barbianus, and vnderneth A De Alexiis, and on the outside Registrata apud Marcellum Secretarium: wherevpon the Attourney

generall to the king, and Thomas the Aduocate generall proceeded in manner following.
            Among things naturall there is such an order, that one dependeth vpon an other, and to auoide confusion, the inferiour are subiects to the superiour. Euen so among men, the diuine prouidence hath giuen a naturall inclination, to one to commaund, and to others to obey, in whom lieth the greatnes, quiet, and welfare of realmes, and commonwealths, where the Kings, Princes, and Magistrates ordained to be aboue, are markes and prerogatiues more then other, which maketh them sacred & inuiolable, as representing liuely the image of the diuinitie. Such therefore are we bound to obey, as the wisest in all times past haue with one voice witnessed, that the bonds which we hold or retaine one to another, of what estate soeuer they be: are not of such vertue and efficacie, as those whereby we are restrained and bound to regarde and honor our Kings: to expose our liues, goods, and all meanes else for their safetie, and for the execution of their commaundements. But beyond this naturall inclination, there is nothing so much exprest in all the holy Scripture, & which hath bin more religiously obserued in the church of God: then vsing praiers publike and particulerly, for the prosperitie of Kings and Emperours, albeit they were Pagans and Infidels. Such likewise ought to be the vowes and oraisons of the Prelats and Pastours, for the life of their Princes, and prosperitie in their affaires, following therein the auncient councels and determinations of the good fathers,

and holy personages: and so well hath this order beene preserued, as thereby hath the catholike religion flourished, and realmes and great Seigneries filled with patience and charitie, with continuall and free inuocation on the name of God. And principally might this be noted in this realme of Fraunce, the true prop or stay of religion, and refuge to the seat Apostolike in all hir afflictions: till now that certaine ambitious and vnthankefull men, beeing little contented with the excessiue good turnes they haue receiued from our Kings, and aspiring to their height of estate and life, haue filled this Realme with Sedition, Fellonie, Barbarisme, and crueltie. And as this vnhappie and insatiable ambition, hath made them forget all right and pietie, so well knowe these Rebellious coniurers, that in all times religiō hath had a most mightie puissance ouer men, and that vnder the shadow thereof, the Pagans themselues haue helde their Monarchies, estates, and authorities▪ euen so vnder this pretence they lay downe the foundations of their pernicious purposes, and making trafike of the gifts and blessings of the holy spirit, haue with counting money bought the selling toongs of many ecclesiasticall persons, made drunke with like ambition, and the great promises of the authors of this rebellion, and by blasphemie and hipocrisie, haue filled the house of God with all execrable abhominations, making the flesh to sound where the word of God ought to be preached, by burnings, murders, massacres, spoiles, and subtil practises, and by fearefull outrages haue deceiued and drawne

to them the worst sort of people, the weakest and fanaticall spirits.
            Then haue they called to the partage and dissipation of this flourishing Realme the Spaniards, auncient enemies to true Catholikes, and this French estate, without whose ayde, neuerthelesse the predecessours of their King had neuer obtained the crowne of Spaine, and all the people yet liue in Arrianisme and Sothike heresie. And to heape impietie and wickednesse together, they caused to be doone that cruell, abhominable and detestable Paracide on the late most Christian King, a religious and catholike Prince, whom God absolue.
            Nowe seeing that the diuine prouidence hath miraculouslye preserued and raised King Henrie the fourth, raigning at this present, (who in so iust a cause is assisted by all the Princes of his bloud, the Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and the better parte of good Prelats, the principall officers of the Crowne, and the Nobilitie beside, who all with one voice, demaund and breath for nothing else but the expiation of a deed so hainous, the reestablishing of this estate, as also the religion Catholike, Apostolike, and Romaine, and the restitution of those great Signeuries, which vniustly they haue detained in his realme of Nauar since the time of his maiesties great graundfather, and to reproue the title which they by vsurpation pretend to this Realme:) these rebels opposing themselues against him, haue made, & do make, by their accustomed practises, to run vnder hande diuers

scandalous libels against the honour of the king, the princes of his bloud, & his good & faithful subiects: to ouerthrow all order, to induce thē forsake the yoke of obedience, & wander from the seruice & fidelitie, which they owe to his highnes▪ by the disposition of all right, diuine and humane. Notwithstanding, they shal not be shaken by such sinister deceites, the grace of God assisting, the wisdome & valour of the king, their loialty in defence of this Realmes dignitie, & the perfect freedom of the French Church: following the examples of their predecessors who in like & lesse case, imployed themselues, & brauely held head against all the Popes enterprises: who somtimes forgetting thē
               selues against their benefactors, would insult vpon the preheminences, rightes, and authoritie of the French church, and this Realme, which stands exempt from al excommunications, & interdictions: as the Popes, namely, the hottest, and most audacious, hath beene inforced to confesse, by many autenticall Buls; yea and in case of commination, or declaration of such censures, by great and graue deliberation of all orders, haue beene with vnanimitie withstood, as well by substraction of obedience, as of money and goods.
            Which examples of so waightie consequence, might and ought with-hold the pretended Pope, by name called Gregorie the 14. from enterprising in this Realme a matter so bolde and monstrous, as to sende and publish certaine infamous libelles, scandalous, and full of impietie, sedition, and heresie, vnder a masque of Religion, in forme

of Bulles, by his pretended Nuntio M. Marcilius Laudrianus, authorised (as he saith) vnder his two Seales. But the rather is this done, in respect that the Pope Sixtus Quintus his predecessor, was in the beginning of his pontificacie left beguiled by the perturbers of this Realme, and being afterward by certaine Princes and especiall Lords informed touching the trueth and estate therof, that all the principall Catholiques and men of woorth and the goods of all qualities, were (to the great disgrace and daunger of the catholique Religion) pursued by the Leaguers and rebels: chased from their houses, pietie and religion trod vnder foot, the Churches by them contuminate and ouerthrowen, the Priests and religious ransomed and slaine, and a million of such innocent soules as haue been cruelly massacred, continuallye crying to God for vengeance due to such misdeedes, and the taking of his holy name so wickedly in vaine: he would now by his fatherlye prouision safelye foresee, this scandale to christianitie, by abridging the course of his life so shamefullye practised, and by the Spanish faction hindred from any conuenable remedye, which yet turned to the shame and confusion of the Leaguers and rebelles. Hereupon the Attourney generall calling for the sayd writing or Bull in forme of an excommunication or interdict from the saide Pope Gregorie the xiiii. of that name, against the King raigning at this present, and all the good Catholiques of his Realme: for the obseruation of Iustice, ordeined

that the saide Marcilius Laudrianus the pretended Nuntio, should as a common enemye and kindler of hatred, be pursued, taken and apprehended aliue or dead, to be deliuered to iustice if it might be possible. And if he happened not to be apprehended, he should within three dayes be summoned to the Town of Pontellarche, which was neerest to the Cittie of Rome, wherin he had published the said scandalous Libell, there to be proceeded against, according to the Lawes of the Realme. In meane while, it was most expressely forbidden to all the Kings subiects, of what estate or qualitie soeuer they were, not to acknowledge or vse any obeysaunce to the said Pope, nor to pay him directlye or indirectlye any right, vnder the name of first fruits or such like pretence. And not to pursue or receiue of him or any other, of what qualitie or condition soeuer they were, his complices adherent, any collations, confirmations, or prouisions for benefices in this Prouince and primatie of Normandie, graces, dispensions, or other expeditions, neither to answere, beare or cause to be borne, by waye of banque or otherwise, golde or Siluer to the Court of Rome, likewise not to obey or pay any thing to the Archbishops, Bishops or other Prelates his adherentes, who had put in execution any of the pretended diffamatorie Libelles, so scandalous in forme of excommunication and interdiction: on paine of confiscation of bodie and goods, as infringers and perturbers of the publique peace. And that the ecclesiasticall

persons should be admonished to assemble together, according to the Kings will contained in his letters, that they being spoyled by the ambition of the League, setting before their eyes the feare of God, the quiet of their consciences, the honor and dignitie of their charges, the conseruation of the catholique Religion, the vertue and successe of such as haue aduaunced the same: should neuer suffer the libertie of the French Church to be in any sorte diminished. But being assisted by their Kings and their soueraign iustice, to oppose themselues against all the Popes enterprises: considering whē they were knowen in their greatest promotions, they that were enemie to the Crown of Fraunce, euer vsed some meanes and practises against them. As it happened by Pope Martin the fifth, in the cause of the Emperour Sigismund, when he declared against the King and many other: yet they reestablished this fair French church in her former right, in purging it from the vices which slipt thereinto, by the violent passions of these disturbers, and such as they framed of their minde: which to effect, they held Counselles and Smodes, true and only remedies against scismes and heresies: moreouer, by that Court was foreseene and preuented the scandales that might arise by the exposing and reading of such Libelles and pretended admonitions.
            This Court and Chambers assembled, haue ordayned and doo ordaine, that these Letters shalbe published, heard and registred: requiring the Attorney

Generall to the King, who alreadye hath receiued them, openlye to declare and manifest them, how that the saide Bull giuen at Rome the first of March 1591. is abusiue, scandalous and iniurious, tending to sedition and trouble of all the Christian estate: contrary to the woord of God, holy decrees and liberties of the French Church, proceeding from wrong and not from right, stuffed with errour, impietie & deceit. It is ordeined that it shalbe torne and burned before the Pallace gate, by the Executioner of publique iustice. Forbidding all persons, of what estate, quality or condition soeuer, to keep, read, publish or commune therof, on the paine of confiscation both of bodie and goods. Likewise that all Colleges, Couents, Chapters, Communalties, bodies of Citties, Curates, Vicars and such like▪ shall not assist or fauor such communications, publications or readings, on paine to be attainted & conuicted of high treason, and depriuation of all priueledges, prerogatiues and exemptions. Commaunding likewise al persons, that shall haue knowledge of such as secretly keep it, read or talke therof: quicklye to reueale them to the Attorney generall, or his substitutes in the place, who haue in charge to make secret search, and thereof to certifie the Courte, on the paines aforesaid.
            The Court also declareth, the said Pope Gregorye the xiiij. of that name, an enemye to the King and the estate of Fraunce, as also the peace of christianitie: a troubler of the religion catholique, apostolique

and Romain: a pertaker with the League and coniuration, doone aswell against the King now raigning, as also the late King Henrye the third of most happy memory, traiterously and cruelly murdered by the meanes and procurement of the saide rebelles. Forbidding all persons of this prouince and primatie of Normandie, to send to Rome for obtaining of Buls, writings, collations, graces, dispensations, or other expeditions, neither to carry directly or indirectlye thither, golde or siluer, on paine of being declared an enemye to the estate and depriuation of their goods and possessions. Moreouer, that the said Marcilius Laudrianus calling himselfe Nuntio to the sayd Gregorye, shalbe apprehended aliue or dead, to be deliuered to iustice, and if he cannot be apprehended, he shalbe summoned three daies in the publique places in Pontellarche, being neerest to the Cittie of Roane: the first eight dayes hence, and the two other by three dayes and three dayes following. This dooth the Court declare for good and avayleable, and that this present agrement shalbe sent into all the Baylywickes of this iurisdiction, to the end that none may pretend ignorance therof.
            Pronounced in iudgement at Caen in Parliament the third day of August, 1591.
            
               Signed. De Medyne.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               THis Edict being published, the Popes Bulles were burned in diuers places of Normandie, diuerslye in some place after one sort, in some place after another sorte: in as infamous manner as could be, and to omit all the rest, I will only shew you how it was burned at Toures.
            
            The Maiestrates and the common people of Toures being assembled, before the Pallace gate, there was a Piller erected, a little distant from the foot thereof, there was a fire made by the common Hangman of the Towne: then did he take the Bull and hang it on the top of the Piller: which being doone, he kindled another fier at the very foot of the Piller, which by degrees crept vp the Piller, vntill it took hold of the Bull which presently was consumed with fire, to the great ioy of all the beholders.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   