
      
         
            
            
            A
Briefe discourse of
Warre.
            Written by Sir Roger Williams
Knight; VVith his opinion concerning
some parts of the
Martiall Discipline.
            Newly perused.
            
               Imprinted at London, by Thomas Orwin,
dwelling in Paternoster Row, ouer against
the Signe of the Checker.
1590.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST HOnorable,
my singular and best Lord,
Robert Earle of Essex and Ewe, Vicount
Hereford and Bourghchier, Lord Ferrers
of Chartley, Bourghchier and Louayne,
Master of the Queenes Maiesties horse,
and Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter:
            Roger Williams wisheth increase of all
Honor and Vertue.
            
               MOst honorable Lord, hauing
busied my self more
than two yeares in writing
sundrie actions that
passed in our daies, especiallie
the great actions
of the Netherlanders since the first arriuall
of Duke D' alua, vntill the late sieges of
Sluce and Bergis, hauing resolued to print
and dedicate them vnto your Lordship: diuers
occasions perswades me to craue pardon
for a time; assuring your Lordship, if
health and libertie permits leaue, to present

them vnto your selfe in the French
tongue: hoping by those meanes to bee
rightlier iudged, than I haue been hethervnto.
In troth, but for the negligence of a
seruant that lost part of my discourses, I
would not haue printed any thing without
the whole; wherefore I haue taken boldnes
to present your Lordship with some of my
lost papers, humblie desiring you to accept
them, as from a Souldier that hath but smal
skill in writing or inditing; but could I doo
better, assuredlie it should bee vnto your
selfe, and shall bee in any thing I can performe.
Beare with my faults, be assured of
my loue, and command my life, next vnto
my sacred Soueraigne & deare Countrie.
            
               Your Lordships most bounden
to serue:
Roger Williams.
               
            
         
         
            
            To all men of Warre
in generall.
            
               NOble Souldiers of what qualitie soeuer,
where I discourse of the vertues
and vices that aduanceth and ouerthroweth
all actions, all that hath
their honor to lose may claime part of
the vertues, neither needes any to
bee grieued at the vices vnlesse they
condemne themselues guiltie; the
greatest Captaines of Europe, can
witnesse, that I robbed neither superiour nor companion of his
right, much lesse hath been euer my thoughts to wrong any generall
action: the which all or the most of you that knowe me
will beare witnesse, when my Netherlanders discourses with
others, comes out. I thinke Gonsalua was called the last
graund Captaine, but I perswade my selfe neither he nor any other
before him had euer carried that name, without the seconding
of a number of braue companions. The most worthiest
Caesar although hee was highly ambitious, notwithstanding
in his Commentaries written by himselfe, hee imputed
part of his honour vnto his Lieftenants and Officers. Wherefore
should not others doo at the least the like, being not worthie
to be compared vnto the basest sort of his followers: no
honorable minds can bee free from honorable ambition, but
the ambitiō may be such (let the minde be neuer so great) if hee
robbs the honor of his companions, he wrongs himselfe and imbates
his action. Few men of iudgement but knowes it impossible
for one man to conduct an Armie without Officers, &
vnpossible for any state to knowe the worth of their Captaines
without being in action with great enemies: but for that triall

the Parisians, Gauntois, Antwerpians and such, would onelie
place squadrons in battailes, chuse grounds, march in what
order you would, arme men in good order, fortifie and discourse,
with other matters, to the shew, as though they had been great
masters of Campes: but when they were tried with the furie
of expert executioners, their warres prooued but May-games.
Although I perswade myselfe my Discourse bee Vnpleasant,
with small iudgement: notwithstanding, being perswaded
by honourable good friends, I tooke courage to print it: true
it is, no action ought to be printed without the consent of sundrie
Actors, or at the least by one Principall, which ought to
signe his workes with his name, otherwise wee finde the most
Actors wronged and robbed of the most of their reputation:
some with enuie or malice, others with glorious ambition:
sometimes you haue most honorable quiet Estates wronged
with ambitious follies libells, the which are hardlie knowne
and found out: but being signed by the author, deserues hee
well, the honour is his; if ill, the shame shall be his. Men of
Warre ought to bee more open hearted, more liberall, and more
affable, than any other profession, although their secrets ought
to bee but vnto fewe, their hearts must be open vnto the multitude,
and liberall to confesse good deserts as well as with their
purses: although their resolutions be agreed on by two or three,
notwithstanding the more affable they shewe themselues vnto
the multitude, the greater will be their voges and loues. Some
tearme men wise for not speaking many words: true it is, idle
speaches are windes, and a disgrace vnto the speaker; but bee
they to good purpose, the more hee speakes, the greater is his
praise. You must thinke to repeate great actions, it requires
many words, to perswade the fewe expert companions to offend
or defend, a fewe words will serue: but to animate or disswade
the rude multitude, the more words and the oftner the better.
Wee doo finde the most Conquerours were greatlie aduanced
with the orations of their Orators, as well amongst the seruilest
sort as the rude multitude: without speaches, the wise can
not be discerned from the foolish, nor without triall of gouernement

against equall enemies, the perfects Captaine cannot bee
knowne from the most ignorant. Otherwise ignorance will
condemne Generalls, their followers and actions let them bee
euer so great, although themselues neuer carried places of reputation
either in field or towne, nor commanded more than ouer
their owne seruants, saying wee haue knowne great Potentates
Campes, and Courts. Let no man bee so simple to iudge them
worthie to condemne great actions or their actors, without being
imployed in their great affaires, it is hard for men to gouerne
themselues well, harder to gouerne a few, more harder to
gouerne many, much more a great multitude; some can gouerne
a houshold, and cannot gouerne a towne; some can gouerne a
towne, and not a whole countrie. A man may be sufficient to
conduct a priuate companie, and not sufficient to command a
Regiment; likewise sufficient for a Coronell, and not for a Generall.
But whether it be for policie or Armes, it is an error to
thinke men without triall worthie to bee compared vnto the others
tried, in what place soeuer great or small. Diuers play Alexander
on the stages, but fewe or none in the field. Our
pleasant Tarleton would counterfeite many artes, but hee
was no bodie out of his mirths. Many haue a vertue, few
hath many, none haue all: the most men lookes into their fellowes
faults, but fewe lookes into their owne; beare with mine,
I will beare with thine; loue mee, I will loue thee; let vs loue
each other, and God will loue vs all: on that condition noble
superiours, Roger Williams wisheth to you all honour and
happines, and to you companions, no worse than to himselfe▪
Farewell.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            EXperience and Learning must
confesse, all VVarres are maintained
with these three Principalls.

                  A good Chiefe;
                  A good Purse;
                  And good Iustice.
               
            
            
               ALl consists in the Chiefe: where
there is a good Chiefe, there is
good Iustice; & a braue Chiefe
cannot want a good Purse, if he
be second with his Prince or Estate:
if their purse faile, a braue
Chiefe will force his Enemies
Countreyes to maintaine his
action, hauing a good quarrell: with the sufferance of
the great God.
            Is he resolute and valiant? Al the rest of his Officers
and Souldiers will resolue themselues, no coward shall
be aduanced; taking alwaies care vnto their words and
deeds: assuring themselues, this resolute valiant Man
will aduance vs, doo we deserue it; doo we ill, his Honour
is such, he will not abide vs.
            Is he liberal and constant? Then are al that serue vnder
him sure to receiue their due, rather more than

lesse, that come into his hands, & assured to be recompenced
for their vigilant paines and trauell, and to bee
partakers aswel with his honorable acts, as with his liberall
Purse: neither backbiter nor flarterer dares call
in question the name of a braue man, much lesse none
of his familiar acquaintance. If they should, then is the
other sure to come to his answere, and not be condemned
without great faults, as noble Sir Philip Sidney was
wont to say, Let vs loue him for his small vertues, for a
number haue none at all.
            
            Is he couetous and miserable? He careth not what
wrong he dooth to recouer wealth, cause men to ende
their dayes in euerie light skirmish, weary others with
wants and discurtesies, keep the Officers of his Armie
in pickes and quarrels, cause them to disgrace one another,
lay al the fault on his felowes, spare neither friend
nor foe to recouer wealth; it is vnpossible for such a
Chiefe to end anie action honorablie: for he respects
the least of his bagges, more than his best Captaine;
and valures his crownes too good for his brauest souldiers.
A multitude are not to bee contented, without
consuming great treasure; the sight of his gold, & departing
with his treasure will cause him to wish all his
troopes dead to recouer their dues. In short time hee
will discredit his Estate and action.
            Is he ambitious, in such sort that he thinks none to
be valued vnto himselfe, and that all seruices are done
by himselfe, resoluing none shal be aduanced, but such
as flatter his humors, enuying all other mens fortune,
and vertues? That man careth not what becomes of his
State and Action, longer than they maintaine his ambition,
against all others, be it right or wrong.
            Is he proud and vaine glorious? All those that serue

vnder him, must flatter his fauorites to come vnto his
speech; when they come, there must bee nothing contraried;
if they doo, he will tearme them fooles, and his
fauorites deuise faults to condemne them, to please his
humors, and to maintaine his Gloria Patri.
            
            It is almost vnpossible for anie one to haue all these
vertues; or for anie to be free from al these vices. To say
troth, Ambition is giuen to men of warre, more than to
any other profession: but let him be assured, whosoeuer
hath it as I speake off, ouerthroweth any action, vnles
the great God will haue the contrarie.
            Some thinke it hard to know these men, because euery
man thinketh himself valiant & vertuous, or at the least
say honest & iust. Their valure must be iudged by their
deeds, not by their words; the rest of their vertues are easier
known, than theeues in a ciuil gouernmēt. Theeues
are tried by God and their countrie, so ought these great
Captaines to be tried by the multitude that serues vnder
them; especiallie by their officers in general. Their feare
cannot stop the rumor of the multitude, nor their bribes
content few or none of the Officers, but such as respect
neither honour nor vertue, and care not how they come
by their fauor and wealth, so they haue it.
            Dutie, honor and wealth makes men follow the wars:
when Generalls rob their inferiors of all three, often it
makes honest minds quit their seruice, and the dishonest
to serue their Enemies. None knowes the worth of honest
Souldiers, but such as haue bin in action with equal
Enemies. Those that are most furnished with experimē
               ted
captaines, shal find it a losse to lose few; but those that
haue but few, shall finde it a greater losse to lose any at
all:
            
               
               How that all Conquests and Ouerthrowes consists in expert
souldiers, & euer did since the world began vnto this houre.
               SOme thinks Commissions & authoritie is sufficient
to conduct an Armie, and that Conquests and Ouerthrowes
consist in multitude: let the Commission be euer
so large, the authoritie euer so great, the multitude
euer so many; the Warres consists altogether in good
Chiefes, and experimented Souldiers, and euer did since
the world began to this houre. What caused Alexander
to ouerthrow Darius with few men, considering his
number? but his valorous person, with the experience
of his Captaines and Souldiers. What caused Caesar to
ouerthrow Pompey, Romane to Romane, with far lesser
number? because hee had olde trained Legions, against
more than halfe new leuied rawe men.
               Our famous Kings Henrie the fift & Edward the third,
gaue their ouerthrowes with few in respect of their Enimies.
               Also Charles the fift with a few experimented Souldiers,
considering the number of the Germaines.
               
            
            
               How often few or one is the occasion of the winning or loosing
of a Battaile.
               IN our time did not the Prince of Conde giue battell to
the French King at the gates of Paris, to the Kings
losse, to the honor of the smal Troupe, being not halfe
a quarter so manie; where Stewart a Scottish Gentleman
with a dozen Horsmen was one of the principallest occasions,
by killing the Constable being their Generall.
               At the Battaile of Mocberhay, where the worthie Count
Lodowick of Nassau was ouerthrowne and killed; the

Troupes of Spaniards being fearefull to fight, seeing the
number of Lodowickes Horsemen, were onely encouraged
to charge resolutelie, by the oration of Sentia de vela.
               
               The shameful Ouerthrow at Iubeleo, where lesse than
600. Horsmen of Don Iohn de Austria, ouerthrew 15000.
against reason, onlie for want of Chiefes to keepe order.
The occasion of this charge came through a Captaine
of Horsmen, which discouered their disorder of
March, and procured the rest to followe, desiring leaue
of Octauia Gonzaga his Generall, to charge.
               At Northorne in Freezeland, two or three cowardlie
captaines were the cause of the ouerthrow of our Battaile
with discouraging words, the Enemies Horsmen
and vangard being broken.
               The mutenous Gauntoys and Iper, did they not giue
battaile in our fathers daies vnto a French King, & their
Earle of Flanders: and did not this Prince of Parma with
lesse than 8000. men conquer them like slaues? onelie
because they were void of Chiefes, vnexpert for warres,
their braue warlike minds changed vnto mechanickes.
               Also the proud Towne of Antwerpe, which was left
in good guard and Discipline by the late famous Prince
of Orange hauing in it better than 16000. as well armed
and in as good order as any Garrison in Europe, furnished
plentifullie with artillerie, munition, and all necessaries
for warres; for want of Chiefes to direct thē, this prince
of Parma made them slaues, with lesse than 8000. men.
            
            
               The difference betwixt raw men, and expert Souldiers.
               WHat is a multitude without Chiefes, but bodies
without heads. Nations must not flatter
themselues what they haue bin, but what they

are. The Grecians, and the Macedonians had the Monarchie,
so had the Romaines, with others; what are they
now? The people wanting their Chiefes, and their accustomed
braue minds. All these actions with the rest that
haue been aforetime or in our daies, were executed by
the lesser numbers, and the praise of euerie seuerall action,
belonging vnto lesse than a dozen Chiefes. It is an
errour to think that experimented Souldiers are sodeinlie
made like glasses, in blowing them with a puffe out
of an yron instrumēt. There can be no Leaders of good
conduct, vnles they haue beene in foughten Battailes, asseiged
and defended Townes of warre; the longer experted,
the more perfected. The Duke of Alua was
wont to say; In leesing of 100000. in 10. yeares action,
their prooues not 20. famous Leaders. To conclude; a
multitude without experimented Leaders, that haue to
warre with expert Captaines, are to be compared vnto a
Nauie in a Tempest, without Masters or Pilots.
            
            
               One noble opinion of Mounsieur de La Nowe.
               THE famous Mounsieur de La Nowe was wont to
say, It was necessary for the greatest commanders,
to giue eare often vnto all their vnder Officers, I
meane their simplest Captaines, to heare their opinions,
concerning their Discipline in open audience. His meaning
was noble without ambition: for in all Armies,
there are a number of Captaines better Souldiers, than
many higher Officers; which can neuer bee knowne
without place to execute their art: which must bee in
action and audience before famous Superiours. These
liberties and curtesies make a number employ their wits
and valours daily to aduance their credites. It hinders no
great Officers, vnlesse they meane the warres should end

with themselues; it aduaunceth the Warres, and Actions:
when they are gone, other experted knowne men
are placed in their roomes. This order must maintaine
good Discipline, otherwise ignorance happens often into
the high places, vnknowne, vntill actions bee ouerthrowne.
Those will say, wee are expert and as valiant
as the others; let them say and bee what they list, vnles
they be knowne to be expert of action, it is not necessarie
for a State to hazard their action in trying their
experience, and vnknowne fortunes. What corrupted
the discipline of the Netherlanders? chieflie placing
their ignorant cousins & fauorites to command. Who
could haue won Gaunt, Antwerp, Bridges, Iper, with an
100 other townes, that wanted no necessaries for warres
if there had been expert Commaunders in them. These
strong places were lost shamefullie without blowes,
with twentie ouerthrowes in the field, with the like disorders.
Therfore this noble La Nowe would say alwaies,
Checune a son mety; as much to say, Euerie man ought to
haue place according to his art. The martial Byron would
say also, These Coronells of three dayes, marres all the
Armies of the world. Notwithstanding, it must be confest,
that some quick spirites proue to bee expert with
small actions: but so rarelie found, that it is dangerous
to giue them charge before they be well knowne.
               What makes the Spaniards discipline to be so famous
as it is? Their good order: otherwise it is wel knowne,
the Nation is the basest and cowardlie sort of people
of most others; so base, that I perswade my selfe, ten
thousand of our Nation, would beate thirtie of theirs
out of the field, let them bee chosen where they list; sauing
some 3. thousand which is in the Lowe countries.
And those, for all they bee conducted by ancient expert

Captaines accompanied with other Nations, nothing
inferiour to those Spaniards, both for valour and conduct;
notwithstanding, the trained Troupes of our
Nation did beate them always number to number, both
in Generall Norris his time, & sithence. In their Countries
the world dooth know fiue thousand of our Nation
made guardes at the gates of Lisborne foure dayes, although
there were in the Town fiue thousand Spaniards,
4000. Portugeses carrying armes; besides they
were assured of all the Burgesses, for they had sent into
Spaine, and kept in the Cytadell, their wiues, children, &
chiefest goods. Also by reason of our Armie staying in
Galitia, where 6000. of ours ouerthrewe 16000. of
theirs. Before we arriued at Lisborne, they had 20. daies
respit to arme and put themselues in order; but had our
Armie not touched at the Groine, and sailed strait to Lisborne,
as the Earle of Essex did, neither Soldier nor Captaine
can deny, but the towne had been ours; for it was
vnmanned, without any good order: & when wee arriued,
had our Nauie entred, wee would haue entred the
Towne, or the world should haue witnessed, so manie
Englishmen had bin buried in that place. But let all the
Captaines of Europe iudge rightlie of our proceedings
from the first to the last, considering our small means &
great crosses, they cannot denie, but both our valour and
gouernment, deserued 100. times more praise, than the
attempt of Duke Medina and his, on England: notwithstanding
they wanted neither men, victualls, munition,
nor money. Also the worlde knowes, wee were not set
out with our Soueraignes royall Forces; notwithstanding
we gaue them the law 30 daies in their Countries.
When sicknes with other wants forced vs to imbarke,
being followed with their Armie, we returned towards

them with lesse than 4000. Where the Earle of Essex
sent his Trumpet, to dare their Generall the Countie of
Fuentes, to finde himselfe in the head of his troupes, to
change the blows of the pikes, giuing him signall of his
attire and feathers: so did Generall Norris command the
Trumpet to tell them our small number, & to dare their
whole Forces to battaile: but the cowardlie besonions
perceiuing our resolution, before we could arriue within
3. miles of thē, al their footmen ran away to Lisborne,
being 3. for one. Fuentes with Don Gabriel de Ninis knowing
wee had vnder fiftie horsemen, staid where they
were incamped, hauing with thē at the least 600. horsemen:
notwithstanding, the alrrme being giuen vs, the
Earle, and General Norris with the most of the Chiefes,
giuing order to our Squadrons to keep in that order we
marched, and to march with al speed to recouer the top
of a hil, a fine place to giue battell, assigned vnto them by
the trumpet, within halfe a league of their quarter. The
Earle, Generall, and Chiefs with the horsemen, aduaunced
with speed to the top of the hil, both to discouer the
Enemies order, and to choose a commodious place to
fight. At their sight, wee perswaded our selues by their
fashion to receiue battaile, our ensignes being displayed
on the top of the hill, and our squadrons possessing the
ground that we thought most fit: after resting a while, &
perceiuing their cowardly resolution, aduāced our battaile
towards their quarter, vnknowne to vs but that all
their forces had bin in that village. At our approch, they
ran away in such sort, that our horsmē (being but 50. in
al, amōgst whom were diuers of our Chiefs, besides the
Earle and his brother) made 200. of them run away that
they kept in the Reregard. This proofe with diuers others,
had we on them in our Portingall voyage.
               
                  
But to speake troth, no Armie that euer I saw, passes
that of Duke de Parma for discipline & good order: the
which & it pleased others to follow, it were not amisse.
And to that ende I thought good to show some parte of
the discipline and orders amongst them. None comes to
be high Officers, vnles they be knowne to be expert and
tried Souldiers of action, of long continuance; or for
courtesie to grace their Armies with young Princes, or
Nobilitie, or at the least Gentlemen of good qualitie;
neither must these contemne the basest Master of their
Campe. For all their birth, they must bee knowne valiant,
and of good discretion. These Noble men are placed
Generalls of horsmen, or commaund a Cornet; but
they will be sure to looke, that their vnder Officers shall
bee expert and knowne men; they shall not choose their
owne fauorites and followers: which maketh them to
maintaine the like discipline, when they come to be expert
themselues: for without doubt, none can command
so well, as those which haue been commanded.
               Their State is gouerned with two sorts of people,
Captaine and Clergie. As the Captaines ambition perswades
the king to encrease his Warres, to maintaine
their estate in wealth and greatnes, so dooth the Clergie
perswade him also to warres, to maintaine their State, against thē of Religion. By this means the State of Spaine
during this gouernement can neuer be without warres,
and continuall warres must make expert Souldiers.
            
            
               The long continuance of their Armie.
               THis Armie of the Prince of Parma hath been in action
vnbroken, since Charles the fift his troubles against
the Germaines. They haue continued in the Low
Countreyes three and twentie yeares. When the Duke

                  D' alua, brought them thether, he found them readie disciplined
in Regiments, vnder Ensignes and Cornets, although
the Gouernors, Captaines and Souldiers, were
changed with casualties of Warres: notwithstanding
the Armie was continuallie maintained with one purse
& discipline from the first houre vnto this, which must
be about 50. yeres. For that time, we must confesse, none
had the schoole of warres continuallie, but themselues.
Their actions shewes their discipline, which were not
amisse for others to followe. Their order is, where the
warres are present, to supplie their Regiments being in
Action, with the Garrisons out of all his Dominions &
Prouinces: before they dislodge, besonios supply their places,
raw men, as wee tearme them. By these meanes hee
traines his besonios, & furnisheth his Armie with trained
souldiers: yet though these Garrison men be wel trained
Souldiers, God knowes they are but raw men for a long
time, in respect of the men of Action: then iudge you,
what difference there is betwixt expert Soldiers & raw.
In my poore iudgement, (as I shewed before) all their
discipline consists in the Spanish. They maintaine also
certaine companies of ordinances, chiefly to content the
Nobilitie, as I will shew hereafter; they keepe in good
order their Caualeri, Italians, Burgonians and Albanetes,
for their great numbers I meane, to supplie their Armies,
as occasion presents. They make most account of
the Wallons, Burgonians and Italians: for the Almaines
they care not, but will hire them onelie to serue their
turne, when their Enemies leauie Germaines against
them. They haue great reason; for as long as any Prince
or Estate keepes continuallie 7000. expert footemen, &
3000. horsmen, though his leuied Armie be 50000. the
ten thousand will both discipline them, and keepe thē in

order: for out of the 10000. he may draw cōtinualy 100
or two experimented Soldiers to make officers, to train
the others. Besides he places diuers great Officers out of
his assured 10000. amongst his mercenaries; in the
which he shews great discipline; for there can be no dā
                  gerous
muteny in any Army, vnles some of the Chiefes
be priuie vnto it; and easily preuented if it be discouered;
and can not be but discouered by reason of this good
order.
            
            
               How they diuide their Armies.
               THey diuide their Armies into Regiments. All the
Spanish Colonells are tearmed, Masters of the
Campe. Although al their Armie be diuided into
Regiments, be they neuer so many Colonels, there are
none termed M. del Campo, but the Spanish. Although
there are but foure Tertias Spanish, which are called de
la Lyge, de Lombardy, de Naples, and de Flandrie; to grace
the Spanish, they giue often the name of M. del Campo
vnto others, but neuer aboue sixe at a time, the which
must be famous. Mondragon being Colonell of the Wallons
afore Serexe, for his famous seruice was called M.
del Campo, so was Ionas Oria, hauing no Regiment, for
his famous seruice at Malta and in other places.
               These foure Tertias, when they are most, are scarce
6000. strong, they make vp their 10000. I named before
with Burgonians, Italians & Wallons. One of these Tertias
when the Duke of Alua came downe, was called Tertia
de Sardinia. For their disorder, the Duke executed their
Captaines in Amsterdam, in Holland, cassid the Tertia,
entertaining the Souldiers a new. To keepe the honour
of the braue Souldiers, they termed this Tertia, Tertia
Veche, to giue example vnto others. It is necessarie to remember

this Discipline, with other, executed by the
Duke of Alua. This Tertia of Sardinia had to their Colonell
a valiant Captaine, named Don Gonsalo de Drakemont,
being commanded to Frizeland, against Lodowicke
the worthie Count of Nassaw, brother to the famous
Prince of Orange: to stop his course, Duke d' Alua sent
Sir Iohn de Lamy Count de Aranberge Chief, with other
troupes of horse and foote. Besides this Tertia being approched
Count Lodowicke vnderstanding his strength,
Aranberge would haue staied where he was, vntill the
arriuall of the Count de Megem, the which would haue
ioyned with him that night with more forces. The ambition
of this Colonel and Captains was such, they forced
Count Aranberge with vrging words touching his
reputation and credit, both to approch and charge some
of Lodowicks troups, the which brought them into an
ambush where Lodowicke was: who defeated them in
route, leauing Count de Aranberge dead in the place,
with diuers other Chiefes. At their returne, Duke d' Alua
rewarded them, as I shewed you before.
               Another time a great Regiment of Almaine mutined
for wāt of pay: in their outrage they spoiled Count
Laderne, their owne Colonel. Duke d' Alua called them
into a field, both to be mustred and to receiue their pays,
Into this place he commanded also al his Caualery with
other footmen to come. The mutinous Regiment being
viewed with commissaries, he placed the horsemen
in Squadrons round about them, commanding them to
charge them like enemies, vnles they would deliuer the
mutiners into his hands. The poore Almains seing thē
                  selues
deceiued, fearing the furie of the horsmen, deliuered
vnto him all that he demaunded. To reuenge their
mutinie, and to maintaine Discipline, hee executed of

them 200. Since that time we cannot learne that the Almaines
mutined in the Spanish Armie.
            
            
               Their great Officers in order as they commaund.
               IN the absence of the Captaine Generall, the hie Marshall
or master of the Campe general commandeth al.
After him, the Generall of the horsemen: after him,
the Generall of the Artillerie: after him, the eldest master
of the Campe: next vnto the Masters del Campo, the
Lieftenant general of the horsemen: after him, the Lieftenant
of the Artillerie. These Officers direct the field:
for the rest of the Colonells and Officers, none meddle
further than his owne particular charge, vnles they be
authorized. Although the Threasurer at wars be an honorable
place commanded by no bodie, but by the Captaine
generall, he nor none of the others meddle with
the Martiall Discipline; I meane the Auditores, Commissaries,
Muster masters, & such. Touching the charge
and duties of the Captaine Generall, and the other great
Captaines, I refer it vnto the famous warriours which
wrote it often before.
            
            
               What other Officers ought to second their great
Officers.
               THe office of the Marshal, is painful & great, for he
medleth with the whole affaires of the warres; he
hath to serue and to help him, the Serieant maior,
Quarter masters, Prouosts, and Captaine of the Spions.
               The Generall of the horsemen hath to serue him, his
Lieftenants, Colonells, Captaines, and Scoutmasters.
               The Generall of the Artillerie, his Lieftenant, Commissaries
of munitions, Gentlemen of the Artillery, Colonel
of Pioners, Trench-masters, & Carriage-masters.
               
                  
The Treasurer is chiefe of al the others: he, the Auditor,
Muster-masters, Commissaries aswell for musters,
as for victuals, deliuer their accounts only vnto the captain
general, or to his deputy authorised by him for the
vse of the King. There is also one Secretarie authorized
by the King, who lookes into all their dealings, and
knows all the secret onlie that passeth betwixt the King
and the Captaine generall.
               This Secretarie hath always diuers blanks signed by
the King. With those blāks they haue redressed sodenly
many disorders which could not haue bin done, if
they had bin forced to stay to know the Kings pleasure.
            
            
               The greatnes of their Generall, and Obeysance
vnto his King.
               ALthough the General hath his commission absolute
from the King, to alter, to redresse, place, & to
displace whom he lists, as occasion presents: Notwithstanding
he doth nothing, without the aduise and
consent of his counsaile of warre, if he should he is sure
to be dispised and contemned, not only by his counsel of
war, but by his whole Armie in generall; who will not
faile to appeale vnto the King, & Estate of Spaine, which
redresseth presētly any disorders. For sodain dispatches,
the King hath his counsell of war seuerally for euery of
his kingdoms and prouinces, where he hath occasion to
vse Viceroyes or Captaine Generalls. All these Counsailes
of wars both in Spaine and abroad, are expert and
principall Captaines, sauing a few Diuines and Ciuililians
ioyned with them, to aduise and redresse their
high mindes and ambition; the which is done easier and
better by wise perswasions, than by extreame iustice:

for if iustice were executed to the vttermost, fewe great
Captaines should liue. The most great captaines cannot
denie, but their profession ouer-reacheth themselues,
more than anie other; because all their speaches, deeds,
and minds consists in ambition for honour, seeking to
ouerthrow all estates, to aduance their owne, weighing
no perill in respect of fame.
               I speake this for Captaines in generall: but there are
honest, vertuous, and iust, yet so few that the number
must bee imbraced, els the multitude of the enemies
would bee too to manie for the fewe friends. If a Captaine
be a good counsellor in Warre, a good executioner,
or a good engioner, he ought to be imbraced, and as
noble Sir Philip Sidney said, borne withall, vnlesse his
faults are too intollerable.
            
            
               How they diuide their Horsmen.
               THey diuide their Caualerie into an 100. vnder a
Cornet. Vnles it be their two Generalls, the most
of the aduantagers and aduenturers march vnder
the high Generall, so doo all his domestiques. When
he is in person in the field, his Cornet is alwaies foure
or fiue hundred; they giue seuerall commissions vnto
Launtiers, & to the Hergulutiers, to fiue hundred Launtiers
they ioyne a hundred Hergulutiers, they keep that
rate from the lesser number vnto the greatest. These
Launtiers are called light Horsmen, notwithstanding
they are aswell mounted as the men at armes, for one
horse a peece, and aswell armed, sauing the barbd for
their greeues and maces: the most carrie one Pistoll,
but all carrie a curtilace, I meane a good broad sworde.
Their Hergulutiers are also well mounted for 1. horse a

peece, more than halfe curaces of the proofe, with an open
burgonet, or Millaine murrions; many haue pistolls
besides their peeces, but all haue good curtilaces. Both
Launtiers and Hargulatiers haue al cassocks, euery company
seuerall colours to be knowne.
            
            
               The diuisions of their foote bands.
               THeir Commissions for foote Bands are like vnto
ours, some Ensigns 300. some 200. the most of an
150. Euery hundred hath forty armed men, of
which there must be 30. pikes, the tenne others, are halberds
& targets of the proof; al their Gentlemen & vantagers
are armed men, the most carry the pike, hauing
plasterons of the proofe, I meane the fore part of the armour,
the 60. others are shot. In the later dayes of Duke
D'alua 25. of euery 100. were commaunded to be Musketters.
With their armed pikes and musketters, they
execute most of their seruices. They found such seruice
in the musket, that this Prince of Parma hath the most
of his shot musketters.
            
            
               The order of their marching.
               VVHen the Armie marcheth, one commaundes
the vangard, another the battell, the third the
rereward. None of these, nor of the Officers
appoynted with them, whatsoeuer occasion presenteth,
although their fellowes were in fight, dares breake out
of his place to offer to fight, without commaundement
from the Principall. If the Generall be in person, hee is
knowne by a signall, like vnto a Cornet, which is carried
hard by him. As hee sends often to know the State
of his Armie in all the quarters, so doo they send others

vnto him, as occasion presents, both to acquaint him
of their Estate, & to know his direction. To giue equall
honor vnto al their troups, they alter their marches euery
seuerall march. He that had the vangard to day, to
morrow is to haue the rereward, the third the battaile.
When occasion presents to diuide their Army into seueral
parts to do some exploits in surprising some town,
Castle, Fortresse, or other to giue camisadoes, or reincounter
troupes, eyther at their lodgings, or in their
march, they send two of qualitie, according to the number
of the troups that go, the one commaunds the horsmen,
the other the footmen; but one is obeyed chiefe, in
as ample authority, as the Captaine Generall himselfe,
vntil they returne into their Army. They haue great
reason; for it is impossible for two Chiefs to agree, hauing
equall authority.
            
            
               The order of thier Sieges.
               VVHen they assiege any place, they incampe at
the first out of the danger of the enemies artillerie:
before they make any approches,
they do what they can to make sure either with Fortes
or Trenches all the passages, I meane the comming in
as well to their Campe, as to the Towne or place assieged.
If there be any riuer or passage by water, they will
be sure to stop it with Forts, Artillery, Stockathos, Pallisathos.
If they can make a bridge to passe ouer horse
and foote, with all necessaries from one side vnto the other:
if they can they wil not faile to make ways round
about the place assieged to march with horse & foote.
If there be any passages strong by nature, straits through
woods, hills, or with waters, although it be a dozen
miles from their Campe, they will build strong Forts,

sufficient with a small guard to abide the furie of an army
without battery. At one of these places will they
giue battaile, rather than leaue their siege, if the party
be to their aduantage: by this meanes they will be sure
to haue fortie houres liberty to resolue, whether they
will fight or retire; as they did at Muncier, at Cambria,
and at other places. Count Lodowicke being in Mounce,
well accompanied, especially with good Chiefes; for he
had with him the famous Captains Monsieur de la Nowe,
Monsieur de Poiet, Monsieur de Roueres: Notwithstanding,
Duke d' Alua intrenched his Army before it so
strongly, that he was able to send out halfe his men to
doo exploits where it pleased him. When the Prince
of Orange incamped hard by him with equall forces, he
neuer stirred his Army, by reason of his trained Souldiers,
vndid him with a Camisado, forced him to retire.
So did hee also send Chappine Vitelly out of his Armie,
with sufficient forces into the strait towardes Valentia,
who defeated Monsieur Iohn de Lise, which marched to
the succours of Mounce with seauen thousand Frenchmen.
Also at Cambria this Prince of Parma abode the
Army of Monsieur d' Alanson to come in sight, although
he resolued to retire, sending his Artillerie, munition
and baggage out of daunger: hee stayed to see the order
of his march, seeing the party vnequall who marched
in good order, he retired orderly without ingageing
any fight. If they thinke the place assieged too wel
manned, or the seate such by nature, that batterie can
doo no good, they will blocke it vp with Fortes in
such sort, that halfe their Armie will be sufficient to
assiege it, they will be sure to place the rest in the best
quarters for victualls and forrage, although it be three
dayes iourney from the place assieged: as they did at

                  Antwerpe, Gaunt, Iper, Berke, and other places. By these
meanes they relieue their wearied troupes with fresh at
their pleasures. If there be troups making head to leauie
their siege, they will ioyne closer together, as occasions
present: if they batter, they approch carefully with trenches
a farre off, spare neither Pioners nor cost to saue
their Souldiers. Before they place their Batterie, they
mount Culuerings, and other peeces to beate the flanks
and defences: if there be not high grounds aduantagious
to do it, they will be sure whatsoeuer it cost, to raise
mounts for the purpose. If the Bulwarkes be such that
the flanks cannot be taken away with their peeces, they
will lay batterie at once both to Bulwarke and Curten;
for the Soldiers may lawfully refuse to assault, vntill the
flankes be taken away; neither will the Chiefes offer it;
for some of them must leade them.
            
            
               The order of their assaults.
               BEing ready to assault, to giue equall honour vnto all
the troups, the Regiments hurle the Dice, who shal
haue the point, the first charge we call it: lightly the
Chiefe that commaunded that quarter will aske it as his
right, because his troupes are most spoyled by reason
of their neere guardes and approches. Most often hee
hath it: beeing giuen him, he diuides his troupes to second
one the other, according to the widenesse of the
breach, they respect the honour of the poynt, that the
Captaines will not giue place one vnto the other more
than their Colonells, but by fortune of the Dice. They
neede not be so earnest for the matter, because the greatest
warriours account the first troupe that entreth a
breach in more daunger, than the first troupe that must

charge in their seuerall battailes. They haue reason; for
I knowe it by good experience, whether they enter or
retire the most of them are killed, if the defenders be honest
men, I meane any thing valiant. They may haue
two or three breaches, but at euerie one they keepe
one order. Before the armed men aduance to the assault,
they place their Musketiers as nere to the breach
as they can, lightlie they make mounts higher than the
defendants: in those and in trenches before the Artillerie
they place all their small shot. Before they giue an assault,
they send sundrie Officers and Souldiers armed of
Musket proofe and good iudgement to discouer the
breaches: when they giue the assaults, if they bee not
pell mell with the defendants, their Canoniers, flankes
the breach ouer their heads, both from the batterie, and
with their flanking peeces: they line their armed men
that haue the first poynt with Musketiers armed of the
proofe. At these assaults both sides lightlie shoote all
the vilest shot they can inuent, both to pierce Armes and
to cut off Pikes, chained bullets, Dice of steele couered
withlead: lightlie they giue their assaults generall at
once, I meane at all their breaches and mines, if the
ground serue to mine. To discourage the defendants,
they haue messengers of credite one horseback, if they
can passe, which runne from breach to breach crying,
courage the Tertia de la Leige is entered: So at the other
breaches the like, that Tertias of Lumbardy or Naples, or
others are entred, when there is no such matter. When
those that giue the first charge begin to retire or waxe
colde, the great Officers command their seconds to
the assaults; finding fault with the rest, telling them, it
is you fellowes must doo it: with these stratagems and
words, they make the poore souldiers break their necks

at their pleasure. But to speake troth, the Spanish discipline
is verie gratefull vnto the men of warre; for want
of present places to aduance their valiant men of vertue
according vnto their deserts, they giue them aduantages
of payes, with encouraging words and assured promises
of the first places that fall voide. If a Colonell, Captaine,
or any other officer vnder them, leeseth his whole
Regiment or Companie in Battaile, Assault, Skirmish,
or in any other seruice commanded vnto by their superiours;
although the troupe bee defeated, those that returne,
are sure to remaine in pay, and the Colonell or
Captaine haue present Crownes to recomfort his
troupe. If the Regiment or Companie bee cashed, all
the Officers are surelie enrouled in their owne payes
they had before. A cashed Colonell, Captaine, or Officer,
will neuer take baser charge than they had before,
but will serue priuatelie, vntill occasion presents to aduance
them vnto the places they had before. As they
are bound to followe the warres, where they receiue
their reliefes; so haue they libertie to followe whome
they list, vnles they be commanded to the contrarie: the
greatest part will followe the Cornet royall, some the
Generall of Horsemen, others the high Marshall, others
the Master of the Campe, as they bee affected and minded.
Likewise the cashed Souldiers are placed in their
former payes, vnder other Colonells None of these cashed
Officers are bound vnto anie duetie, sauing fighting;
I meane to guard or watch▪ but the most part will
doo it orderlie, better than the bound men, to shewe example
vnto others: perswading themselues hee that excels
his fellows, is soonest aduanced. Their vsage hath
been such, that I meruaile all professions in Spaine desires
not to bee Souldiers. Charles the fift being before

                  Metz in Loraine, his Armie beeing in miserie and extreame
sicknesse, his Souldiers would openlie raile on
him, especiallie his Spanish would call him the sonne of
the mad woman, with all the vile words they could deuise,
yet he would not heare them, but threw Crownes
amongst them, saying to his nobilitie; hearken these
knaues, yet let me call the worst by his name, hee will
not refuse to doo any thing for mee, though it cost him
his life. Also the Duke of Alua, when the Burghmasters
of Holland presented a petition vnto him of the disorder
of the Spaniards; amongst other foolish articles,
they shewed him how they would haue their napkins
changed twice at a meale. He answered, you must think,
all those which came with mee were not brought vp amongst
Burghers. To say troth, God helpe that man of
warre, that hath al his deeds and words construed to the
worst, considering what casualties there are in warres aboue
all other places. Often choler altreth honest
minds, to day rich, to morrowe poore; now happie anone
vnhappie. Although their discipline in martiall
actions be most famous, and worthy to bee followed of
al others; notwithstanding their gouernement is so vile
and tyrannous, that no people is able to abide it, vnles
they be too base minded. For example, the Castilian of
Gaunt, hauing occasion to execute 3. or 4. offenders: to
terrifie the multitude, hee did it openlie in the market
place; by chaunce a scaffold fel down, at the which there
grew a great noise and rumor: sodainlie without more
adoo, the Castilian drew his sworde, crying Alerto to
his souldiers; The souldiers most sauagely discharged a
salue of hargubusaides on the poore people; with shot
& sword they killed and hurt aboue an 100. Complaint
being made vnto the Duke D' alua their Gouernour;

his answere was, he was sorie the fault was done without
desert, notwistanding he punished no bodie: thinking
it a good meanes to terrifie a mutinous popular (as
he termed thē). Another time, the Master of the campes
companie, Iulian Romero, being in garrison in the towne
of Macklen, his Alfere being in loue with a gentlewoman,
could not obtaine her loue; on a May day, he and
his companie armed, came vnto her fathers house vnder
the coulour of Maying, tooke her away by force: her
friends and kinsmen making what stirre they could to
saue hir, with the disorder of the Alfere and Souldiers,
diuers were killed and hurt. Complaint being made, no
man was executed, but perswasions vnto the parties to
take patience, shewing them what an offence it was, to
stir against a flying Ensigne of the King their Lord. The
Alfere was banished for a few daies; notwithstanding
he inioyed his loue, & his fauour with his Gouernor in
a short time. Another time, a Serieant of Sentia Dauilla
Castilian of Antwerp, rode vp and down Antwerp on
a footecloth of veluet, mandilion and hose imbrodered
with gold letters, the contents of the words in Spanish,
Gasador de los Flaminges; as much as to say in English, A
Scourge for the Flemings: a number cōplained, but none
had redres. Such is their gouernment in al places where
they command with citadels, garrisons, fortresses or forces;
the least Serieant of a Band, being a natural Spaniard,
will seeme to command the greatest man of qualitie of
any other Nation, vnles hee command forces himselfe.
Let the forces bee euer so great, although it bee 40. or
50000. and of them, but two. or 1000. Spaniards, it must
be called the Spanish armie. Whē they come first out of
Spaine, either to Italie, Flanders, or anie other places, they
be the simplest besonios (as they terme them) that can bee

found of any other Nation; the most are apparelled by
the Gouernors, before they enter the Countries, to saue
the honor of the Nation. Let them continue any time
in pay, the simplest will compare in pride with any captaine
of other Nations, and diuers rascalls must be called,
Signor of such a place, meaning the next Towne or
Village that he was borne vnto, hauing neither lande
nor house of his owne. Besides the tyrannous Inquisition
is maintained by that Nation, principallie in Spaine
to bridle Princes and Nobilitie; which otherwise haue
so great libertie by their auncient customes, that diuers
of them owe but small subiection vnto their King: for
abroad as well as in Spaine, they make whome they
list slaues and prisoners at their pleasures, without triall
of Iustice: neither shall the parties know, who accused
them, nor what is laid to their charge, more than it
is the will of the holy Inquisition. With their diuelish
Inquisition, they take mens goods at their pleasure.
With their Buls and other paltrie deuises, poysoning,
murther, breaking othes & promises, may be pardoned
by the Pope. Their religion is such, where they subdue
kingdoms or coūtries, either by right, policy, or armes,
if they finde any of great qualitie that carries a voge, to
command popular or men of war; let their seruice and
deserts be neuer so great, vnles they be sure of them, in
such sort to obey al those, that carry their commissions
& directions, be they neuer so basely or vilely directed,
they will be sure to make them away with poyson or
murther, for Iustice can take no place, I meane touching
all strangers, sauing their owne Nation.
               For exāple, the Marquis of Marin̄an, after they gaue
him aduancement, Charles the 5. wrote letters to execute
him, which were discouered by the Marquis. Likewise

the Duke of Bourbon hauing won the battaile of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
fearing his greatnes, Charles caused his Army to mutine
against him, with other disgraces vnderhand to vndoo
him; if the Duke had not taken resolution to sack Rome,
to content the men of warre. Also the braue Count Egmont
with others of his Nation, for al their seruice were
executed most cruelly by Duke D'alua, and the Marquis
of Berges with Mountenie poysoned in Spaine, onely to
bring to passe their determination against the Netherlanders.
Also Marke Anthonie Colono, whose house and
himselfe, folowed always the house of Austria, beeing
Vice-Roy of Naples, reputed and feared for the greatest
Captain in Italie, was sent for into Spaine; and before he
could speake with the king, he was poisoned in his way
to the Court. The last day, two or three noble men Porteguises,
taking armes, made to the Sea coast, hauing discouered
sir Francis Drakes fleete; the Spanish perceiuing
their greatnes, executed one Count, and poisoned the other;
although some of them were the men that sought
to bring them into the countrie, and most assured them.
Looke also to their proceedings with Naples & Millain,
the wrongs to Francis Fortza, Ferdinando of Aragon,
with diuers other the like actions. T'his discipline & gouernment
do I know by good experience, for I serued
vnder the Ensignes of the M. del Campo, Iulian Remero 22
moneths, and Mondragon 18 moneths, with the domestiques
of the braue Don Iohn de Austria eight months,
always in action. As I saide before their discipline must
be good, for good Chiefes makes good Souldiers.
               The least of thirty commanders they had alwayes amongst
them, were sufficient to command 10000. Soldiers.
A campe continually maintained in action, is like
an Vniuersity continually in exercises, when famous

Schollers die, as good or better step in their places: Especially
in armies, where there be euery day new inuentions,
stratagems of wars, change of weapons, munition,
& all sort of engins newly inuented, & corrected dayly.
               Some may aske me as I did Philip de Comines in reading
his booke, where he speaks much to the praise
of Lewis the xj. but nothing how he quited his Duke of
Bourgondie: true it is, at the defeate of Harlam; Colonell
Morgan and his Regiment were discharged from the
Prince of Oranges seruice, my selfe being one arriuing in
England, the saide Colonell with a number of others,
were imployed into Ireland. At that instant the Prince
of Condie was newly escaped out of France into Germanie.
I hauing nothing to doo, hearing the saide Prince
meant to return into France with an armie, my self & 4.
other companions, resolued to imploy our seruice with
that Prince: being in Germanie with smal purses, finding
the Prince not able to martch in six moneths, hauing no
meanes to liue, we returned for England; passing throgh
Lier in Brabant, we were brought before the Master of
the campe Iulian Romero, who entertained me with such
curtesie, that I remained with him. Thus did I enter into
the Spaniards wars, and do thinke it no disgrace for a
poore Gentleman that liues by wars, to serue any Estate
that is in league with his owne.
            
            
               To proue Lantiers more seruiceable than men at arms,
considering the numbers that do duties.
               THe difference betwixt the men at Armes, companies
of Ordinances, as they tearme them, and the
Launtiers, called by the strangers Light Horsemen,
by vs Demilances. I must confesse a companie of
men at Armes, to be the most honorablest priuat charge
that a man may haue in the warres, principally because

these charges are giuen vnto Princes, Nobilitie, or men
of great qualities in the wars. To euery seuerall company
belongeth one Ensigne, one Guydon, and one Cornet;
the Ensigne ouer the men at Armes, the Guydon ouer
the Archers, the Cornet ouer the light horsemen:
Considering the number of hands to come to fight, & to
do duty, I persuade my selfe the greatest warriors think
the Lantiers more profitable and more seruiceable: my
reasons are these; a man at Armes ought to haue 5. horses,
for euery horse he receiues as much pay as a Launtier:
commonly the men of Armes makes no conuoyes
that belongs vnto an Army, the most of them are men
of quality (as we tearme men of warre) eyther gentle or
cashed Officers, wherefore they are fauoured for their
skouts, guards and watches. If they be commaunded to
any of these duties, out of their fiue horses, it is much if
they send three, commonly one and two: halfe of
them keepes but foure horses, the most three, the rest is
loden with baggage, perhaps lame iades, sufficient with
curtesie to passe the Musters, being trimmed vp with
help of their witnesses, how they wer hurt in seruice, &
deuises. Lightly they are not commanded to march, vnles
the Army dislodges: if they do, Cornets of Launtiers
and Hargulatiers are commanded with them. The men
of Armes neuer breake their soft paces, vnlesse they
charge or retire, the others often are commaunded to
great marches, to do exploits, Caualgade, (as the straungers
terme it) beside they must skout, discouer, with all
duties that belongs vnto an Army, either in lodging or
march, and fights often, when the men of Armes see no
enemy▪ when they doo fight, lightly, it is a battaile, then
the Launtiers receiue and giue the first blowes. The
first charge being well conducted, and directed, tryes

the most of the fortune of a daies seruice, 100. men at
Armes are as chargeable as 500. Launtiers, and doo not
the duetie, neither in fights nor guards as halfe so manie.
Touching the barbd, (I meane the arming of the horses)
I thinke it to little purpose, seeing all squadrons of pikes
be lined with Musketiers or Caliuers; the lesser of both
pearceth any arming that horses vse to carrie. In stead
of Maces, the Launtiers may carrie one Pistoll, the
which is lighter and farre more terrible, than thrice the
force we haue in these daies. True it is, it is necessarie,
for the shocke of a horse to weare a little Cuisset to couer
the knee, so ought al the Launtiers to be. We know
it by experience; let a horseman be armed, the forepart
of his curaces of a light pistoll proofe, his head peece the
like, two lames of his pouldrons the like, two or three
lames of his tasses of the like proofe, the rest I meane his
tasses, cuisses, pouldrons, vambraces, and gauntlets, bee
also so light as you can deuise. With one pistoll these
kinde of arming shal be found heauie for the most men,
to carrie all day long, and too heauie for the most horses
to carie ten hours together, and to do any seruice: As
I said before, the Launtiers are as well mounted for one
horse a peece, if hee haue not two, vnles he be too base
minded, and the warres verie bare. Besides, all Launtiers
receiue euerie man his own pay, and haue nothing
to doo with Master, nor anie bodie, sauing his Officers,
that commaunds him to doo his duetie in the warre.
Wherefore I perswade my selfe, they maintaine these
Ordinances, as they tearme them, chieflie (as I said before)
to keepe the ancient customes, fearing in breaking
that order, diuers of their great men would grudge: by
reason, all or the most part of these companies belong
vnto them. For example our Band of horsemen Pentioners

did account them the fairest Band of ordinance in
Europe for the number, because all the men at armes are
Gentlemen of qualitie: wherefore I doo value this Band
better, than twice as manie of any other, let them bee of
what Nation soeuer. I may speake it by good experience,
out of this Band there may be pickt 15. or 20. sufficient
to answere so many at all deedes of armes, let it be
chosen out of any Armie, be it neuer so great: considering
their charges in payes, expences in victuals munition,
and their liberties for dueties; I meane to conuoy,
guard, and to watch, so many priuate Launtiers, as this
faire Band musters in all of horses, vnder their Ensign, or
Guydon, would excell them; my reason is, as I said before,
because euery Launtier is a master, and receiues his
owne pay.
            
            
               To prooue Hargulatiers more seruiceable than Speare men,
tearmed by vs, light Horsemen.
               THE difference betwixt our Northerne Speares,
Light Horsemen we tearme them; and the Light
Horsemen tearmed by the strangers Hargulatiers,
as much to say Hargabushes or Petronels on horseback.
Touching the mounting and arming of these hargulatiers,
I shewed you before, the seruice of all Light horsemen,
consists chiefly in marching of great marches, (Caualgades
the strangers terme it) I meane, to surprise Cō
                  panies
a farre off in their lodgings, or marches; likewise
to defeat conuoyes, & to conduct conuoyes, as much to
say, direct it to spoyle necessaries that come to furnish
their enemies, and to conduct necessaries to furnish
their own campe or seruice. Also to scout and discouer,
to spare the armed men, I meane the Launtiers, & the other
horsemen; likewise both to conduct & spoile forragers,

with the like seruices. They be neuer commanded
to do any exploits on men of Warre, without being accompanied
with Launtiers, or armed Pistolers, I meane
Curaces on horseback. Diuers march with swords
without Pistoll or Launce, especiallie the Frenchmen.
For these seruices it is necessarie to haue in armies or
troupes, for euerie 500. Launtiers or armed Curaces,
100. of these kinde of light horse: from that rate to the
greatest numbers. If horsemen bee directed to assaile
troupes at their lodgings, either in villages, streights, or
fields, where it requires too great a march for footemen
to keepe companie with the horsemen, without doubt
these hargulatiers are farre better then the spearemen;
my reasons are these; when the horsemen approach the
enemie, if it bee in a village, lightly they must passe
through barriers and narow streights, bard with waggons,
both of victualls, & of their men of warre, where
commonlie the Enemie keepes guardes & watch. If the
passage bee such, either in entring a village or straight,
that horsmen cannot finde place to enter and to charge,
these hargulatiers light on foot, & do no lesse dutie than
foote hargabushiers. If the enimie be lodged either too
strongly or to manie, for the assailants to doo any good
on their quarter, as ye must think, a 1000 stronglie lodged
in a village or streight, with good guard and order,
are worth 2000. without, let them be of one valure and
conduct) then the assailant will addresse an ambush perhaps,
in a passage or narrow streight short of the Enemies
quarter, where he will also cause all or the most of those
Hargulatiers to light, then place and hide them in such
sort, that 100. shot wil spoyle and defend ten times more
than themselues, vnles the enimies bring shot to displace
them; if they doo, the Ambush may dislodge, if hee

thinkes the partie vnequal; the which he could not, were
his Hargulatiers Hargabushers without horses, beeing
ingaged to fight. I confesse also the Hargulatiers farre
better than the spearemen for this seruice; if troupes of
armed curaces, launtiers, or others, chance to meete by
fortune with the like enemies in a champion, the Hargulatiers
vnarmed march on both sides of their squadron,
like wings of shot about a squadron of pikes; vntil
the launtiers or curaces charge, diuers of their Hargulatiers
march skirmishing before the squadrons, like forelorne
men after the Almaine phrase; when the squadrons
charge, they flye on both sides to their fellowes
They place their armed Hargulatiers behinde the squadrons,
they execute more than the Launtiers, after the
Launtiers, break into the enemies squadrons: for the armed
hargulatiers ought to be as well mounted, and armed
for curace and caske, sauing their beauers, as the
launtiers; the most of them, as I shewed you before carrieth
a pistoll, besides his caliuer or petronell. Let it bee
for what seruice Captaines can deuise, these hargulatiers
are better than our sort of speare men that wee tearme
Light Horsmen. I perswade my selfe, that all the warriers
in Europe, sauing our selues and the Scots will bee
found to be of my minde. I am sure the Earle of Essex,
Generall Norris, the Lord Willoughbie, Sir William Russell,
Sir Richard Bingham, with the most of all that serued against
the great Captaines, I meane the Prince of Parma
and his followers, will say and confesse as I doo. For example,
the famous Mounsier de la Nowe, commanding
chiefe of the warres vnder the Prince of Orange and the
States in Flaunders, had 5. Cornets of these spearemen,
all Scotts: he finding little seruice with these kinde of arming
and mounting, changed them vnto Launtiers and

Hargulatiers; the which afterwards prooued to be seruiceable,
& as braue bāds as any other vnder his charge:
especially the company of Seaton. True it is, braue men
wil shew themselues valiant with any kind of weapons,
al maner of ways: but the best sort of arming and mounting
is the more profitable, & the more seruiceable. Although
our two nations (I meane English and Scottish)
may compare, & in my opinion do excell all the rest of
the world in value and strength: notwithstanding, neyther
of both our Nations can compare with the Strangers
for the mounting and arming, vnlesse we resolue to
be Launtiers, Pistolers and Hargulatiers, as I shewed before.
               Our discipline is to haue 1000. Spearmen, and some
200. Launtiers, from that rate to the greatest numbers,
which ought to be 1000. Lantiers and 200. Spearemen.
Likewise, from that rate to the greatest, and those 200.
ought to be Hargulatiers. I know no reason but 2000.
Lantiers, 2000. Pistolers, 1000. Hargulatiers, should not
Master 20000. Spearemen on horsebacke. Likewise
from that rate to the lesser numbers; you must think the
reason was that our kings of England & Scotland fought
always or the most part on foote, because their whole
trust was on the footmen, and that all strangers mastred
them with horsemen: Assure our selues let vs keep their
discipline with horsmen, none shal master vs number to
number, although they were more.
               Let vs not erre in our ancient customes, although our
famous Kings Hen. 5. Edw. 3. and Hen. 8. were the most
worthiest warriers that our nation euer had: notwithstanding
you may be assured, had they knowne the terror
of Muskets, Caliuers and Pistolls, they would haue
used the lesse Bowes, Speares and Bills; as the actions of

these famous kings shews their Captains to be the most
expert. Likewise, we must confesse Alexander, Caesar,
Scipio and Hanniball, to be the worthiest and famoust
warriers that euer were; notwithstanding, assure your
selfe, had they knowne Artillerie, they woulde neuer
haue battered Towns with Rammes, nor haue conquered
countries so easily, had they bin fortified as Germanie,
France and the Low countries, with others, haue bin
since their days. Although the ground of ancient Discipline
is the most worthiest and the most famous; notwithstanding,
by reason of fortifications, stratagems, ingins,
arming, with Munition, the discipline is greatly altered;
the which we must follow and be directed as it is
now: otherwise we shall repent it too late.
            
            
               The difference betwixt Launtiers and Pistolers,
               TRue it is, as Monsieur de la Nowe saith, a squadron
of Rutters (meaning Pistolers) ought to beate a
squadron of Launtiers. It were a great follie of
me, either to deny his reasons or deeds; the little experience
I got was from him, and from such others as himselfe.
Touching Monsieur de la Nowe, he is knowne to be
one of the worthiest and famous warriers, that Europe
bred in his days. I do perswade my selfe, a squadron of
Pistolers ought to encounter so many Launtiers; if they
should enter into the squadrons of Lantiers, as Monsieur
de la Nowe saieth. Without doubt the Pistol discharged
hard by, wel charged with iudgement, murthers more
than the Launce: out of a hundred Pistolers, 20. nor
scarce 10. at the most do neither charge pistoll, nor enter
a squadron as they shoulde, but commonly and lightly
always they discharge their Pistols eight and fiue score
off, and so wheele about; at which turnes the Launtiers

charge them in the sides, be they wel conducted, if they
should enter as Monsieur de la Nowe speaks, the Launtiers
haue or ought to haue one Pistoll at the least: touching
their arming and mounting, they ought to be rather
better than worse. The captains or captaine that charges
either with troups or troupe, cares not much whether
the cōpanies breake their launces or not, but desires thē
to enter resolutely, and to keep close together. If they be
wel conducted, their leaders command more than half
of thē to carie their swords or pistols in the bridle hand,
rather than faile to vse the sword & pistoll, & quit their
Lances; but they wil be sure to place the best of the Lantiers
in the forefront. Lightly of euery hundred, 15. or
20. know how to breake: being wel broken, with care
of the goodnesse of the staffe and head, the blowe of the
Launce is little lesse in valor vnto the pistoll: the charge
of the Lantiers is terrible and resolute, being in carier to
breake, the enemies perceiues their resolution is to enter,
and not to wheele about like vnto the pistolers; seldome
or neuer at al shal you find pistolers charge or enter
a squadron, either horse or foot on the spurs like vnto
the Launtiers; but softlie on a trot or soft pace, persuading
themselues, as it is true, their Pistolls giue as great
blowes, without the force of the horses. Considering
the resolute charge done with the might of their horses,
the Launtiers are more terrible and make a farre fairer
shew, either in Muster of Battaile: for example, the
Almaines, during the time they carried Launces, caried
a farre greater reputation than they doo now being pistolers
named Rutters. The most Chiefes or Souldiers
of account are armed at the proofe of the Pistoll. If the
Leaders commaund their troupes to spoyle horses, the
Launces are more sure, for diuers Pistolls faile to goe

off, if they doo, they must be charged with discretion;
being ouercharged, it shakes in a mans hand, so,
that often it toucheth neyther man nor horse. If the
charge be too little, it pierceth nothing to speake of.
True it is, being pickt and chosen, the Pistolers murther
more, would they doo as Monsieur de la Nowe directes
them? But it hath beene seldome or neuer heard that
Launtiers gaue place vnto Rutters; but I was often in
their companie when they ranne away, three from one
Launtier both in great troupes and small. True it is, the
great Captaine the Admirall Chatillion, chose often to
fight, and would haue diuers or the most of his horsemen
to bee armed, wyth one Pistoll and a good Curtilace:
hee had great reason, for the most of his followers
on horsebacke were Gentlemen of qualitie, or
resolute Souldiours that fought for the Religion. Diuers
of the Gentlemen were in quarrells for their houses,
or for their particular reputation, but all in generall,
were resolute valiant faithfull men of warre, that
fought either for religion or reputation, to maintaine
their wordes after the olde Romane fashion. Being
such men, no weapons comes amisse: for constancie
and true valor, ouerthrows al pollicie, being in Armes,
readie to fight without delayes. Besides, the nature of
the Frenchmen is such, that they will grudge to carrie
any Armes, but such as please themselues: vnto the
which their Leaders were faine to agree, partly against
their wills, fearing otherwise to offend their humours,
knowing it lay in them to followe whome they lifted,
especiallie their Realme beeing diuided into factions;
being al vnited, their kings were faine to hire Switzers
and Almaines for their battailes on foot, I meane armed
Pikes, which is the bodie of all battailes.
            
            
               
               To prooue Musketiers the best small shot that euer
were inuented.
               THe difference betwixt the Muskets and any other
peeces that are vsed. If it be in a battaile, howsoeuer
the ground or place falles out in Trenches, either
assailing or defending Townes, Forts, or Fortresses,
or in defending or assailing streights, or passages, whether
it be by night or day, in my iudgement fiue hundred
Muskets are better than 1000. Caliuers, or any other
such shot, and are to bee valued from that rate vnto
the greatest numbers. My reasons are thus, the Musket
spoyles horse or man thirtie score off, if the powder bee
anie thing good, and the bearer of any iudgement. If
armed men giue the charge, few or any carrie Armes of
the proofe of the Musket, being deliuered within ten
or twelue score. If any great troupes of horse or foote,
offers to force them with multitude of smaller shot, they
may discharge foure, fiue or sixe small bullets being deliuered
in volley, the which pearceth al they strike, vnlesse
the enimie bee heauely armed, the which are not
vnlesse it be some 100. of a 1000. at the most of either
horse or foote. By that reckoning 100. Muskets are to be
valued vnto 200. Caliuers or more: the Caliuers may
say they will discharge two shot for one, but cannot denie;
but one Musket shot doth more hurt than two Caliuers
shot, farre or nere and better cheape: although the
Musket spend a pound of powder in 8. or 12. shot, and
the other smaller shootes twentie and thirtie of a pound.
Considering the wages and expence of two to one, the
Musket is better cheape and far more seruiceable. Some
thinke the Musket cannot march far in a day, or night,
or cōtinue long without rest, by reason of their weight
nor skirmish so nimblie nor so often, by reason of their

length, weight, and sore recoyling. Armed men are heauier
loaden than the Musketiers, and more combersome
in carriage: lightlie no great troupe matches ten miles
without resting, although it be but a little at euerie stand
and nere the enemie: the Musketiers are suffered to quit
their weight, leauing their Muskets in their rests: the armed
men will not be suffered to disarme themselues in
their march, let thē stand neuer so often, if they be within
fiue houres march of an Enemie any thing equall of
either horse or foote: by that reason they haue a little
aduantage. Fewe Captaines will force any great troupe
of footemen to march aboue 15. miles, without resting:
if the Enemie be equall and in hazard to fight, although
it be 20. miles, both armed men and Musketiers wil not
stick to march, if their Leaders haue any credite with
them, and discretion to furnish their troupes with victualls
and necessaries that belongs vnto such a march.
               Touching their often discharging, nimblenes & profit,
I answered before. For recoyling there is no hurt, if
they bee streight stocked after the Spanish manner. For
their weight and sure shooting, the Muskets haue aduantage
on all the other small shot, by reason they shoote
in their rests: true it is, were they stocked crooked after
the French manner to be discharged on the breast, fewe
or none could abide their recoyling, by reason of their
great charges of powder: but being discharged from the
shoulder after the Spanish manner, with the thumbe betwixt
the stocke and the face, there is neither danger nor
hurt, if the shooter haue any discretion; especiallie not to
ouerload their pecces, and take heede that the bullets
ioyne close to the powder. Few seruices of importance
are executed in the field without armed men; and where
armed men wil march, the Musketiers are il conducted,

vnlesse they doo the like, let it bee neuer so farre. The ouerthrowes
of all Battailes and great fights are giuen
within two miles, the most in halfe a mile: for that
space, were it further, the Musketiers march as their leaders
needs to wish them.
               Touching light skirmishes, vnles it bee to some purpose,
none vseth them, vnles it bee rawe men or light
headed, that delights to heare the peeces crack: as I saide
before, the most seruice consists either to defend or assaile
passages by water, or by straits, or to assaile townes,
forts, fortresses, or whatsoeuer seruice you can inuent if
it be done on great troupes, the musketiers are the terriblest
shot & most profitable that euer was deuised. The
Spaniards do vse them most, & findes their seruie & terrour
such, that I perswade my self shortlie, al or the most
of their small shot will be Musketiers. True it is, I doo
thinke it necessarie to haue of 1000. shot, 200. Caliuers
from that rate to the greater number, and such shot for
this purpose, when occasiō presents to make great marches
(Caualgades the strangers calls it) to giue Camisadoes
on troupes that are lodged a farre off, to surprise
Townes, Fortresses or passages that are simply mand, and
negligentlie guarded, or to lye in Ambush a farre off, to
cut off conuoyes, passengers, and such services. These
lighter shot are necessarie to march great marches with
horsemen for these purposes, the which are often taken
behind the horsemen for expedition of great marches,
to doo executions vnlooked for.
            
            
               To proue the Pike the most honorable weapon carried
by Footemen.
               THe Pike is the most honorable weapon that is carried
by footmen; the Pike is the strength of al battailes.

I know no reason but two thousand Pikes, 1000.
Musketiers, shuld not retire ten miles, although it were
all champion grounds, from 3000. horsemen mounted
& armed, as Captaines can deuise. The Pike is the chiefest
weapon to defend, and to enter a breach, although
diuers guards nere a place assieged are furnished onelie
with shot & short weapons, as armed Holberts, Targets,
and such weapons, by reason their Trenches are narrow
and deepe to couer them from the defendants shot, in
which trenches the Pikes haue no conuenient place to
fight: notwithstanding, about their batteries, and in diuers
places nere vnto these guards, they make large Cordigards,
where they place their Ensignes in some and in
all strong guards of Pikes; meaning thereby to put their
strength and rest chieflie on that weapon: wherefore
the experimented Spaniards commands all their chiefe
men on foote to carrie the Pike.
            
            
               What number of short weapons there ought to bee amongst one
thousand armed men, from that rate to the greater nūber.
               I Perswade my selfe there ought to bee amongst one
1000. Pikes, 200. short weapons, as Holberts or Bills;
but the Bills must be of good stuffe, not like our common
browne Bills, which are lightlie for the most part
all yron, with a little steele or none at all; but they ought
to be made of good yron and steele, with long strong
pikes at the least of 12. inches long, armed with yron to
the midds of the staffe, like the Holberts: for example.
like vnto those which the Earle of Leicester, and Sir William
Pelham had in the Low Countries for their guards:
being made thus, no doubt but it is a necessarie weapon
to guard Ensignes in the field, trenches or townes, and a
good weapon to execute, but no better thā the halberd.

Because the Frenchmen make their halberds with long
neckt pikes, and of naughtie stuffe like our common
browne bills, diuers of our Nation condemnes the
Halberdes: but let the Halberds bee of good stuffe and
stronglie made after the Millaine fashion, with large
heads to cut, and broad strong pikes both to cut and to
thrust, then no doubt the Halberd is nothing behinde
the bill for all manner of seruice, and armes a souldier
fairer than the bill. Both Bills and Halberds ought to
haue corslets, with light Millain murrians; the foreparts
ought to be of reasonable proofe, I meane of the proofe
of the Caliuer, discharged ten or twelue score off: so
ought the pikes also to haue the foreparts of the corslets
of the like proofe, fifteene or twenty of euery hundred,
from that rate vnto the greatest numbers. I knowe no
reason, that a thousand armed men ought to aske aboue
two hundred targetters of the proof: those weapons are
very combersome, they are best to arme men to discouer
breaches; or for the defendants to discouer trenches,
or the enemies workes; and for to couer shot that
skirmishes in streights; their weights are such, that few
men will endure to carie thē (if they be of good proofe)
one houre, I perswade my selfe, the best arming of targetters,
is to haue the corslets of reasonable proofe, and
the targets light; so the bearers may the better and nimbler
assaile, and fight the longer in defending.
            
            
               To prooue Bow men the worst shot vsed in these days.
               TOuching Bow men, I persuade my selfe fiue hundred
musketers are more seruiceable than fifteene
hundred bow-men; from that rate to the greater
numbers in all manner of seruices: my reasons are thus,

among 5000. Bowmen, you shall not finde 1000 good
Archers, I meane to shoot strong shoots; let them be in
the field 3. or 4. months, hardly find of 5000. scarce 500.
able to make any strong shootes. In defending or assayling
any trenches, lightly they must discouer themselues
to make faire shoots; where the others shot spoile them,
by reason they discouer nothing of themselues vnlesse it
be a litle through small holes. Few or none do any great
hurt 12. or 14. score off; they are not to be compared vnto
the other shoots to line battels, or to march, either in
the wings of any battailes, or before, as we terme them
from the Almaine phrase forlorne hope. Diuers wil say,
they are good to spoile the horsmen; I do confesse it, if
the horsemen come within their shootes, and can not
charge them by reason of their trenches or guards of
pikes. Lightly when the horsemen approach within
twelue score, the trumpets sound the charge; if it be on
shot, that lies where they cannot charge, they are ill conducted
that leade any great troup of horsmen to charge
trenches. Commonly the Cornets or Guydons charge
one an other if there be any of both sides: if not, few
horsemen well conducted, will charge either trenches,
or battailes of footmen, vnlesse they see a faire entrie, or
the footmen begin to shake, as good Captains wil soone
perceiue. If they do charge, they will be sure to be well
accompanied with small shot, which soone terrifieth
bowmen, especially the musketters: besides the horsemen
are all well armed, in such sort that Bowmen cannot
hurt the men; let them say what they list, when the
men are sure the arrowes will not pierce them, they wil
be the valianter: although the horses be killed, and the
Masters seruice lost for that day, notwithstanding they
thinke it better to be taken prisoner sixe times, than killed

once, beside the munition that belongs vnto Bowmen,
are not so commonly found in al places, especially
arrowes: as powder is vnto the other shot. Also time
and ill weather weakneth the bowes as well as the men.
In our ancient wars, our enemies vsed Crossebows, and
such shoots; few, or any at all had the vse of long bowes
as we had; wherefore none could compare with vs for
shot: but GOD forbid we should trie our bowes with
their Muskets and Caliuers, without the like shot to answere
them. I do not doubt but al, honorable and others,
which haue serued in the Low Countries will say as I
doo: notwithstanding some will contrarie it, although
they neuer sawe the true triall of any of those weapons
belonging eyther to horse or foote, alledging antiquitie
without other reasons, saying, we carried armes before
they were borne. Little do they think how Caesar ended
all his great actions in lesse than twelue yeeres, by their
reckoning none could prooue great Captaines that followed
him, which began and ended in that time, as
Duke D'alua said, the longer experted, the more perfect.
T'rue it is, long experience requires age, age without experience
requires small Discipline. Therfore we are deceiued,
to iudge men expert because they carried armes
fortie yeeres, and neuer in action three yeeres, during
their liues counting all together.
               Some wil say, what discipline could there be seen in
the actions of the Netherlanders and France, counting
them ciuil wars: touching the Netherlanders, the worlde
doth know their warres dured 23. yeeres, without anie
peace, putting all together not 15. months. The wars of
France dured 30. yeres: true it is they had often peace, &
a long time together: wherefore it cannot be compared
vnto the other; notwithstanding, in these actions were

imployed all the brauest Nations of Europe, their greatest
Captaines, enginers, and counsellors for warre.
            
            
               What Fortifications are best to withstand a royall batterie
and to prooue a wet ditch better than a drie.
               SOme will condemne me for my strange names of
Fortifications, they ought to pardon mee: for my
part, I know no other names than are giuen by the
strangers, because there are few or none at all in our language.
If a man shuld call a Casamate a slaughter house,
the multitude would thinke I speake of a place to kill
biefes, & such matters; if I should call a Cauilere a moūt,
diuers would aske, what to do? to place windmills or artillery;
if I should call a rampire a wall, they would think
I lied, vnlesse it were made of lime and stone: therefore
as the most languages calls London and Bristow as we do,
so is it best for vs to call their inuentions as they do: touching
Muskets, Caliuers and Hargubuziers, with other
things, wee agree with their names. The best dry ditch,
is to haue the ditch 100. paces broad, & 50. foote deep, 4.
Casamats on euery side of the Bulwarkes, the lowest to
flanke the bottome of the ditch from the one side vnto
the other; the second like wise within ten foote, with
broad Casamats, that the Artillery may be raised hie behind,
to beat a long the ditches, as nigh to the botome as
can be deuised; the third and fourth Casamats likewise
within ten foot one of another, to flanke the ditch in euery
part as lowe as may be deuised; also the fourth Casamate
must flanke the Counterskarfe: in euery part
the Counterskarfe ought to bee three score broad, rising
from the foote to the head; the head ought to couer
the ditch and rampire as high as the fourth Casamate:
you can not bestow too much cost on the Counterskarfe, Counterskarffe,

for before the enemie possesse the
Counterskarffe, hee cannot batter to take away any of
the flankes: wherefore it ought to bee made with all the
arte that can bee deuised with lime and stone, from the
foote to the head, especiallie for fortie paces nere vnto
the head. It were not amis, although it hath been neuer
seene before to haue mines like vautes, ouerthwart to
the midds of the Counterskarsse; which mines ought to
be flanked with two lowe Casamats out of the head of
the Bulwarks, likewise from Bulwarke to Bulwarke
in that sort: my reason is, when the assailant lodgeth in
the Counterskarffe, they must bee couered with Trenches,
the which will bee hardlie done by reason of these
mines. The mines cannot bee hurtfull; let the Enemie
finde them, they cannot lodge in them, we knowe it by
good experience: he that possesseth a mine, first hauing
an entrie that cannot bee cut off, hath treble aduantage,
though the mine were sodainely made, much more being
made artificially with time and care, hauing a Casamat
to flanke it. The Counterskarffe ought to haue
parapets cut in them foure foote deepe, euerie trench to
flanke one another, from the head to the foote of the
Counterskarffe, I meane place to lodge what troupes
pleaseth the defendants to guard it, with diuerse places
to sallie both horse and foote at their pleasures. Euerie
Bulwarke ought to haue two sallies, one for Horse
and foote, the other a little secret sallie: the Bulwarkes
ought to flanke one another within tenne score; euerie
Curten ought to haue two Caualeres to command
the field within their shootes, aswell as the Counterscarffes:
let all this bee finished as Captaines and Inginers
can deuise. Notwithstanding, no drie ditch can
be compared for strength vnto a wet ditch: my reason

is thus, where water may bee drawne vnto the ditch of
the Rampier, likelie it may be drawne vnto the Counterskarffe
ditch: halfe or the best part of the Fortifications
is lost, when the Counterscarffe is possest, being
possest, the assailants with their Trenches on wheeles,
pusht on with strong poales with the force of men, the
which may be made of the proofe of a field piece; with
those and with wooll sacks, gabions, sand bags, faggots,
and such deuises, as they had before Sluce, they will
soone place their batterie: after dismounting the Caualeres
and highest Casamates. Also they will deface the
Counterscarfe, enter the ditch with mines in diuers places,
in time make all the Counterscaffe an easie entrie in
the ditch, and keepe their guards in the sides where the
flankes can not annoy them: that being done, they will
soone lay batterie to the other Casamates before they
batter: hauing an easie entrie into the ditch, the defendants
dare not sally, by reason the Assailaunts Artillerie
beates all their high flankes & parpets; in such sort, that
none dares shew themselues. Let the defendants enter
the ditch, the Assailants will enter also; beeing pell mell,
the Casamates kils their owne as well as their enemies.
Being thus, no doubt in short time the assailāts wil lodge
in the rampier let it be neuer so thick, what trēches with
in the Captaines and Engioners can deuise, vnlesse they
haue newe fortifications, like vnto those I named before:
in time the Assailant will lodge his batterie on the
rampiers, as they did at Mastricht, and in short time fight
with equal hands with the defendants to their vndoing.
Therefore a drie ditch cannot be compared vnto a wet.
If there can be made a wet deepe broad ditch at the foot
of the counterscarfe, where the water may not be taken
away, I knowe no reason why the defendants should

loose their Counterscarfe, being well manned. If the
water may be drawen out of both the ditches of Rampier
and counterscarfe, yet is the wet ditches better than
the drie. Few good Enginers giues counsaile to make
a wet ditch artificiallie, without Casamates vnder water,
as lowe as reason perswades them the water may be
taken from them: being let out, there remaines in some
trenches, water that cannot be voided, beeing cleane taken
away, the Casamates flankes all one.
               As I said before, flankes cannot be taken away, without
possessing the Counterscarfe, neither can a broade
ditch be fild, without great murders against reson, with
out dismounting the flanks. Some wil say, the dry ditch
is better, alledging that any armie may the better succor
the place asseiged, and that the defendants may the better
sally out. Touching the succouring of the Asseiged,
it is well knowen al Armies are victualled from hand to
mouth; he that leades an Armie to leauie a siege, & cannot
finde a place to lodge his armie within three houres
march of the others, where hee shall be assured to force
his enemies to fight within ten daies, leauie his siege, or
famish, conducts his troupes verie ill. None besiegeth anie
place, but intrencheth himselfe and troupes in such
sort, that 5000. will defend trenches, against thrice their
number: wherefore the succours are ill conducted to
force trenches, and may fight better cheape. Touching
the sallies of the besieged, if the fortification be such, as
I named before, it ought to haue in it for euery bulwark
a ponton, I meane a bridge ioyned close together with
yron engins, like vnto those of the citadell of Antwerpe.
Those pontons are iust the bredth of the ditch, hatched
fast with yron hookes vnto the Counterscafe, made so
broad & so strong, that Artillerie may passe beside horse

and foote. These pontons serue a wet ditch for salying,
aswell as any salies that belongs vnto a drie ditch: both
wet and drie, when the Counterscarffe is possest, leeseth
their salying, if the Seigers be good Captaines. All Batteries
ought to be guarded with strong trenches, and all
quarters ought to bee stronglie entrenched, as I saide
before; especially, the assailants hauing intelligence of
succors, that being furnisht, the salying of the assieged is
their owne confusion. It is dangerous to haue Bastiles
from the rampier like vnto Mastricht, Vtricht, and other
places. Some counts these bastiles bulwarkes, I thinke al
Bulwarkes ought to bee gardall round about: others
counts them spurres or rauelins; whether they be spurs,
bastiles, rauelins or bulwarks, they be dangerous vnlesse
they ioyne vnto the rampier, or to bee furnisht during a
siedge with strong guards. Commonlie they are not
guarded, vnlesse the Enemie lodgeth against them, because
the defendants perswade themselues, the Enemie
dares not lodge in them, by reason they bee open vnto
the curteine & cauileres like the Counterscarfes. These
Bastiles haue much earth. Let the Enemie enter one of
them, within two hours, he couers himself in the earth;
nothing made with hands that can bee battered, but will
be made assaultable. Is there a breadth in one of them, &
the enimie can beate the entry, I meane the bridge, betwixt
the curten and it, their succours is cut off. Besides
the defendants shall not finde much ground within thē,
to retrench themselues against the cannon; & where the
cannon plaies no defendant dare shew himself: some wil
say, these bastiles may haue counterscarfes as I named
before; I doo confesse it, but they are so farre from the
rampier, that neither the rampier, his counterscarfe, nor
scarce caualere can flanke; wherefore without doubt

these bastiles that are not ioined vnto the rampier, are very
dangerous, and not to bee compared vnto the others ioyning.
True it is, men, victuals and munition ought to defend
Trenches against an Armie, I doo confesse it, a little
Armie against a great, I meane halfe so manie. But no Fortifications
made with mens hands, can be kept continuallie
against a royall Armie, without succours, if it can bee
battered; nor against a small Armie, without men, victualls
& munition: wanting one of the three, the best Fortresse
is lost, you must thinke the assailants hauing the field, and
meanes to reenforce their troupes as they list, the losse of
one hundred vnto the defendants is more, than two thousand
vnto the assailants. But let the defendants or assailants
do their dueties to the vttermost in any kind of seruices,
vnlesse it pleaseth their masters or superiours to
grace their deedes, their well dooing will bee turned to
nought; and their vertues, vices. Wherefore all men of
warre ought to pray to hazard their liues in the sight of
their Princes or Estates, then likelie they will confesse no
traffique so deare as liues, especiallie being in action with
equall enemies. It is hard to please the most masters, & vnpossible
to content the rude multitude: the least worme
will mooue, hauing anie life being troden vpon: for my
owne part I doo confesse to bee one of the least in respect
of thousands, not so base but euer I carried a mind rather
to be buried dead, than aliue.
               I speake this for the wrongs done vnto my selfe and
companions for the defence of the towne of Sluce: true it
is, those that serues many, serues no bodie; I meane, they
shall find none that will confesse to be their masters, especiallie
when they should be rewarded for their seruice, but
the multitude will bee readie to disgrace their seruants,
thinking by such meanes to pay them their debts, or at
the least sufficient rewards to bee reconciled vnto them
and pardoned for their misconstred thoughts. Wherefore
I would wish all men of warre, and they can, to bee in all
strange Princes or estates debts, rather than they in yours:
if your masters bee giuen to any machiuell humours, the

debts that should pay you, will hire them diuers others:
are you in their debts, you are sure not to bee wronged,
thinking your seruice to come paied for. Although our
masters the States bee for the most part honest and vertuous
personages, notwithstanding looke into their actions,
you shall finde a number of Captaines wronged besides
our selues: they are partlie to bee borne withall. Sometimes
great Captaines are so ambitions, that they will deface their inferiours deedes: therefore there can been no great fault in the States, nor any such, when we wrong one
another: otherwise time and fortune might make inferiours
Competitors with the great ones. Sometimes fortune
frownes on the greatest Captaines, in such sort, that
they can not or will not performe that the world lookes
they should do, then likelie had they rather burie their instruments
and inferiours, rather than bee touched themselues
with the least disgrace. Therefore you cannot blame
the poore Souldier to desire the eye of his master, when he
hazardeth his life. Subiects are vassalls vnto Princes and
States, and not vnto the most Generals: although I neuer
knewe any, notwithstanding, it is well knowne ambitious
Generals wronged often their masters: being in those humors,
they will bee sure to wrong their inferiours, vnlesse
they serue their turnes. Touching our wrongs, I impute it
to no bodie but vnto our owne fortunes, as the Spaniards
said vnto Charles the 5. Adeunda salta la diecha, non apreuiecha la
diligencia. Touching Sluce, I do protest by the faith of
a Souldier, what I write is troth. As nigh as I can remember,
we kept the Towne about 60. daies: diuers thinkes it
no time, because Harlam, Mastricht, and others, were kept
longer: little doo they thinke how those places were furnisht
with all necessaries, especiallie, the lesser of both had
in them at the least 6000. hands to fight and to worke. Let
vs be rightlie iudged, I will prooue that Bouennene was the
furioust siege that was in the Lowe Countries, since Duke
D'aluas arriuall vntill this houre; the which began and ended
in lesse than twentie daies: notwithstanding, there
was more Captaines and Souldiers spoyled by sword and

bullet at that siege, than at Harlam, which dured ten moneths.
Experimented Captaines will confesse, the furie of
all breaches are tried in fewe houres, and the furie of artillerie
preuented without sodaine attempts. Wee were
not in S
                        •
                     uce 1600. fighting, workmen, and all: wee had to
keepe (counting the two Forts) aboue two miles and a
halfe. It is well knowne, before we entred, the Towne lost
one Fort. If wee shewed anie valour in our entrie, let Sir
Henrie Palmer, & his Seamen, with them of Zealand iudge;
the danger was not so little, but of the vessels that carried
vs in, fiue were taken the next tide in comming out. The
third tide, Sir Charles Blunt offered fiftie pounds (besides
the commandement his Masters and Mariners receiued
at his imbarking) to carrie vs our necessaries from Sir
William Russell, then Lord Gouernour of Vlishing, who indeed
was the occasion of our entrie, resolution, and quick
dispatch; who sent with vs a good quantitie of victuals and
munition: and to say troth, without his earnest dispatches
wee had not entred: then the world knowes the Towne
had been lost without blowes, as a number of others were
in those Countries farre better than Sluce: The best sort
doth knowe, had I and my companions marchanted our
liues, as traffickers doth their ware, wee had no neede to
haue entred Sluce, for our direction was but to Ostend: we
were battered with thirtie Cannons and eight Culuerings
on S. Iacobs eeue: from three of the clock in the morning
vntill fiue in the afternoone, they shot aboue foure thousand
Cannon shot. By the Dukes owne confession he neuer
sawe so furious a batterie in one day: wee were made
saultable aboue 200. & 50. paces, betwixt fiue of the clock
and seauen: wee were aboue fiue times at the push of the
pike for our breach, where wee spoyled the enemies in
great numbers; who perceiuing our Trenches within Ouerthwart
the breach, quieted their furies: afterwards we
kept the Towne eighteene daies, the enemie being lodged
in our port, rampier, and breach, aboue three hundred
paces, in the which time the Enemie passed through the
port sixe paces to beate our Trenches within: wee kept

our Fort vntill wee were made saultable more than our
Troupes could guard, vnles wee would quite the Towne:
being mined, wee countermined them, in the which wee
fought hourelie for the space of nine daies with Sword,
Target and Pistols: at our breach, port, and rampiet of the
Towne wee fought daylie with pikes, short weapons and
stones, besides our shot for the said space of eighteene
daies. Touching our sallies, let the Enemie testifie. The
Duke of Parma being entred, asked me which was Buskeruilde,
standing before him; I shewed him: who imbraced
him, turning towards his Nobilitie, he said: there serues
no Prince in Europe a brauer man. Most true it is, at one
sallie he had the point with an hundred corslets of the best
sort, who charged and made to runne, eight Spanish Ensignes
of the Tertia Vecho, and hurt their master del Campo.
True it is, he was seconded with a number of others; but
himselfe principallie knowne by prisoners, and his great
plume of feathers. Also Sir Francis Vere marked for his red
Mandilion, who stood alwaies in the head of the armed
men at the assaults of the Fort and Towne, beeing twise
hurt, I and other his friends requested him to retire: he
answered, he had rather be kild ten times at a breach, than
once in a house.
               Captaine Hart most valiantlie swamme in and out to
shewe our Generall and States our wants and daungers:
the world doth know what picks there was betwixt them
at that instant, such that none can denie but a full resolution
was taken not to enter in by water. The world doth
knowe our Armie by land retired at midnight from Blanckenborough
to Ostend: let enuie and malice speake what
they list, troath may be blamed but neuer shamed: we were
lost men but for our owne wits and resolution: our powder
was all spent so farre, that wee had not to maintaine
halfe a daies fight: the Enemies had gotten into our rampier
so farre, that their shot flanked vs into our trenches,
for eighteene nights we lay alwaies Officers and all at our
breach, where we eate our meate continuallie: we had not
left vnbroken of twentie field peeces with their Artillerie,

foure: wee endured in Towne and Fort, seuenteene thousand
foure hundred and aboue of Cannon shot. Where
malicious tongues speake of our assaults, I protest we endured
one assault in the Fort at breaches and mine, from
nine of the clocke in the morning, vntill two in the afternoone,
where the braue Marquis of Renti was hurt, the
great Captaine Mounsieur de la Mote lost his right arme,
Mounsieur de Strippeny, Colonell of the Burgonians slaine,
with diuers Captaines and Officers: besides, by their own
report at that assault they had slaine, aboue seuen hundred
and as many hurt: we had hurt and slaine at that assault
aboue one hundred and fiftie; where Colonell Huntley,
Sir Edmond Vdall, Sir Iohn Scot, Captaine Ferdinando
Gorge, Master Selinger, Captaine Nicholas Baskeruilde, with
diuers other Gentlemen and Officers shewed themselues
most valiantlie, both at that assault and at all other seruices,
during the said Siedge. Captaine Francis Alene swam
in with Captaine Hart after the breach was made; during
his time, none shewed greater valour. Truelie, all the Wallons
with their souldiers shewed themselues constant, resolute
and valiant, especiallie the braue Captaines, Messures
de Medkerke and Erogier. We were but foure English bands
neere two hundred strong a peece, by reason wee diuided
amongst them some two hundred and fiftie Muskettiers,
who through the meanes of the Gouernour of Vlishing,
came with vs from his Garrison, from Berghen, & Ostend.
There were many Lieftenants, Ensignes and Sergeants,
aduenturers, beside those souldiers, the better halfe of our
men were slaine▪ for of 1600. English, Wallons, and Flemings,
we carried not out 700.
               In respect of our losses, our Captaines asked pay for the
whole numbers; wherefore our masters the States and others,
would not confesse our losses to bee so great, from
the first houre of our entrie, vntill our comming out, none
came to vs but those which swamme. The Duke of Parma
himselfe asked me before a great number, what were our
losses? I answered him with the troth as neere as I could:
himselfe, and diuers other assured vs, that he lost before

                  Sluce fiue and fortie Captaines besides other Chiefes, and
more Souldiers than he lost at Nuse, Berke, Graue, and Vendello.
What words I spake vnto the Englishmen that followed
him, my companions can witnesse. Some others
(besides the Duke and my selfe) knowes, if I listed, and
promise kept, I might haue had a farre greater number of
Pistolls, than euer I had of Angells. True it is, some Princes
loue treason, but neuer like the traitors: did they loue
them, they should neuer loue me, for the least thought of
such matters. Where it pleased some to speake of two Irish
Greyhounds, which the Duke requested me to send vnto
him; returning to Middleborow, where I found the Earle
our General, he gaue me two faire Greihounds, commanding
me not to faile to send them vnto the Duke: and finding
Master Steeuens, sometime seruant vnto the most noble
Sir Philip Sidney, returning vnto the Duke, on my request
he presented the doggs; for the which it pleased the
Duke to send me a faire Spanish horse with a rich saddle.
The saying is true: It is better for some to steale a horse
than others to looke on: notwithstanding, that I gaue nothing
nor receiued nothing without the consent of my
Generall, it was enuied without more occasion. A faire
horse with rich furniture is easilie discouered by day light,
where bagges or rich bribes can hardlie bee seene, if the
parties hath wit to couer it, the which the Spaniard presents
often to many, vnknown to their masters or estates,
els their credites had not troubled Europe as it doth, nor
the proceedings against them so slowlie as it is in some
places.
               Some said also; if they had bin in such dangers in Sluce,
wherefore gaue the Duke of Parma such large composition
vnto them? I know no reason but this, sixe daies before
we gaue ouer the Towne, all the Captaines and Officers
met in counsell: Hauing seene our daungers, and
some perceiuing the heate of our succours, wee assigned
our Articles of composition, swore all to haue them granted
vnto vs or to dye, and to burne the Towne and Castle,
so escape that could through the drowned land: The copie

of those Articles with other letters wee sent vnto the
Earle our Generall and Estates, the which came into the
Enemies hands, by reason the messenger was slaine in
swimming by their boates and pallisade on the riuer. This
is well knowne vnto all our companions, for the Marquis
of Renti out of his Trench tolde it me openlie before all
our guards at the breach, and that Owen a Welsh Gentleman
had much adoo to put my foule hand in Italian to
the Duke. Also wee made a sallie, where we lost two Officers,
who shewed them our resolution, the which we maintained
being face to face with the Duke in our parlie, and
returned once from him into the Towne, thinking he
would not agree vnto some of the articles: but his prudēce
or his counsell perswaded him to send for vs againe, and
to signe them all. But I protest on the faith of a Christian,
I thinke so wil the rest of my companions protest the like,
for my part I knowe not how wee might haue kept the
Towne twelue houres with the losse of our liues, had wee
been al desperate, if it had pleased the Enemies to attempt
vs: but most true it is, rather than take any base conditions,
some and many would haue ended our liues in that
place. I protest to all manner of qualities, I write not this
with a meaning to condemne any particular nor generall
that should haue succoured vs, nor to robbe the least defendant
of his right; for I confesse my selfe the simplest
Captaine of halfe a dozen that was within the Towne,
three or foure of them, were they knowne and rightlie
iudged, are sufficient to conduct double that Garrison in
anie Armie in the world, and to conduct a greater troupe,
hauing authoritie.
               Some may blame me because I tooke no care in writing
this action of Sluce more larger, and in better order; I will
doo it at large in my discourse of the Netherlanders actions,
perhaps both that and a number of other matters,
in better order, than some perswaded great Personages, I
could doo.
               True it is, some are to write, some to speake, others to

execute. What I want in anie of those vertues, my bloud
shall witnes in others, the zeal of 
                     〈◊〉
                   towards my sacred
Soueraigne and deare Count
                     •••
                  , if occasion presents
it. In the meane time, and alwaies, I pray
most heartilie to the Almightie to preserue
her sacred health and royall estate to
the honour of God, and confusion
of her Enemies.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   