
      
         
            
            
            The Arte of Loue. OR, Loue diſcouered in an hundred ſeuerall kindes.
            
            
               ET VSQVEAD NVBES VERITAS TVA
            
            Printed at London by P.S. for William Leake: and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Paules Churchyard, at the ſigne of the Greyhound. 1598.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Worſhipfull Ma: Henry Prannell Eſquire, the true Friend and Fauourer of all laudable Profeſsions.
            
               SIR, the ſtranger may theſe my ſalutations ſeeme vnto ye, in that I being a Stranger and neuer treading on Engliſh ground till this inſtant, make choice of you for my firſt Entertainer, intruding my ſelfe as a gueſt, whereas yet I haue no acquaintance at all. But if you

ſhall deeme me blame-worthy heerein, (as I will not greatly ſtand in maintaining anie preſumption) the fault indeed is a kinde Countrimans of yours, who would needes haue mee leaue my honourable Friends in Italy, and thoſe great preferments alotted me in France, to trie the aire & climate of faire Englands Maiden Kingdome. And whereas diuers others intreated me to honorable habitations, yea, as great places of reckoning as anie mine owne natiue Soile affoorded me: yet the perſwaſions of this your wel-wiſhing Friend hath ouerruled

me, to lay all my fortunes at your feete, & either by your fauour to liue here for euer, or by your diſcountenance to returne backe diſgraced. The rude Engliſh I ſpeake, I learnd it of him: the danger I may incurre, I impoſe vpon him: onely (for his friendly aſſociation in my trauell) if you allow me anie grace, beſtow it on him. For, as his affection to you exceedeth that of manie: ſo, (in mine opinion) if you trie him, you ſhall finde him as forward to your welfare as anie.
            
               
                  Your Worſhips to bee commaunded: Hecatonphila.
            
         
         
            
            
            Jn Artem amandi Decaſtichon.
            
            EXimiè ſcripſit Cicero, benè pinxit Apelles,
            
            Inuidiae morſum ſenſit vterque tamen.
            Conſcia mens recti cum te comitetur euntem,
            Sperne venenato quicquid ab ore fluit.
            Quòd liber eſt nitidus, miſcetur & vtile dulci,
            Dexter Apollo tibi; Fama perennis erit.
            Ergo macte animo, nec publica cōmoda tardes,
            Ingenij viuent ſic monumenta tui.
            Candidus Interpres laudetur, & optimus Author,
            Viuat vterque diu, cedat vtrique decus.
            
               FRANCISCVS MERES.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Argument.
            
               VIncentio Bentiuoli beeing Duke of Ferrara, a ſolemne contract of mariage was cō
               cluded, betweene Ludouico his Sonne, and faire Annabella, Daughter to the Marqueſſe of Mont-Ferrat. And when the tìme of the Nuptialls came to bee perfourmed, there wanted no reſort of honorable Perſonages, nor anie magnificent coſt and royall pompe, as might well be ſeeme a matter of ſuch importance, as alſo the time ſo neceſſarily vrging it. Triumphes, Tiltes, Maskes, Barriers, were one while Companions with this gracious Aſſemblie, then another while ſtately

Tragedies, and queint conceited Comedies holpe to beguile the idle howres: & when neither of theſe were thought expedient, then ciuill diſcourſe and familiar conference liberally paſſed between the Lords and Ladies.
            Jnto ſeuerall Companies were theſe Diſcourſers deuided, ſome intreating on martiall affaires, others of ciuill and domeſticall occaſions. But they who are the Argument of our preſent Treatiſe, their talke conſiſted onely of Loue, laying downe Rules, grounds, and principles, whereby (at full) to inſtruct the true Arte of Loue.
            
            
               One Ladie (among the reſt, tearming her ſelfe Hecatonphila) was allowed to be chiefe Speaker in this diſcourſing of Loue: and though at diuers times before ſhee had indifferently inſtructed all (or at leaſt the moſt part) of them, concerning the proceeding in ſo weightie a matter, yet now at this inſtant they requeſt a further ſatisfaction.
            Shee, loth to denie anie thing remaining in her power, and ſeeing the paſtime which was prepared for that night to be a pleaſant Comedie, euen almoſt at the point of preſentment, while the Actors were attiring and furniſhing

themſelues to their intended merriment, ſhe deliuered this her ſhort Inſtruction to the Arte of Loue, fitting it with the breuitie of the time, & the earneſt deſire of them that ſo much importunde her theretoo, beginning her Diſcourſe as hereafter followeth.
         
      
      
         
            
            HECATONPHILA The Arte of Loue. Written by Maſter Leon Baptiſta Alberto, Florentine: wherein is taught an hundred kindes of Loue.
            
            
               
                  I Take it to be a part of humanitie, as alſo an action of pittie & compaſſion, ſeeing for the moſt part amongſt you (faire Ladies) ſo manie ſignes of an afflicted ſpirite, onely through the weightie oppreſſions of loue, that by all the wit and cunning remaines in me, I ſhould inſtruct

how this burthen might bee more eaſie, and leſſe troubleſome vnto you.
               For beholding at this inſtant (moſt ſweete Siſters) manie of yee leaning your heads on your hands, others croſſe armd ore the breaſt, ſome (bitterly ſighing) hiding their eyes with their fingers, other ſome lending their lookes to all parts of this Theater, as it wer to eſpie among the multitude, the man whō they moſt of all expect, & with greateſt longing deſire to ſee.
               Whereby I cannot chuſe but take pittie on them, whom I know to bee in the ſame agonie, which I my ſelfe haue heertofore felt, being then leſſe ſeene and skild in loues affaires, than now I am at this inſtant.
               Now albeit you are furniſhed of good iudgement and ſingular wiſedome, whereby to direct & gouerne ye in the caſe of Loue; yet make no

doubt at all (faire Patrones of beautie) but being leſſe experienced therin than I, that you ſhall heare ſome thing deliuered from me, as pleaſing to heare, as profitable to practiſe.
               At no time can bee found a better Phiſition, than hee, who hauing firſt taſted an infirmitie himſelfe, learnes thereby the skill of helping others infected with the ſame diſeaſe. As for my ſelf, concerning mine own loue, and others made knowen to mee; I finde, that without anie repenting, I haue ſatisfied my deſires (for one woman) more than an hundred other Louers could doo: ſo that at euerie Fall of the leafe, & likewiſe for euerie Summer ſeaſon, I might iuſtly make account of a whole yeres experience in loue.
               Vpon this occaſion, learned men (who aboue al other moſt pleaſe and content me) in their priuate amorous Diſcourſes call mee Hecatonphila,
                  
which is as much to ſay, as An hundred Loues; wherefore from me, beyond all other, they would ſeeke to gather the fruites of the ſecond Triumph, concerning the ſweetes and pleaſures of Loue.
               Therefore (faire Friends, and my deareſt Delights) while the Comoedians delay their time of appearing on the Stage, liſten to me as diligently and attentiuely as ye can: yea, to me I ſay, who am a perfect Miſtreſſe in this Arte, and deſirous withall to make you deepely learned therein; that you may learn how to end your Loues with maruellous pleaſure and contentment, without dread of anie ſiniſter accident, that may befall in the progreſſe of your loue.
            
            
               
               CAP. 2.
               
                  AS concerning mine owne Loues, (which till this inſtant were neuer more than two) with thoſe of others, wherein I haue imployed my labour and induſtrie: but onely of the firſt, thorough my want of prouidence, I haue no great occaſion to complaine: And that was in my yong yeares, when I ſet a high rate on mine owne beautie, eſteeming more a bare victorie of opinion, than the endowment of ſuch an eſpecial occaſion, wherby I might ſoly ſtudie & endeuour, to make my ſelfe faire and beautifull indeed.
               But for this euer afterward I gaue thankes to Venus and Cupid, who in my firſt affections & yonger errors, gaue me a Loue diſcreete, wiſe, modeſt,

vertuous, pittifull, patient, and worthie of all commendation: of whom I learned (that which is onely ſufficient) to loue ſecretly, and without pride, controuling daylie mine owne imperfections, and practiſing the knowledge of manie things neceſſary to true and perfect louing: as for example, to rehearſe large Hiſtories by lookes onely, & other eſpeciall matters by leaſt ſuſpected behauiour.
               But moſt happy is the Louer whatſoeuer, whoſe fortune is ſo good as to light on ſo true and faithfull a Friend: ſweet loue, ſweet paſtime, but ſweeteſt of all is the firſt kindled heate, which brings the louer both pleaſure and profit together, whereby he may the better attaine his owne contentation.
               The firſt loue, being not counterfet but ſurely grounded, can neuer be remooued from the remembrance: but

truly the ſweetnes of thoſe ioies were rare and numberleſſe, were they not often troubled by crooked & finiſter meanes, as oftentimes happens to vs women, ſuch as I was in my yong & vainer dayes, as ſhewing our ſelues too diſdainful, & reckoning the meaneſt of our owne priuate opinions, to be farre beyond all others.
               Fooles that wee bee, how manie wonderfull pleaſures loſe we, in nice ſhunning them? Afterward, both alone and publique, how much do we bemone our owne ſtearne rudeneſſe? Thus firſt (through our owne fault) we finde the cauſe of our annoiance, til with floods of teares we weare out the flint of our ſtonie ſtubbornneſſe, learning thereby to become more milde and tractable.
               It is beſt then to learne, how to loue without fierceneſſe or diſdaine, but it falls out verie ſildome, that without ſome bitterneſſe one can

endure the ſweete which growes by Loues beginning, except wee firſt make choyce of ſuch an one, as ſhall appeare moſt meete and worthie to be beloued.
               Liſten then (faire Virgins) & learn of me to paſſe pleaſantly the courſe of your life, as alſo to bring ſuch quiet to your Loue, as the iſſue thereof ſhalbe moſt peaceable and glorious.
            
            
               CAP. 3.
               
                  HEere then will I firſt inſtruct ye, how to make choyce of a right good Louer: & afterward teach, in what maner and by what arte you may take & entertaine him, with all the grace & good wil in ſuch caſes requiſite. Laſtly, ye ſhall vnderſtand from me, with what eaſe and ſecuritie yee may long

time triumph in your amorous enterpriſes. For which good Leſſons, I wold next of all know, what thanks or kindnes (on your behalfe) I ſhalbe requited withall?
               But out alas, what recompence ſhal I expect frō ye (faire louely Creatures) when ye haue proou'd, what pleaſure, profit & contentment theſe my inſtructions ſhall enrich ye withall? Well, come what may, I will wayte for nothing elſe from yee, or make anie other demaund, but when yee haue attentiuely heard my ſpeeches and admonitions, that ye would beſtow your loue effectually on the partie, by whom ye finde your ſelues to be loyally beloued.
               For this I dare certainly aſſure yee, that whatſoeuer ſhe bee among yee, that in her courſe of loue will not obſerue my Aduertiſements, let her neuer looke for anie amorous content, without verie great croſſes and

perturbations, neither ſhall ſhee liue without the charge and oppreſsion of infinite cares, greefes and heart-killing paſſions. Liſten then aduiſedly, how much it ſhal auaile ye to loue diſcreetly, and how preiudiciall beſide, the want of this knowledge in loue will be vnto ye.
            
            
               CAP. 4.
               
                  FIrſt then muſt wee ſhew yee, what kinde of Louers they ought to bee, of whom you ſhould make choyce: and therefore (ſweet Siſters) bee carefull of this firſt precept, that yee chuſe not a man either too yong, or ouer-wearied with yeares: for no age can bee more ſucceſſefull in louing, than when a man is in the ſtate of firme ſtrength & abilitie: which being alreadie ſpent and gone in old men, makes them vnapt or incapable of thoſe ſweet paſtimes

the caſe of Loue requires.
               Think with your ſelues what a hell it is, to loue where the like cannot be returned againe. Whereas the able gallant Youth, being in the firſt flower of his manly age, hath a moſt delicate aſpect or countenance, declares a more firme & potent conſtitution, and is able to endure watchings or other weightie burdens, in better ſort than thoſe of weaker diſpoſition can.
               But learne with me (I beſeech ye) to know, how many diſcommodities attend vpon ſuch men, as being ouer yong, are likewiſe vnapt for loue.
               They are not expert, & euery ſmal occaſion ſeemes in their mindes to make a verie great ſhadow, being alwaies haſty, & ſubiect to no patience.
               They are ſudden, raſh & indiſcreet, knowing little, & therefore improuident, ſuſpitious in all things, & eaſily caried away with any diſdainful conceit. Sildome ſhal ye ſee thē without ſome folowing friend, to whom they

wil diſcourſe a whole hiſtorie of their amorous paſsions, taking delight in counterfeiting and defending apparances of truth, and making open vaunts of approoued falſhoods.
               Here hence inſues it, that theſe reports paſsing from one to another, whatſoeuer is ſpoken of vs women, bee it neuer ſo falſe, as quickly will ſome be found to beleeue it.
               Thus by the meanes of theſe indiſcreet yong heads, before wee can ſcant know the name of him we purpoſe to loue, wee are made common reports and pratlings of the people.
               And ſometimes it happeneth, that when all ſiniſter language is ſilent of vs, then our owne fortune reſembles the yong Liones following the Hart, who ieſted & dallied verie long with her yet in the end caſt her off: rather than which inconuenience ſhould happen to me, I would make election of an elder Louer, than one ſo

ouer yong and voyd of reaſon.
               The Louer more ſeene in yeares, will be wiſe, diſcreet, readie to know and accompliſh whatſoeuer, according to time, place, and all offered occaſions: whereas the yong gadding head, not obſeruing thoſe neceſſarie rules, can neuer know how to fit him ſelfe with theſe needfull furnitures.
               Note well the diſcreet Louer, and yee ſhall ſee him ſilent, ſecret, patient, modeſt & aduiſed: but the yong Fantaſticke will go vp and downe all day before your doore; where, thogh he be alone, yet euerie paſſenger ſhal be a witneſſe of his inward affection.
               The elder Fauour it, except theretoo induced by ſome mightie occaſion, will neuer giue ouer his enterpriſe, his Loue is his hearts Heauen: but if he ceaſe to loue, yet neuer will he become an enemie, hate, or ſeeme moleſtuous vnto ye, either by word or deed.
               
                  The yong wanderer, like one that newly comes into a publique market place, walkes along euerie ſide, and admireth all things, deſiring to inioy each thing hee beholdeth: but with the leaſt looke he is preſently chaunged: and no greater miſerie can happen to her that truly loueth, than to affect the man, whoſe heart and ſoule are not ſolemnly dedicated and linkt together, to deſire or couet more than one onely Loue.
               But that which is worſt of all, theſe young amorous Gallants, for euerie ſmal occaſion giue ouer their affection, conuerting their behauiour and all elſe towards vs, as if we were their verie greateſt enemies.
               Vnhappie then are we, that by louing ſuch yong ſtraglers, proud minded, and voyd of counſell, muſt liue continually in feares, compaſſed in with worlds of endleſſe moleſtations.
               
                  In a ſoft and gentle molde, anie print or forme we like, may eaſily be effected: euen ſo in this firſt eſtate of greene & delicate youth, ſooner (beleeue me) may loue be extinguiſhed, than rightly enkindled.
               This makes euerie one timorous to deale with ſo ſweete a ſolace: remembring the beautifull Roſe, that it both ſprings & dies in one Summer; and haile ſtones fallen in the morning are no where to bee found the ſame day at night.
               Hereby ye may perceiue, faire virgins, that men ouer aged, are not the apteſt for loue: likewiſe theſe yonger ſort to bee verie daungerous, and therefore not to be dealt withall; but ſuch as floriſh in a mature and ſetled middle age, may perfourme, what the too olde are vnable for, and know that, which thoſe young and greene wits are vtterly vnexpert and ignorant in.
               
                  An apple being well knit together and mellowed, is more ſweete and pleaſing than when it is greene; yet that apple beeing ouer-ripe and too much mellowed, becomes wrinckled, ſapleſſe, and wel neere ſauourleſſe: euen ſuch is the loue of men ouer young and ouer olde; the one ſowre and ſharpe, the other dry and ſenſeleſſe.
               Heere too I muſt now adde, that in loue are infinite pleaſures, no leſſe delightſome, than to be admired; as in the marriage bed, where is all kinde conference, diſcouering of greefes, recounting afflictions paſſed, clearing all ſuſpitions, correcting with ſweet accuſations one another: thus out-wearing the ſlow-paced howers, one while with true-loues teares, another while with intyre reioycing.
               To the faithfull Louer, nothing is more pleaſing, than to feele on her cheekes, or in her boſome, the teares

of him ſhe loueth, ſweetly trickling downe: what honnie of Hybla, what cinamon of Arabia, or what Nectar prepared for the gods themſelues to drinke, can be imagined ſo ſweet, (faire Glories of Vertue) as one little teare of him whom you intirely loue? A thing ineſtimable, a delight admirable, nothing ſo precious, wherewith may not be valued al the pearles of India, the gold of the Perſians, or Emperie of the Latines; no, not with the verie leaſt teare (ſweete Siſter) of thy affected Louer.
               Oh happie Maiden, oh fortunate Louer, that ſeeſt ſhining in thy ſoules eyes, loue, faith, pittie, and all other ſweetnes, religiouſly combyned faſt together. So that by theſe, and infinite other heauenly pleaſures, which though auaileable▪ yet heere I let paſſe for breuities ſake, and ſome other ſerious reſpects: affirming this, Greene Youth is not for ye, old Age

is as vnneceſſary, only the meane betweene both, the ſound ſetled ſpirite, is aboue all other to be preferred.
            
            
               CAP. 5.
               
                  HEthertoo ye haue heard, of what Age your Louers ought to be: there are now other things moſt profitable, concerning their election, which I will rehearſe to yee as breefely as I can.
               Neuer could I finde my ſelfe inclinable to loue a man ouer-rich, becauſe theſe money-mongers will buy loue without exchange of good will, and ſeeking to ſerue their turne with manie, neuer keepe faith with anie.
               As hard a matter do I account it, to loue a man ouer-beautiful, becauſe he being deſired of diuers, though I

loue him neuer ſo earneſtly, yet ſhall I be in continuall feare to looſe him.
               As dangerous I take it, to loue a man lifted by Fortune to anie great dignitie, becauſe he can neuer intend to loue without many witneſſes, both ſtrangers and domeſticall, abroad & at home.
               He can neuer go abroad, but with a mightie throng of Seruants and Friends, which makes him ordinarily more noted of the world, than others are.
               Such men are commonly of proud ſpirit and puft vp courage, compaſſing manie things rather by violence, than any fauour, loue, or friendſhip.
               As little wiſedome is it, to loue ſuch as are ſlothfull, dull ſpirited and courageleſſe, who through want of better wit or exerciſe, make an arte or occupation of their loue, gadding abroad with frizled lockes, embroidered garments, & other open marks of

their lightneſſe, onely but to procure their owne ſcorne and derifion.
               Flie from ſuch (faire Siſters) and take heed of them, for they loue not a iote, but ſpend the day in theſe odde courſes, not as requiring your kindneſſe, but for lacke of other labour: and looke what they ſay to you, the ſame will they to whomſoeuer they meete withall; and doubt not, but what they ſpeake of others, the ſame will they of you, be it true or falſe.
               I holde it in like manner as blame-worthie, to fore-ſtall good fortune in better place, and ſtoop to the affection of a Boore, Peazant, Carterly clowne, or ſuch like, becauſe it is a ſubmiſsion to men of the very vyleſt and baſeſt condition: for marke what inconuenience followes thereupon. Theſe abiect hirelings and mercenarie groomes; thinke to attaine ſome title of honour, by giuing it foorth in publique to be knowen, that they are

fauoured by ſuch a Gentlewoman, or beloued by a Ladie of ſo great height and calling.
               Moreouer, vnder colour of religion, to loue him, who pretending zeal in his ſpeeches, ſhall diſcouer and reprooue that publiquely, which himſelfe ſeekes for in ſecrete, and gladly would attaine vnto; I condemne as much as anie of the reſt, and holde it for a misfortune hardly to be repayred.
               Then all theſe rehearſed, vz. The too rich, too beautifull, too fortunate, too negligent, too baſe, and too holie, are men not to bee regarded, neither contained within my leſſons, anie way to be beloued; let vs learne to know them then, that are to bee tearmed worthie of affection.
            
            
               
               CAP. 6.
               
                  MAke no doubt (dere Siſters) in fixing your fancies on ſuch a louer, as is not poor, misſhapen, defamed, or a villaine: ye ſhall eaſily perceiue when he is indued with wiſedome, modeſtie, patience and vertue.
               It hath euermore been my natural inclination, to loue ſuch an one, (as I haue ſaid before) that was addicted to good letters, learned, and adorned with manie vertues, euen ſuch an one as my firſt husband was; whom (indeed) I loued more dearly, than I did mine owne ſelfe: for hee was of goodly perſonage, of exceeding qualified conditions, accompanied with a maieſticall countenance, gentle & affable, compleat in all parts of humanitie,

and of a minde (diuine as it were) farre beyond all other men.
               He abounded in all vertues, eſpecially thoſe that beſt beſeemed the greateſt Princes, being of comely & ſtrong perſonage, couragious, hardie, affable, graue, ſecret, modeſt, merrie, pleaſant, where he deemed it beſt became him; eloquent, learned, amiable, pittifull, warie, expert, quick witted, and (aboue all) moſt loyall, & exceding in al the parts of gentlenes.
               Verie skilful was he in the exerciſe of Armes, managing great horſes, and either at his launce, bow, or ſuch commendable qualities, right ready: well ſeene in ſciences, muſique, painting, engrauing, yea all other Artes whatſoeuer; and yee can name no laudable action fit for a man, but I imagine he could therein very hardly be ſeconded.
               Impoſsible it is for mee to recount the moitie of his admirable vertues,

which worthily made him famous, affected, and euerie where regarded.
               Thinke then (faire Ladies) I neede not be aſhamed, both to eſteeme and tearme him my Lord, being ſuch an onely moſt ſweete and loyall Louer, neither a matter hard or laborious to me, readily and at all times to pleaſe and obey him; nay, I thought my ſelfe moſt happie and fortunate, if I might expreſſe my vttermoſt diligence, in doing whatſoeuer he pleaſed to commaund me.
               Who better could deſerue ſuch dutie and reuerence at my hand, than ſuch a worthie husband? Oh my Lord, moſt bleſſed haue I euer reputed my ſelfe, ſeeing Fortune beſtowed ſuch a Loue on me, as had not his like. But alas, my miſhap chaunced afterward, cutting off the felicitie of ſuch a heauenly kinde of life, by taking him from me into a farre diſtant Countrey, and death could bee no

worſe to mee, than this ſowre ſeparation: yet this is ſome conſolation to my ſoule, that the remembraunce of thy faith and loue continueth aliue in me, which I keepe and will doo with all religious duty I can, as a moſt memorable teſtimonie of our neuer ſundred affection.
               Such a Loue as this (faire Ladies) yea, ſuch a Loue, if ſuch a one maye be met withall, doo I councell ye to make choyce off, and intyrely to loue him, neuer preferring anie to the ſouereigntie of your affections, but ſuch as are wiſe, vertuous, and modeſt.
               Theſe are they that will requite your faith and kindnes with endleſſe recompences, and by whom ye ſhall neuer need to doubt any ſiniſter accident.
               Theſe (like Poets, Times glories) will make your names immortall, giuing true fame and eternitie to your

beautie and vertues: Lesbia, Corinna, Cynthia, and manie more deceaſed a thouſand yeares ſince, yet liue, by being beloued of vertuous and learned men.
               Loue then (ſweete Siſters) thoſe that are learned, wiſe, modeſt & vertuous: ſo ſhall your liues be heere as none the like, and your loues remembred, as none comparable.
            
            
               CAP. 7.
               
                  THus hauing declared, how ye ſhould elect men worthie of your loue, now will I ſhew the meanes to entertaine and preſerue them ſtill in louing.
               And firſt of all let me tell yee (faire Creatures) that nothing better becommeth your excellent perfections,

and ſooner preuaileth in conquering his heart you ayme at, than a ſweete carriage of countenance, as alſo a comely, diſcreete, and modeſt preſence: one piercing looke heates and enkindles the dulleſt deſire, one modeſt amorous glaunce awakens ſleepie thoughts, fetcheth fire from the flint, and makes the hart as yeelding, as your own can craue enioying.
               Heerein I haue diſcerned manie young Damoſels, (through want of better wit) verie much to deceiue themſelues, imagining, that a man no ſooner lookes on them, but preſently he is in loue with them: which makes them verie liberall in eying euerie one, and take pleſure in gazing on each goer by, ſtill thinking theyr beautie increaſed by their often beholding, wheras men are rather wearied with noting their vanitie.
               But beleue me (deare Friends) it is no part of beauties glorie, to attract

a troope of eies, or be beleagerd with an hoaſt of idle regarders: couet rather priuately to bee ſeene, as one adorned with vertue, courteſy and humanitie, than gold, purple, ſilke or ſiluer, for that ſhall make thee truly honoured, when the other will leaue thee fooliſhly deſpiſed.
               One onely light makes an entyre and perfect ſhadow, whereas manie lights being together, confounds & defaceth it: euen ſo from one onely Friend and loyal Louer, true and perfect loue is to bee expected; for well may ſhe bee compared to the Broodhen, that all the daye long beſtowes her paines in all the duſt ſhee meetes withall, and yet ſleepes at night hungrie and vnſatisfied.
               It is good then for her that loueth, to imploy all her endeuour, to finde the meanes for preſeruing one entire Loue onely: for how vnwiſe is ſhee that conſiders not, how manie caſualties

and dangers happen in loue, eſpecially when affection is rouing at more than one marke onely?
               Vnderſtand (faire Siſters true loue is a matter immortall, not to bee deuided or ſeuered: for when it is truly beſtowed where your ſoule ſolemnly affecteth, what beſide it is bragd or boaſted on to anie other, is woords without woorth, and golden ſhowes with glaſsie ſubſtance.
               She that can deuide her liking into diuers parts & proportions, knowes not how to loue indeed, but prophanes ſo ſacred a profeſsion, & ſhee that labours not to maintaine loue in his true and onely glorie, deſerues not to haue the benefites of loue, but rather to be generaly hated and contemned.
               And though all other reaſons auailed as nothing in this behalfe, yet thinke with your ſelues, that beeing purſued with a multitude of riualls,

what expectation is to be had thereof? I will not ſtand to rehearſe all the inconueniences, but let this one ſuffiſe for the reſidue.
               If yee lend good lookes to euerie one, ye bring your ſelfe into a hell & intollerable ſeruitude: for then, if ye grace one more than another, preſently ariſeth hatred and contentions betweene them. What daily is then to bee lookt for about your doores, but brawles, quarrels, frayes & murders, made onely about you? The people laye the blame hereof vppon you, worthily deſpiſing yee for theſe rude inciuilities.
               Some one of them, either to deſpite his enemie the more, or becauſe he will be ſinguler in his owne conceipt, beares downe the reſt with tearmes and brauadoes, he becomes the kill-cow, he will haue more than anie, though he merit leſſe than any: where ere hee comes, hee brags of

your fauours, preſents, letters, and tokens, yea, ſometime of kindneſſe that might be kept cloſer. And hearing the like deliuered from another, with oathes and proteſtations, how true I know not, (furie beeing enkindled) nothing but blood can allay this hot tempeſt; and you being the cauſe thereof, are publiquely condemned, that neuer can your credit bee afterward repayred.
               But admit that all your Louers were ciuill and modeſt, no way iniuring your fame and reputation, yet ſhal ye finde great defect in this multitude of followers, and that the proſecuting of their loue will proue very perillons.
               Continuallye will they bee to one another as ſpyes, murmurers, and ſecrete enemies, ſo that no place or time can yeeld yee anye ſafe aſſurance or priuiledge, but by one or other ye ſhall bee continually

ſiedged, & neuer enioy one minutes reſt, from their ceaſeleſſe perturbations.
               Therefore would I aduiſe ye, not to be ſo generall in your affection, but to elect one Louer onely, ſuch a one as before I haue deciphered vnto ye, to whom ye may ſafely diſcloſe your harts ſecretes, and finde your loue euerie way effectually requited.
               To all other beſide, ye muſt be verie ſcarce and ſparing of your behauior: for they perceiuing themſelues not to be regarded, will ſuffer yee to enioy your owne choyce the more quietly, becauſe no man will loue longer, than hee hath hope to bee eſteemed.
               If they diſcerne in your lookes no apparant ſignes of loue, they will ceaſe al purſute, and for beare further moleſtation: abuſe not then your ſelues with the opinion of ſome vain headed wantons, who are perſwaded

that the onely meanes to make them affected, conſiſts in brauery of attire, and gay decking of the bodie to bee gazde on.
               But I aſſure ye (deare Siſters) that neither golde, pearles, periwigs nor painting, but faire & comely demeanour, humanitie, gentleneſſe and modeſtie, are the true weapons to win Loue withall, and the onely faire Trophees that beautifies his Triumph.
               I haue ſeene more homely in aides beloued for their ciuill demeanour & modeſtie, than faire faces for their pride and boldnes and reaſon giues vs knowledge by moſt apparaunt proofes, that a proud minde can neuer loue as it ſhould doo.
               What thinke ye (ſweet Siſters) did firſt of all incite and prouoke yee to loue? Queſtionleſſe neither golde, purple, precious ſtones, or any other of Fortunes ornaments: but rather

diſcreet behauiour, vertue, modeſty, gentlenes and ciuilitie, diſcerned in your amorous Seruants: then looke what firſt procured you to affect, the ſelfe ſame in others makes you to bee fauoured.
               Giue then your ſelues to one modeſt Louer onely, not audaciouſly, as diuers ouer-bold and impudent vſe to doo, but with a womanly cariage, an affable demeanous, true ſignes of humanitie, ſimple facilitie, & a pleaſing diſpoſition, whereby you ſhall gaine as much grace, good will and equall affection, as you can wiſh or deſire from your choſen Fauourite.
            
            
               
               CAP. 8.
               
                  THus ye ſee how yee ſhould make your election of one onely Louer, of mature age, vertuous, modeſt & ciuill behauiour, as I haue alreadie deſcribed vnto ye: him and no other would I wiſh ye to affect, euen as yee ſeeke to bee required with the like againe in him.
               Not much differing from this preſent purpoſe, I begin now to remember mine owne former loues, when ſitting weeping by my deare beloued mother, I would make complaint vnto her, that my Husband (the onely moitie of my ſoule, to whom I frankly gaue my ſelfe, deſpiſing the thoght of anie other) ſeemed vnkind to me, and in outward appearaunce did not

manifeſt ſuch affection toward mee, as my ſimple wiſedome craued and expected.
               Continuing in the heate of theſe amorous oppreſsions, I found but one comfort onely in this my martirdome; which was, to weepe my fill daily, and declare my greefes to my pittying Mother, ſtill accuſing (to my vttermoſt) my Husband with great crueltie.
               When ſuch large expence of teares and heart-renting ſighes auailed not, I would often intreat and deſire him, that hee ſhould not forſake my companie, and ſeeme ſo diſdainfull to her, that intyrely loued him: but his diſcreete aunſweres (as now I can confeſſe they were, though then my folly would not ſuffer mee to diſcerne ſo much) declared him to bee a wiſer Husband than I was a Wife, and his councell was more auailable, than I had wit to conceiue.
               
                  But I being then yong, and in the extremitie of Loues flames, as many other in the like caſe doo, tooke all in the worſt ſenſe, fretted, greeued, and wept alone by my ſelfe, imagining ſtill, that I loued but in vaine, & fancied where I was not affected.
               Theſe troubles and moleſtations made me ſo forget my ſelfe, that I vſed the aduice of forcerers and charmers, hearbes, vearſes, oyntments, or anie thing thoght likely to induce & procure loue: them I made proofe of, as deeming I had him not ſure enough, who loued me better than I did my ſelfe.
               In teares at length I told all to my Mother, and ſhe being well acquainted with youths peeuiſh follies, worthily controlling my deepe indiſcretion, vſed theſe or the verie like ſpeeches vnto me.
               Daughter, the eye onely is Loues directer, no hearbe, no potion, no

enchauntment, neither Circes nor Moeris, that could chaunge themſelues, & other humane ſhapes, into beaſts and monſters of ſtrangeſt qualities, haue anie power at all by theyr ſpells or exorciſmes to procure loue, or preuaile againſt a minde not determined to loue.
               Let her then that will declare her ſelfe a Louer, affect truly him whom ſhe deemes to be the like.
               One knowes not a Muſitian, but either by his voyce or touching hys inſtrument: euen ſo ye cannot be reputed a perfect Louer, but by the teſtimonie of the true ſignes belonging to Loue.
               Figures are fallacies, & ſhewes no ſubſtances; loue more priuately, than may be noted apparantly, ſo ſhall ye expreſſe your loues value, and your wittes vertue: for by following this courſe, yee ſhall haue this aſſurance, to be as intyrely affected, as your ſelf

can fancy, and the leaſt friendly look ſhall finde as fauourable liking.
               Heertoo ſhe added diuers other reaſons, but none ſo pleaſing (mee thought) as this.
               Beware Daughter (quoth ſhe) that when reports come of others deſpiſing thee, thou be not as readie to beleeue, as the other to belye, and ſo prooue as ſudden in hatred, as they were ſwift to incenſe thee.
               We ſhould bee naturally inclined rather to loue thā hate, becauſe loue is full of ſweetneſſe, and hatred hath no felicitie but in bitternes & ſowreneſſe. Therefore thus reſolue with thy ſelfe, that whoſoeuer ſhall perceiue thy hearts firme affection, will hold it as religion to returne thee the like: leaue then theſe had courſes, to baſe abuſers of their time, for they that ſo liue, ſhal worthily be loathed, and run into more contempt, than thou haſt reaſon to conſider.
               
                  Loue, and thou ſhalt be belou'de; be kinde, curteous, gentle, and debonaire, that thy outward demeanour may 
                     〈…〉
                   harts feruor: for thus ſhall the fire that warmes thee, heate him, and make him as tractable, as thy ſelfe can be affable. What thogh he bee ſomwhat ſlow in diſcouering his affection? thou oughteſt not to miſdeeme thereof, but conceiue the beſt in ſuch a caſe, gouerning thy ſelf by this rule; That he who is long ere he loues, is much longer ere he miſlikes, for haſtie fancie hath as haſtie flight: whereas loue growing by leaſure, hath aduiſe for his guide, comfort by his continuaunce, and true fame after death to make him eternall.
               He neuer ſlips or falls, that runneth with diſcretion; and the tree which is ſlacke in ſprouting, is as ſlow in periſhing.
               Wel worthie regarding were theſe

good admonitions, for (to my coſt) ſince then, I haue found them moſt certaine.
               How manie diſdaines, how manie moleſtations, more hurtfull to my ſelfe, than offenſiue to him: yea, how manie wrongs bare my Husband at my hand, only through no other occaſion, but becauſe indeed I knew not rightly how to loue?
               All which notwithſtanding, his affection to me neuer failed, & ſcantly would hee ſeeme to ſhew himſelfe anie way offended: he ſaw it was but my want of better iudgement, &, being borne weake by nature, I muſt needes declare the ſame in nurture; which though he had admirable patience to endure, yet had I no reaſon at all to diſcerne.
               My Grandame beeing a Woman experienſt in manie things, but eſpecially in the Arte inſtructing to loue, tolde mee that long ſince, which I

found moſt true in my Husband. A patient man (quoth ſhee) is the true honour of manhood; for being euermore wiſe and ſecret to himſelfe, bee his wrongs few or manie, his boſome is their buriall, and tungs abroad ſhal not tattle of his troubles at home. Euen ſo did I finde it in my Husband: for though I daily gaue him cauſe to be diſpleaſed, and (indeed) preſumed a little too much on his patience, yet (God knowes) much griefe would he ſmoother with a ſmile, pittying to to haue my errors ſhowen, or his diſquiet reuealed to anie.
               Conſider then (faire Ladies) on the good precepts rehearſed, be conſtant in loue, & doubt not of the like: the next way to purchaſe contempt, is by ſhewing your ſelues vnkinde, & the ſureſt waye to win loue, is by expreſsing true loue; hate then the one, and be ſure to enioy the honor of the other.
            
            
               
               CAP. 9.
               
                  YE haue hithertoo heard, ſweete Siſters, what election yee ſhould make of modeſt and vertuous Louers; likewiſe, that ciuill conuerſation and faire demeanour, both preuailes and purchaſeth ſuch meete men for ye. It remaines now to know the latter part, how this loue may be kept in perfect continuance, that the pleaſure thereof may for euer be preſerued.
               Which I hope ye wil account as a moſt neceſſarie conſequent, and that no leſſe skill is to be vſed in keeping, than was in obtaining: for in compaſsing of a thing, wee are oftentimes

aſsiſted by fortune and good hap, but to keepe the ſame in ſuch eſtate as it ſhould bee, requires induſtrie, wiſedome, & carefull diligence: for the felicities of Loue are ſubiect to manie infirmities, one while, by time and courſe of occaſions, another, by the iniquitie and mallice of enuious perſons, ſomtime thorough lets and hinderaunces enſuing by fortune, then againe by want of knowledge, how to guide and gouerne our ſelues in louing.
               To Time and Fortune (faire Ladies) wee muſt needes bee obedient. And as he that intends to paſſe a Riuer, ſtayes on the banke till the rough ſtormes bee ouer-blowen: ſo in the ſtearne tempeſts of time, wee ſhould awaite and not wilfully caſt our ſelues into daunger, conſidering that what may not bee done to day, happily to morrow in better ſort will bee compaſſed.
               
                  Let the way be neuer ſo long, hold on, and at length thou ſhalt attayne the end. Thinke then no trauaile tedious in Loue: if thou meete anye croſſe encounters, proceed on chearfully, and at laſt thou ſhalt land in the wiſhed hauen.
               As for the ſlaunder and detraction which oftentimes attendeth on ſecrete loue, it may eaſely bee eſcaped, becauſe hidden Loue is fortefied on all ſides with infinite good excuſes, which ſerues as a rampart againſt all bad reports.
               But among all the aduerſe chaunces incident to vs Louers, (as I haue tried by mine own proofe, and noted the like in others) there can no miſhap whatſoeuer betide vs, but it receiues from our ſelues the ground & originall; as by our ouer-much inconſtancie, pride, wilfulnes, diſdaine, and ſuch like, which proones more to our owne harme, than theirs wee

ſeeke to hurt.
               And let me aſſure yee, that there is nothing more preiudiciall to the ſweete proceeding of loue, than our owne peeuiſh humours, which being carried away with meere ſhaddowes in manie things, continually deludes vs with vaine and idle fantaſies in all things.
               Onely our own folly and obſtinate opinions, makes vs afterward ſit alone, and ſigh out our repentaunce, nor enſues this fault ſo much by improuidence, as through pride and vaine conceit at the firſt in our ſelues: therefore he ſpake both well and truly, that affirmed: A proud Woman could not loue effectually, becauſe ſuſpition continually attendeth her.
               Suſpition enſueth through lacke of knowledge, and diſtruſt, waited on by diſdaine; which makes vs to ſhun, iniure and torment them, that too dearly loue vs: thus our crooked behauiors

ſerue as inſtructers to them, & look what coyne they receiued of vs, they pay vs backe with the like.
               There are ſome of vs women, who deeme themſelues neuer ſatisfied with pride, furie, and ſcornfulneſſe, which makes but a bad agreement among vs: for where diſdain is entertained, contempt of all kindneſſe is the more increaſed, and it is pittie a true Louer ſhuld haue ſuch a reward for his labour.
               But ſhe that is of a noble inclination, gracious, benigne, modeſt, kinde and gentle, will liſten to iuſt excuſes, and let reaſon be her ruler. If anger would preſume, ſhe will quickly ſuppreſſe it; if diſdaine would attempt her, ſhee can foorthwith turne it off: remembring, that loue muſt bee imbraced with loue, & wher the enemy is repulſed, the ſolace is with greater ſweetnes receiued. Be not then coy, proud or ſcornful in affectiō, but (like

your faire ſemblances) full of all affabilitie.
               Which of yee would denie him whom ye dearly loue, whatſoeuer he demaundeth? Little can ye do then, if (at his requeſt) ye will not forſake a fond and friuolous opinion: learne, as my Lord taught me in my firſt affections, to reiect and deſpiſe all ſuch hurtfull follies.
               I tooke extreame delight, ſweete Siſters, in commending him whom I knew to be compleat in all arts and vertues, eſpecially this whereof wee now conferre: yet let it not ſeeme offenſiue to ye, that among my praiſes of him whom I loued, and euer ſhall, I mingle ſome of mine owne infirmities, wherein, either you haue likewiſe fallen through lacke of prouidence, or maye heereafter by ouermuch peeuiſhneſſe.
               Being a yong Damoſell, raſh and vnexperienced, I began to loue, falling

afterward to a little pride in my ſelfe, which drew me to diſdaine, and ſuch fantaſticke humours, as falling from one peruerſe opinion to another, I grew afterward ſuſpitious of anie occaſion whatſoeuer.
               My Husband was a goodly perſonage, of exceeding pleaſing ſpeech and vertuous qualities, which made him called to manie companies, loued and eſteemed of euerie one generally, and herehence began in me a world of afflictions.
               Whatſoeuer woman lookt on him, I iudgd her immediatly a riuall in my loue, my thoughts were neuer free from iealous ſuſpition: if he were in my ſight, yet I deemed him not ſure enough, and what woman lookt vppon him but once, I wiſht ſhe might be blinde for euer afterward.
               I could neuer glut mine owne eyes with ſufficient gazing on him, but deſired that perpetually they might be

fixed on him, when he came toward me, no woman in the world could be more contented; and let him but go backe againe, I imagined no torment might be ſo greeuous.
               My too much repoſing truſt in him, began to make me diſtruſtfull of my ſelfe: and, though needleſſe ſuſpition had got ſome hold of me, as yet it robd me not of my loues felicitie, nor anie way impaired the height of my pleaſures.
               So long theſe golden howres, daies, months and yeares endured, till fortune (enuying my further happines) ſuffered me to ſee a certaine Gentlewoman, who albeit her deſerts elſe where were worthie liking, yet mee thought her familiaritye fitted not with my Husband.
               Hereupon, as if I had been wounded with a deadly ſtroke, my face became pale and wan, deepe conceiued diſpleaſure ſate vppon my brow,

and my former pleaſing diſpoſition conuerted into ſuch melancholy, as my Husband (being preſent) & conquered with compaſsion, gathering by his diſcretion, what danger hereby might redound to our loue, both in teares, & other apparant teſtimonies of ſorow, he declared how greatly this miſhap did diſcontent him.
               All which was no appeaſing of my furious oppreſsion, but I muſt needs goe complaine my ſelfe to my Mother: who, to witnes her owne experience, as alſo to withdraw mee from ſo vaine a perſwaſion, affirmed; That ſhee had both noted and heard their diſcourſing, meruailing I wold ſhew my ſelfe ſo immodeſt, as to iudge of honeſt demeanour ſo abſurdly and raſhly, and the Gentlewoman, comming but in kindnes to ſee mee, my Husband (for my ſake) gaue her ſuch entertainment, aſwell knowing what became him, farre better than I did.
               
                  Her words wanted ſtrength to remooue mine opinion, I reputed it an iniurie, and therefore I would not be otherwiſe perſwaded, but gaue this frantick ſpleene ſuch ſouereigntie ouer me, that I grew into a wonderfull hatred againſt him, concluding, neuer after to loue him againe, but rather greeuing for the affection I had beſtowed on him alreadie. And in this heate, I ſhut vp my ſelfe to ſolitude, purpoſing while I liued to loath mens cōpany: loue now was changd to hate, faire looks to bitter frownes, & all elſe were my vtter foes, but ſuch whoſe fortunes did equall mine afflictions.
               Alas, what fooles are we women, tranſported vp and downe with theſe amorous paſsions? When I perceiued my former determination of ſolitarineſſe, to haue no likelihood of continuance, then became I deuout and religious, none but Church-goers

might now bee my companions, with them (ſiſter-like) I went from Church to Church, vſing all the meanes I could deuiſe, to forget the loue of him whom I thought my greateſt enemie.
               And, leaſt conference with ouer-manie, might alter mine intent, I would prattle with dumbe pictures, vowing this day and that day to enter religion, becauſe I would become a ſworne aduerſarie to loue. See here my ſilly wiſedome, as if I could thus haue left my Husband, at mine owne proper pleaſure, being bound to him in the bond of all humilitie & dutie.
               The verie thoght of Loue, I found wold not agree with the auſteritie of Religion; the one, in bitternes, I deemed ſweet, and the other, in the very beſt eſtate, ſomewhat too ſowre.
               Thus, while with one nayle I thought to expell another, in ſeeking to quench Loue, I kindled it

more violent, and where I was but ſindgd before by the flame, now, in euerie part of me, I felt the fire hotly burning.
               Thus one while, I would faine be free from Loues mightie thraldome, yet lothe at another, to looſe his continuall amorous ſeruice, whoſe verie lookes were my life, and whoſe abſence was more bitter than a thouſand deaths.
               But I was cunning enough to keep all this cloſe, and ſeemed outwardly to feele no greefe at all, when (God knowes) how extreamely my poore heart was tormented.
               Sullen will made me to delight in ſolitude, darke roomes and obſcure vaults would I daily walke in, where, like a witleſſe foole, I did nothing elſe but plague my ſelf, and pleaſe others, who in ſecrete ſmiled at my peeuiſh diſpoſition.
               In the end, being well diſciplinde

with mine owne diſeaſe, and more wearie of this oppreſsion, than I would the world ſhuld haue known, I became a little more friendly to my Husband, deſiring that ſtill he would keepe me companie, and I might be his glaſſe continually to gaze on.
               To eaſe himſelfe of my daily moleſtations, and ſomwhat to ſooth me in this friuolous humour, he yeelded to let his owne affaires run lauiſhly at randome, and ſuggeſt my ſottiſhnes with all poſsible conuerſation & obſeruance.
               When I had gotten this vaine victorie, it were wonderfull to tell you, how prowde I became thereof, for then I beganne to determine a ſoueraigntie in my ſelfe, to make my will a law, and his ſubmiſsion the onelye piller to maintaine and vnder-prop it. I grew then into ſuch extremitie of bold and vndecent preſumption, that I would eſteeme of him as I

liſt, offend him when I pleaſed, hauing no other reaſon, but onely his patient ſufferance: if he laughed, I would lowre; if hee ſpake faire, I would be froward; if hee deſired to walke, I would tarrie at home; if he inuited friends to be merrie, I would deuiſe al the meanes I could to make them malcontent: thus home was a hell to him, abroad, little or nothing better, and I (like a verie diuell) continually tormenting him.
               But who ſuſtained the worſt al this while? His patience did priuiledge him for inward vexation, ſo that my ſelfe bare the burden of this diſquiet, and I did my ſelfe more harme, than I could doo him: for my blood began to drie vp, my mind afflicted with inſupportable ſorrowes, all my veynes ſeemed as ſhrunke and wythered, & daily was I ſubiect to (welneere) howerly ſwounings. Which my pittiful Husband with great griefe beholding,

my former faire ſhape to bee ſo ſtrangely altred, and without any iuſt cauſe of offence proceeding from himſelfe, he ſtill deſired to know the reaſon of this maladie, & whether it lay in him by any means to help it, or if at him I was thus offended. If not (quoth he) but that your diſpleaſure is kindled againſt ſome other, wrong not your ſelfe with theſe ſharpe tormentings, but let mee reuenge it on whom ſo ere it be: for it is a debt due to Loue, and a right which hee doth by great reaſon challenge, that betweene two vnited ſoules, nothing ſhould bee kept in ſecret, but the one bee alwayes priuie to the others oppreſsions; becauſe a Louer (in ſuch a caſe) is to be commaunded, and eithers counſel is not to be ſcorned, but obeyed as the onely ſalue to cure any amorous ſicknes.
               But I (euen as it is the nature of manie other women, neuer to be ſuffiſed

with iniury, much leſſe with reuenge) one while tooke pride to ſee him hū
                  bled, another while practiſed how to preuaile more & more againſt him, ſmiling to ſee him ſo obſequious, & I ſit (as it were) controlling ouer him.
               I wiſhed that he might know the ground of my greefe; yet, if by my ſpeeches hee anie way perceiued it, with ſtout courage & ſolemne oaths I would flatly denie it: affirming that he had no way offended me, but the cauſe of my diſtemper grew by others. Then would I ſhew diſdainfull looks, ſcorne to keep him company, and expreſſe manifeſt hatred againſt him: and ſo long I continued in theſe peſtilent humors, onely to make him wearie with the weight of this martyrdome, that I could ſing when hee ſighed, ſmile when he wept: & (thogh indeed I lou'd him) yet I took a great pride in theſe commaunding behauiours.
               
                  Thus, though outwardly I appeared to bee high minded and imperious, yet iealozie within kept me hot & fiery, loading me with more mightie moleſtations, than thoſe fooliſh conceits of mine could burden him withall: yet ſtill his patience exceeded my preſumptions, and the more I grew ſtubborne, the leſſe he cared for it. How ſorie haue I been (manie times) within my ſelfe, that I could not by my diſdaines and outrages, prouoke him to anger? I could haue wiſht my ſelfe in hell, to haue gotten him but half way thither. See (poore ſoules) the folly of our ſelfe wills.
               When all the reſt preuailed not▪ to plague him as I would, I fell to this wicked purpoſe, to ſeeme in outward ſhew quite weaned from his Loue, and that my affection was inclined to ſome other; which to make hym the more ſoundly beleeue, in his ſight I would talk idly & fondly with

yong Gallants, to kindle the ſame fire in him, that flamed ſo extreamely in mee.
               Thus after long ſeeking mine own miſerie, at length I found it; and I was not ſo greedie of compaſsing it before, but then I would as gladly haue been rid of it againe.
               Much raine weares out the rougheſt marble, and with continuance of ſtrokes the hardeſt ſteele is pierced: euen ſo, the greateſt patience (by extremities) may be peruerted, and the kindeſt hart made cruell by intollerable torturing.
               His loue, which before flamed toward mee like Aetna, became now more cold than froſtie Caucaſus; his kinde lookes, faire preſence, and admirable ſufferance, were now ſowre frownes, moodie geſtures, & ſtearne impatience: which (finding to my coſt, and feeling to be ſo cruell) then, each word I had ſpoken, each deede

I had done, & euery priuate thought which had diſpleaſed him, with true teares I bewailed, & with ſighes from my ſoule intirely repented.
               But what a hell is it, when repentance auailes not? Let me complain, it was to no purpoſe, though I ſighed and ſorrowed, it had no ſucceſſe: his wrongs had been ſo mightie, and my wilfull tranſgreſsions ſo manie, as I could not but expect a iuſt deſerued puniſhment, hauing thus (through mine owne folly) procured both his hurt and mine owne.
               Infortunate wretch, my teares and torments I cannot expreſſe vnto yee: the nights ſeemed too long, wearying me with a thouſand reuoluings and repentances, the dayes likewiſe appeared gloomie and dark, becauſe I had no ſuccour but ſolitude onely.
               My breaſt was nothing elſe but a ſtore-houſe of cares, griefes and vexations; my thoughts, like diſtempered

ſeas, diuerſly tranſported, one while with anger, then with repentance, now with diſdaine, then again with loue; now with pittying my ſelf, then him whom I had diſpleaſed: I would, and I would not, I wept, pleaded excuſes, told my ſelfe the whole ſtorie of my ſilly behauiour, wiſhing I could againe haue recouered ſo much time ſpent in vaine.
               At length it was my good fortune, (though all this while I had been ſo vnhappie) to know for certainty, that my former ſuſpition concerning the Gentlewoman, which had been the cauſe of my ſo long diſcontentment, was nothing els but the folly of mine owne peeuiſh fancie, and no offence at all committed by my Husband.
               Had I not then great reaſon to bee aſhamed of my ſelfe, as one almoſt vnmeet for anie vertuous company? Iudge you (faire Ladies) that are carefull of your honours, and would not

haue your good names to bee anie way ſcandalized: was it time to ſubmit my ſelfe ſpeedily or no? & to beg fauour of him, to whom I had beene ſo farre vnfriendly?
               But to ſee how different the nature of men is from vs women, & where true wiſedome is embraced, how no malice can haue long predominance: he, who neuer was acquainted with vnciuill diſdaine, but euermore deſpiſed all franticke follies, vppon my ſubmiſsion vvas immediately ſatisfied; all offences paſt before, vvere preſently forgiuen, and as effectually forgotten, as if neuer at all committed.
               Then could I not chuſe but confes my infirmities, finding that moſt true vvhich himſelfe had alvvaies taught me, that in loue the leaſt ſuſpition is foorthvvith to be diſcloſed, & a conceit no ſooner taken, but preſently to be told.
               
                  For, a Louers beſt ſtrength is ſubiect to much weaknes, and ſuſpition once entered the minde, will hardly with reaſon or perſwaſions be maſtred. It may bee compared to an Egge, the more it is heated, it wexeth the harder: ſo iealous ſuſpect, the more it is credited, the worſe it is for vs; and the leſſe wee regard it, the greater is our quiet.
               They that pay for experience, as I did, will rue it as I doo; and they that preuent the ſweetes of Loue by their own wilfulnes, may wiſh for them afterward, and yet walk without them. My lucke was little better, which I ſigh to remember, becauſe when our felicitie began again to be firme, and that now I would not looſe the leaſt portion of pleaſure, our Countreyes affaires robd mee of my Husbands companie; where, with the loſſe of him, I would my life had periſhed.
            
            
               
               CAP. 10.
               
                  THus fals it out with vs (fair Siſters) alas too often, we care not for delight when wee haue it in poſſeſsion, but would giue our liues for it when it is too farre from vs.
               See then how manie inconueniences attend on falſe ſuſpition: ſuſpition breedes diſdaine, diſdain couets reuenge, reuenge proſecutes iniuries, which iniuries doo bring the wracke and ruine of all loue delights: this makes our ſoules oppreſt with infinit moleſtations, beeing a more plague to our owne ſelues, than them wee would offend. Thus in ſtead of ſmiling, we ſluce foorth whole riuers of teares; for friendly conference, wee vſe bitter taunts and tearmes: & loue

being created a heauen, wee make it worſe than hell; then ſhun ſuſpition as a deadly poyſon, for that is the only enemie to true loues felicitie.
               Seeke not for that which yee will be ſorrie for afterward & enquire not too curiouſly after your Louers liues: for beleeue mee (faire Ladies) if you be wronged in loue, and know it not, the blame is theirs, not yours; and an iniurie endured, is better than one offered.
               Couet not then to know, what ye cannot wiſely gouern: if he be kinde to you, it is ſufficient; if he erre without cauſe, your glorie is the greater. But neuer will hee ſtray abroad, that findes all well at home; & neuer will he care for another, that may haue his owne in quiet.
               Without thred, a needle ſerues to no vſe, nor the pleſures of loue, without due proſecution: and though a needle haue two, three eyes or more,

by reaſon whereof it carries as many threds with it, yet it makes but one entrance, marrie it makes the worke the faſter: euen ſo, he that delights to dally with manie, bindes himſelfe thereby the more ſtrictly to her hee loues indeed.
               But happie is ſhe that knowes how to ioy with him whom manie couet to enioy, and ſhe that can skill of making her ſelf the cheefeſt, ſhalbe ſure to finde no equall in her loues good fortune.
            
            
               CAP. 11.
               
                  LOue then (ſweete Soules) the men that loue you, be contented with your liking, and ſeeke not to know that which will hurt ye: flie ſuſpition, diſdaine, and all other proud humors; belieue none but him

loue, if yee wiſh well to your owne ſelues: for look what loue ye extend, the like ſhall ye finde againe, and the firmer ye keepe your faith, the faſter ſhall ye finde his, whom ye haue choſen to affect.
               Thinke not but mens conſtancie in loue muſt needs goe beyond ours, for men bee leſſe ſuſpitious than wee are; therefore they haue the greater wiſedome and gouernment.
               They perſeuere more than we can, becauſe they are leſſe obſtinate.
               They are not ſo ſudden in ill conceit as we be, becauſe they haue better courage and loftie diſpoſition.
               They cannot beare hatred ſo long as we vſe to do, by reaſon they are of a more magnifique minde, and affable nature.
               No hindrance whatſoeuer can ſtay them in their amorous deſeigns, becauſe their permanencie exceedes ours, and their qualities are not ſo apiſh

as ours.
               Some of vs women are timorous, and the leaſt occaſion offered, is our guide to ſuſpition: which friuolous humour makes vs ſcorne others, albeit our owne errours goe farre beyond theirs.
               Each ſmal offence we ſeek reuenge for, hauing no moderation in malice and miſliking, but liue as capitall enemies to them that loue vs moſt.
               We know how to offend, but not to ſuffer: wee are quickly led into errour, but neuer firme in beleefe, for looke how our opinions are, ſuch bee our behauiours, and an imagination once ſetled, is not in haſte remooued.
            
            
               
               CAP. 12.
               
                  THis opinion hath alwayes beene the deſtruction of kindnes. For (as my Huſband once told mee) it reſembles the Mole, that beeing in the deep earths obſcuritie, ſtraies about euerie way, paſsing thorow the hardeſt molde ſhe meetes withall; now, ſo ſoone as ſhe comes but to the daylight, all her force and ſtrength immediately failes her: euen ſuch in this iealous opinion hid within the darke clowde of an afflicted minde, it neuer ceaſeth to remoue freſh thoghts with infinit perturbations: but when truth doth diſcouer it, it is preſently nothing.
               When ye manifeſt your conceipt to him yee loue, vſing withall ſome

reaſonable excuſe, ye cleare both his doubts and your own dread: encreaſing (withall) his affection the more toward ye: for then yee declare, all truſt is not remooued, and ſhew a deſire of loue to be continued. Which in like occurrences hapning afterward, makes him the more careful of offenſiue behauiour; and when occaſion is hindred, the leſſe wrong can be offered.
               Whereas on the contrarie, ſuſpect kept within the heart and not reuealed, caries ye headlong from one bad conceit to another; and then yee ſee what miſcheefe immediately followes. For a man toſt in the tempeſt of continual moleſtations, if he finde that reaſon bee vtterly abandoned, though hee giue yee leaue to purſue your head-ſtrong opinions, yet hee will beſtow his loue, where hee may finde it in better ſort requited. Is not this a faire harueſt of ſuch fooliſh

humours? and a verie meete recompence for ſuch vain and rude demeanour? Yee may then ſit and ſigh, but who will bemone ye? You may crie for comfort, and it flyes the faſter from ye.
               And when this ſhall come to the cares of others, what cenſure will they preſently paſſe vpon yee? That ye were raſh, indiſcreete, vnthankfull and vnkinde: yee were beloued, and deſpiſed it; had a true Loue, & knew not how to vſe him; therefore worthily do ye beare the burthen of your owne abuſes.
               Others, leſſe acquainted with theſe mightie diſgraces, ſeeing ye not walk as ye were wont, not your Loue keeping yee familiar companie, they iudge as their opinions pleaſe them; That; either greater faults are committed, than may well bee endured, or ſuch imperfections croſſe your courſe, which rather deſerue burying

in ſilence, than publikely to be ſpoke of, for ſcandall of the Sexe.
            
            
               CAP. 13.
               
                  IT may ſo come to paſſe, that your Louer being ouer paſſionate by reaſon of your offences, and touched too neere with the piercing point of your continual iniuries, will reuenge himſelfe with your ſhame, and eaſe his owne oppreſsion by your publique defamation. For ye muſt thus be perſwaded, that hee whome your rigours haue brought to an extreame eſtate, as it were next neighbour euen to deaths doore; will regard your diſgrace no more, than you did his diſeaſe; and take as little compaſsion on your honour, as you did on his life.
               Remember then (deare Siſters)

that by beeing ſo vniuſt, proud, vnkinde and diſdainfull, the lampe of faire renowme is quite extinguiſhed: and in ſtead of true loue with the pleaſures thertoo pertaining, ye ſhall receiue but counterbuffes of your owne cruelties, and a iuſt meaſure of reuenge, for beeing ſo deſirous to ſeeke it.
               Alone ſhall ye be left without Louer or Seruant, accompanied onely but with teares and ſighes: & where before you ſuſpected a riuall in your loue, you ſhall then finde your ſelfe not to be lou'd at all: but, like one caſt off and deſpiſed, fearing (withall) to be further afflicted.
               Conſider (faire Ladies) the moſt conſtant patience (being too far prouoked) conuerteth into furie; and a wrathfull Louer is more to be feared, than a ſauage monſter that hath no reaſon.
            
            
               
               CAP. 14.
               
                  HEertoo could I adde diuers other ſuch diſcommodities, no leſſe to bee reſpected, your ſelues beeing the originall. Yee ſhall finde that thoſe pleſant places, where before ye were wont to paſſe the time in ſport & delights, through want of his companie that then graced the Aſſembly, they are become like ſolitarie deſerts, and vnhaunted walkes, not ſo pleaſing before, but now as vncouth. Alas poore ſoules, what a torment wil it be vnto yee, to ſee the yeares faire ſeaſons ſo often wheele about, when ye wer wont to be at amorous ſports, ſweete conference, and other delicate recreations: now to finde no more, but that ther were ſuch times,

and once yee had a Loue, who made all thoſe delights in their verie chiefeſt luſter? For now the times are miſerably changed; ye are left companionleſſe, ioyleſſe, neighboured on euerie ſide with greefe and calamitie: ſighes and teares abound, but return no benefit; manie eyes looke on, but none lending pittie; and that which indeed is the verie worſt of all, abandoned by him, who was your liues ſolace, & bayted at by euerie one for a courſe ſo careleſſe.
               Then bee no more (ſweete Siſters) like to blowen bladders, puft vp with proud opinion and needleſſe ſuſpition, ſeeking therby to make conqueſt of your Louers. What victorie call yee that, which hurteth your owne ſelues, and bringeth (beſide) the loſſe of your Loue? Striue to vanquiſh & ſurmount him in loyaltie and kindnes, and then the victorie will bee to eithers profit.
               
                  It is a farre greater emperie, to make your ſelues belou'd by louing, than reaching thereat by ſiniſter waies, to procure your Louers damage, and your owne downfall: for in nothing is a gentle & braue minde more to be diſcerned, than in lenitie, humanitie, pittie, and affabilitie; where contrariwiſe, loathſome diſdaine breedes all inciuilitie, and none but a wicked minde dooth nouriſh ſuch thoughts, as knowing neither how to reuenge, nor how to pardon.
               Then leaſt yee ſhould fall into ſuch misfortune, & haue your faire names blemiſhed by ſo foule a blot, follow the courſes I haue alreadie declared, giue your ſelues to loue truly, and yee ſhall finde loue againe as truly.
               Chuſe a Louer as I haue aduiſed ye, neither yong nor old, modeſt and vertuous: win his loue by gentlenes and all faire behauiour; ſo ſhall yee ſtill preſerue Loue in his cheefeſt ſoueraigntie,

and make the iſſue thereof peacefull and glorious.
            
            
               CAP. 15.
               
                  REmember heer withall, that your quiet will be the more effectuall, if ſo ſoone as a fond ſuſpition is conceiued, yee ſeeke for immediate reſolution therein, remaining firme and immouable in your ſelues, as alſo toward him whom your hart hath elected, as knowing the benefite that enſues by the one, and the vnrecouerable loſſe hapning by the other.
               And, affecting thus with intyreſt faith, diligent obſeruaunce, and all kindes of gracious vſage: the miſeries and miſhaps attending on proud opinion, which is the vtter ſhipwrack & periſhing of loue, can neuer

preuaile againſt yee, but howrely ioy and felicitie euermore await on ye.
            
            
               CAP. 16.
               
                  HAd I more leaſure, I would teach yee manie other rules to be obſerued in loue: but I ſee the Comedie is in ſome forwardnes, & the Perſonages ready attyred that are to preſent it: then till ſome other time & place conuenient wil I refer what remains as yet vndiſcouered, as hauing not gone throgh a quarter of the hundred kindes of loue. In meane while, ſweet Siſters, ſhew your ſelues pleaſing and tractable to your Louers, be not offenſiue to them, and thereby hurtfull to your ſelues. Be warned by the multitude of ſo many exāples, change not pleſure

for paine, ſolace for ſighing, and all loues heauen, for foule hates hell.
               As ye deſire to be beloued, ſo ſhew you the like: no enchauntment, no hearbe, no charme preuailes ſo much in loue, as the verie power of an immoouable affection.
               Loue then, and ſhun all misbeliefe of your Louer, then will he embrace ye with all due correſpondence: diſrobe your ſelues of iealous doubts, diſdaines and opinions; ſo ſhal your liues bee matchleſſe, and your Loues immortall.
               
                  Tutto vince Amare.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   