
      
         
            
            
            ANTWERPES Vnitye. An Accord or Peace in Religion, and Gouernment, concluded by his Highnes, and the members of the Citie, to the common weale and quietnes thereof there lately proclaymed the 12. of Iune Anno. 1579. Printed in French, and Dutch, by the Kinges Printer, and Englished by the Printer hereof.
            AT LONDON. Printed by Richard Daye, dwelling at Aldersgate. An. 1579. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               GOOD Hope there was, & not a little, that through the pacification of Gaunt, and the vnitye of ye 
               Prouinces there adioyning, this great and long turmoyle, or rather miserable calamitie of these Low-Countries should haue bene ceased, and so consequently publique peace and tranquility, aswell in Religion as otherwise, should haue bene established in the same indifferently, especially in Antwerpe, for the full restoring thereof to her olde florishing estate in trafique, marchandise, handicraftes, nauigation, martial feates and all other good, and vertuous practise or pollicy, wherein sometime she farre exceeded any other of the Prouinces whichsoeuer.
            But sith it falleth out so, that the aforesayd Pacification of Gaunt, (what with ye intermedling of Spaniards and their adherentes, being professed enemies to the coūtry, and what with other occasions therhēce

procéeding) hath bene at the first plunge, and is at this present violated and infringed in diuers poyntes: and sith that newe suspicions, and hartburninges kindle againe a fresh betweene them of the Romishe Catholique Religion, and them of the Reformed, and so farre foorth that some townes and places of the Prouinces, so pacified, doe inflame and burne againe, as it is most manifest, with such great rācor, grudging, and dissention as herafter without great slaughter and bloudshed can not bee extinguished: Therefore to preuent all such dissention, discord, diuisions, and effusi on of bloud, his HIGHNES and his EXCELLENCY by the aduice of the coūcell of the Estates assisting him, hath deuised, and made certayne Ordinances, contaytayning diuerse poyntes, seruing to the peace of the Religions, and main tenance of publicke pollicy.
            All which poyntes so aduised & cō
               cluded were by his Highnes letters

dated the 14. of Iuly last past sent to all vnited Prouinces, crauing vpon the sight and receit therof their assēt, and consent therein.
            After the same manner also were the sayd Articles of this Religious peace sēt to the Iustices of the town of Antwerpe, who labouring in the same, as to such a waighty matter appertayneth, haue to that end assē
               bled the whole body of the sayd City then and there opening and communicating vnto them the intent of the foresayd letters, as also reading and examining the sayd Articles deuised for the Religious peace. Where, after long and good deliberation had, together with the aduise of the Colo nels, Deacōs of the Companies and Captaines of the towne, it was fully resolued and concluded, that the sayd Accord for the Religions should be presently proclaymed in ye towne, and wel, and straightly executed, and on the Iustices and Magistrates of the sayd townes part from them cō
               manded

and ordayned, that all and euery inhabitant thereof should hēce forth frame hymselfe to this rule onely, and keepe the sayd Accord of Religiō
                in such order and maner as followeth.
            
               FIrst, sith that Religion neyther oght nor can be vpheld▪ or beatē into mens hartes, by force or violēce, but is a speciall gift of God, and at hys handes to be sought for, and receued: and for that it becommeth all Christian people of what Religion soeuer, to liue mutually in peace, & quietnes, ruling themselues according to the lowable and politique ordinaunces of their Gouernours: it is thought good that they of the aforesayd Romish Catholique Religion, and they of ye 
               Reformed, as also they of the Confession of Ausbourg, shall frely euery one remain at their own choyce and libertie as they will, and are minded, according to their vnderstanding, to aunswere before God for

the saluation of their owne soules, at the latter day.
            
               Item, because there is such diuersitie of Religions, none shall be suffered to disturbe or hinder, or any way be a let to the other in their Ceremo nies, Sermons, Readings, or other Exercises whatsoeuer: or otherwise attempt any other thing the one agaynst the other, whither it be within or without the accustomed or assigned places of their Religion, in any kind of maner, but suffer one another to vse their Religion freely in peace and quietnes: And likewise to let them possesse, holde, and inioy all their goodes so long, and til such time as by the aduice of the Generall Estates, or at least by a prouinciall or nationall Assembly (echone beyng fréely heard) it be otherwise determined and concluded: vppon payne of punishment of body and goods, without delay, as disturbers of the commō peace, and tranquillitie.
            And in the meane while to set

good politique order, after some méet and reasonable manner, for the securitie, and quietnes of ech part, it is ordayned that each of the aforesayd Religions shall holde them content with the Churches whiche they presētly possesse: except ye the Churches of two of them, to weet, of the Reformed Religiō, and of the Aus bourgs Confession beyng to little for their vse, that then by the Magistrates of this Citie there shalbe assigned, and appoynted vnto thē any other church or place for their commoditie, there openly and freely to exercise their religion. And as touching Burialles, the professors, or maintainers of ech Religion shall vse thereto the Churches and Churchyardes where they do exercise their Religion, eache one following their owne Ceremonies: except that for want of room, distāce, or other necessitye, any one of the aforesayd Religions require to vse ech others Churchyarded, whiche then they shall be suffered to do, prouided

that no Sermon be there made or any singing, or other Ceremonye there vsed.
            And for to auoyde such inconuenices as are most commonly occurrent through the wilfull wantonnesse of seditious and quarreling mates, which hunt after nothyng but the ouerthrow of all good ordinaunces: It is ordained that echone shal for beare and refrayne themselues to come or to be found in place, whereas other Religion is exercised than that they professe themselues, except that they so guyde, and rule themselues, according to the vse and exercise of that church or Temple, wherin they shal so happen to be found, vppon payne as is aforesayd.
            Likewise to auoyd al iarring, rancor, and debate, and to represse the inordinate libertie of some, spurning agaynst diuers commaundementes, and orders oftentimes taken, and published by vs, we enioyne, and pro hibite any song to be made, printed,

sould, or to bring to light anye difdaynefull or iniurious song, ballade, rymes, inuectiues, writinges, Pictures, or Payntinges whereby one or other of the religions, or any of thē in particular, or generall should be disgraced, or defamed thereby, on the paine or punishment aforesayd.
            Moreouer they of the aforesayd Religions shalbe bound to present their Preachers and Ministers personally before the Gouernors, and Iustices of this Citie, that their seueral names beyng regestred, they may with great deliberation by the foresayd Gouernours, and Iustices be admitted, and receiued, and before them take an othe of their loyaltie and obedience in these politique cases, without doyng any further act of iurisdiction, or medling with the aucthoritie of the Magistrate directly or indirectly, in what manner soeuer the same might be.
            The sayd Preachers, and Ministers so presented, and admitted, and

sworne; shall also be bound, as also al other persōs, not to speake or preach or otherwise to vse speaches, or wordes, eyther publiquely, or secretly, tending to discord, tumult, and sedition, but to teach, and exhort the commons to peace, loue, and quietnesse.
            
               Item none shalbe suffered to carry any marke or token, through which occasion might be geuen to another of offence, discord, and contention.
            
               Item, the maintayners of each of ye aforesayd Religions (till that otherwise it be prouided by them, or the vnited Prouinces) may contract mariages each according to the vse of hys Religion, and the Children so borne, and begot shal lawfully succéed, yea & inioy the goods fallen vnto them by the death of any Person of a contrary Religion.
            And to kéep indifferencie ouer al, so it is, that because of the foresayd Religions, there shalbe had good regard, and discretion in the receiuing

of any Schollers, sick Parsons, or Poore men, into Schooles, Hospitalles, or Almes houses. Also all the the Almes, and deuotions of good people shalbe gathered collected, and distributed according to the order already therein taken, and as it is vsed at this present.
            
               Item, that echone shalbe bound to keepe the accustomed Holy dayes, hereafter specified, namely, the Sonday, Christmas-day, Thapostelsdayes, The Annūciatiō
                of our Lady Ascention day, and Candelmas, and not be suffered vppon the same dayes to open their shoppes, or to worke, or sell openly.
            
               Item, vpon such dayes as of auncient time serued for the fast, no man shall sell or eate fleshe: and all fleshe markets, or shambles shalbe shut vp, and each one shall behaue himselfe modestly, according to the ordinance or vse of the towne.
            
               Item, in election of any Officer, or Magistrate, and other politique

callyng there shalbe no speciall regard of any mans religion, but such a one to be nominated, and chosē, as shalbe thought and found meetest for the same, and likeliest to execute such an office, with this condition, that such a one so nominated, & chosen shalbe bound to fulfill the othe, which of olde tyme appertayned to his office: and shall moreouer faythfully and solemnely sweare this Accord of Religion, without vsing, or ioyning any other Ceremonies. And if so be that in taking of any the sayd othes, whether it be of Magistrates, or any other publique seruice, any clause be comprised therin repugnāt to the obseruation, or conseruation of any the sayd Religions, that then the same clause in taking & geuing ye oth shalbe omitted.
            Furthermore ech one shalbe boūd to beare dutifull obedience, and reuerence to the heads, & Magistrates of this Citie, and to assist the same in all places to apprehend, and punish

all manner of mutinies and seditiōs, especially of the trāsgressors of these ordinances now enacted.
            And if so be it happen (which god defend) that any man doe contrarye to these ordinances, or do oppose him selfe agaynst the same, in all or in part, or do disturbe, offend, or abuse any manner of person by any iniurous meane, it is ordayned as aforesayd, that imediately they shall proceed to the apprehending of the offen dor, according to ye auncient custome. And because that the examination, and information shall be done without suspition, or misdoubt, it shall be lawfull for them of the Religions a bouesaid ioyntly to chuse and assigne two worthy discreet men, louers of the common peace and tranquility, that in their presence the aforesayd information may be taken by the gouernor, & suche as by the law are appoynted to that purpose, to the intēt that what is done may proceede and be ordayned as it ought to be.
            
               
               Under was written:
            
            This ordinaunce being read in the Counsel Chamber of the Iustices of Antwerpe, was by them ordayned to bee proclaymed, and published, dated the 12. of Iune. Anno. 1579.
            
            
               Me praesente, Martiny.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Articles concluded by his Excellencie and the towne of Antwerpe for the quietnes, and peace thereof: the 12. of Iune. 1579.
            BEcause that the 28. of May last past certayne ill motions, and with no small inconuenience did beginne to rage, whereby more heauines, and greater mischiefe might haue risen too the great hindraunce or hurt of the Citie, and the whole Countreyes, and to the aduantage and incouraging of the common enemy: So it is, that after diuers communications had for to make and mayntayne peace and vnitie among the Burgeses, and inhabitaunts of the sayd Citie, and to remedy the aforesayd mischiefs, as much as is possible at this present, hys Highnes with the aduice of hys Excellencie, and ye 
               Coūsel of the Estates, but not without the conference, and agreement of the Bourgmasters, Sheriffes, Deputies, and Deacons of their misteries, and the adherentes, or confederates

of ye sayd Sheriffes, Colonels, Deacons, and Captaynes of the sayd towne, not onely in forme and manner of a generall counsell called (Bréeden-Raedt, or bread Counsell) but also with the particuler mē
               bers of euery Colledge, hath concluded and ratified these Articles following.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           1
                           First his Highnes doth forget and forgeue al that which is or hath bene done before the date of these presēts, without searching, or apprehending any one for the same matter: and euery one shall likewise forget, and employ himself to vnity, loue, and cō
                              cord, liuing together without reproch or choking ech the other, without all malice, and suspicion. For by this meanes the common wealth, & good estate of this towne may be the better furthered, and our common enemy ioyntly resisted.
                           2.
                           
                              Item, this Union shalbe published in

such order and forme as it was at Vtrecht, reseruing the moderation of the Poyntes different betwéene the Counsell of hys Excellency, the Estates, and the sayd Union, for to be decided by the general Estates of the Prouinces associated and vnited, and the rest which are to be associated and vnited, and the other Townes, in their first assemblie.
                           3
                           
                              Item, a religious peace, irreuocable shalbe proclaymed, as by the mē
                              bers of this City was found expedi ent and approued: reseruing the moderatiō and restraynt of such things, as the articles of this ordinance doth contayne.
                           4
                           
                              Item, the Romish catholickes shal return agayne to their possessions, & the vse of their churches of our Lady of S. Iames, and of Borcht, where they shall freely do their exercise, obseruing the articles of this Accord, or Religious peace: and in this consederation

shall the secular Priestes, and those that haue benefices come into the towne agayne: those onely excepted, which are specified in a certayne bill signed these presentes, and exhibited, the which for certayn resonable causes, especially for the more quietnes of the towne shal as yet remayne without.
                           5
                           Prouided that the spirituall persons shall not haue any iurisdiction ouer the temporal: nor also shal meddle with ciuill or politique affayres: but as touching the same they shalbe subiect to the Magistrate: & further shall pay tole, impostes, tenthes, and the hundred penny, and beare other Citizens charges, losing their priuileges, immunites, and liberties of their Cels, and Cloysters, and other such places.
                           6
                           And to auoyd all vprores and sedition, none shall henceforth be receiued to the office of preaching, of what

religion soeuer they be, before they be first presented to the magistrate, & the nine men, who shal be chosen for the execution of this ordinance, and before them also take their oth.
                           7
                           
                              Item, to shunne all inconueniences and offences, they of the sayd Romish Religion shall do their exercises only in their churches, neither shal they be suffered to keepe processions openly.
                           8
                           
                              Item, they shall carry their Sacra mēt without pompe, or other sound and couertly.
                           9
                           As touching the order of Mendiās (that is to say, the Carmelites, Augustines, & Iacubines, & the Minories) they shall as yet stay without the City, with the others called Bogardes. They of S. Michael, and Peterpots shall reenter, and they that will may tarry out with reasonable maintenance: none shall receiue in a ny other without information fyrste

geuen to him who hath the charge of this ordinance.
                           10
                           
                              Item, Cloyster woomen shall tarrye in their olde possessions, and enioye their cloisters, goodes, and Religion.
                           11
                           
                              Item, all Ecclesiastical persons shall renounce all aliantes with whome they haue had secret dealings or cō
                              ferences, whether it be among thē
                              selues, or with other of other prouinces or straūgers, vnder what coulor, or pretence so euer it be: and shall promise neuer to contract with any such agayne, nor to contrary, or resist this ordinance.
                           12
                           And to the assuraunce of euery one (aboue the othe which is to be taken of ech partie) the Magistrates, and other members of the Towne, likewise the Colonels, Deacons, Headmen, Captaynes, or Officers shall swere before hys Highnes, and Excellencie to mayntayne the decrees

aforesayd, and to take to their protection and sauegard, agaynst all oppression, and outrage, the whole body of the Citie, and all the inhabitauntes thereof, as well the Catholiques, Reformed, and they of the Confession of Ausburgh. And for the more firme assuraunce, likewise to take away all mistrust, and to keepe frendship, there shall out of each of the aforesaid thrée Religions twenty of the worthiest men be nominated, and sworne to take serious care, and diligence to obserue, and cause to be obserued (asmuch as in them lyeth) these Ordinaunces, and Generall rest for the Citie.
                           13
                           And for better accomplishing of yt which is sayd, they of the Reformed religion shall chuse three men out of the Catholicks, and the Catholicks shall chuse three out of the Reformed who afterward shall together chuse like wise thrée of the Cōfes sion: which nine persons shall haue

charge of the execution and maintainance of these ordinaunces. And if in case disagreement rise among them they shal, if they can, pacify the same, if not, thē to certify the Magistrats, Colonels, and Deacons of the Companies of the Town, for them to determine of the same, as the case requi reth, whō his Highnes by these presentes thereto authoriseth.
                        
                        
                           Yeauen the 11. of Iune 1579.
                            
                           Signed.

                                 MATTHIAS.
                                  Guillaume de Nassau.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           ¶ Proclaymed by Cornelius de Mansdale vnder Bayliffe of Antwerpe the 12. of Iune. 1579.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               WHereas by the second Article of this ordinaunce, it is ordered by his Highnes and Excellency to publish this Union, or peace in the same

forme as it was done at Utrecht, reseruing the moderatiō of the poynts beyng different, betweene the concept of the Estates present, and the aforesaid Union, to be decided by the Estates generall of the vnited Prouinces, and by the rest of the Prouinces and Townes whiche are to be vnited, in their first assembly: So it is that wee geue to vnderstande to euery one, that the Burgmaisters and Sheriffes according to the resolution of the Members of this Citie do cōforme themselues to the sayd vnion had, made, and concluded at Utrecht, on the 23. of Ianuary last past.
         
      
      
         
            AT LONDON.
            Printed by Richard Daye dwelling at Aldersgate. 1579.
            
               Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
            
         
      
   