
      
         
            
            
            The Arte
of Rhetorique, for the
vse of all suche as are studious
of Eloquence, sette
forth in English, by
THOMAS
Wilson.
            Anno Domini.
            M.D.LIII.
            Mense Ianuarij.
         
         
            
            GVALTERVS HADDONVS
D. IVRIS CIVILIS, ET OXOniens
                  •
               s
Collegij Magdalenensis Praese
                  •
               .
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                soror, est affata sororem:
            Quem d
                  •
               dicit nuper, sermo Brítannus erat.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                tacuit, magno perculsae dolore:
            Nam nondum nostro nouerat ore loqu
                  •
               .
            Audijt haec, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Vu
                  •
               lsonus forte, magister
            Qui fuerat, nostros addiderat
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                sonos:
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                mutam, uerbis solatus am
                  •
               cis
            Se
                  •
               ocat, & rogitat num esse Brítanna uel
                  •
               t.
            Dcijciens oculos respondit uelle l
                  •
               benter,
            Sed se, qu
                  •
                possit, non reper
                  •
               re, uia.
            Ipse uias (inquit) tradam, leges
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                loquendi:
            Quomodò perfectè uerba Br
                  •
               tanna loces.
            Liberat 
                  •
               lle 
                  •
               idem, nostro sermone politur
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , nostra est utraque facta soror.
            Angl
                  •
               a, nob
                  •
               lium 
                  〈◊〉
                charus sermo sororum
            Est t
                  •
               bi, sermonis charus & author erit.
         
         
            
            NICOLAI VDALLI IN OPERIS COMmendationem
Tetrastic
                  •
               on.
            VT Logice, lingua nos est affata Br
                  •
               tanna
            Sic modo Rhetoricé uerba Britanna sonat.
            Vtra
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                nempe soror, patrem cognoscit eundem
            Anglia iam natis mater, utram
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                fouet.
         
         
            ROBERTI HILERMII
IN RHETORICEM THOmae
Vuilsoni, Epigramma.
            ANgl
                  •
               a serua diu, & quondam uexata Tyrannis,
            Libera nunc regnat, Rege potíta pio:
            Et cui iura ded
                  •
               t Roma imperiosa tot annos,
            Leg
                  •
               bus 
                  •
               psa suis uiuit, & 
                  •
               mperijs.
            Libertas 
                  •
               gitur, regn
                  •
               
               
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                antíqua potestas
            Reddíta nunc Anglis, quos rígat Oceanus.
            Quod licet egregium, & decus immortale parenti
            Concilíet magno: Rex
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Edoarde tíbí:
            Gloria prisca tamen gentis, uel nomen auítum
            Hoc est: nam fuerant libera sceptra tuis.
            At quòd barbaries uestris nunc exulat or
                  •
               s,
            Pulsa
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                rusticitas his dominata príus:
            Hoc opus, hoc uestrum est, uobis per secula fama
                  •
               
            
            Quod dabit, & uestrum nomen ad astra feret.
            Barbara gens siquidem, gemino sub Príncípe tal
                  •
               
            
            Artibus enitu
                  •
               t nob
                  •
               l
                  •
               tata bonis:
            Moríbus & co
                  •
               pta est l
                  •
               udandis arte magistra:
            AEdita
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ingenij sunt documenta uírûm.
            
               V
                  •
               u
                  •
               da testantur uígílem monimenta laborem,
            Scrípta
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tot, nulla quae moritura die.
            Exemplum mihi sit de tot Scriptoribus, unus
            (Nam
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ommes celebres nemo referre queat,)
            Vuilsonus, patrio sub quo sermone magistro,
            Pierides Musae perdíd
                  •
               cêre loquí.
            Cu
                  •
                tamen haud satis est, quod cum ratione loquantur,
            Ni quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                concinn
                  •
               , non putat esse satis.
            At
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ob íd addubítans, ne operi pars ulla deesset,
            H
                  •
               sce dedít Musis, hanc modo Rhetorícem.
            O quanta his scríptis, linguae, regni
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                futura est
            Ma
                  •
               estas, & honos: si fauor adfuerit.
         
         
            THOMAS VVILSONVS IN
Anglicam Rhetoricen.
            ANglia si doceat, quod Graecia docta: qu
                  •
               d obstat
            Quo mínus ex Anglis Anglía, uera scíat.
            Non (qu
                  •
               a Graeca potes, uel calles uerba Latina)
            Doctus es, aut sapíens: sed qu
                  •
               a uera u
                  •
               des.
            Aurea secreto tegitur sapientia sensu.
            Abdíta sensa tenes Anglus? es ergo scíens.
            Sed mea Rhetoricen nequeat cûm lingua políre:
            Cui uacat, hoc unum quod ualet, oro uel
                  •
               t.
         
         
            
            To the right honorable
Lorde, Iohn Dudley, Lorde
Lisle, Earle of Warwike, and maister
of the horse to the kynges maiestie: your
assured to commaund Thomas
Wilson.
            WHen Pyrrhus Kynge of
the Epirotes made battayle agaynste
the Romaynes, & could
neither by force of Armes, nor
yet by anye Policye wynne certayne
stronge holdes: he vsed cō
               munely
to send one Cineas (a noble
Oratour, and sometimes scholer to Demosthenes)
to perswade with the Capitaynes & people
that were in them, that they shoulde yelde vp
the sayde holde or townes without fyght or resistaunce.
And so it came to passe, that through the
pithye eloquence of this noble Oratoure, diuers
stronge Castels and Fortresses were peaceablye
geuen vp into the handes of Pirrhus, whyche he
shoulde haue founde verye harde and tedious to
wynne by the sworde. And this thinge was not
Pirrhus himselfe ashamed in his commune talke
to the prayse of the sayde Oratoure, openlye to
confesse: allegynge that Cineas throughe the eloquence
of his tongue, wanne moe Cityes vnto
him, then euer him selfe shoulde els haue bene able
by force to subdue. Good was that Oratour

whiche coulde do so muche: & wise was that king
which woulde vse suche a meane. For if the worthines
of eloquēce may moue vs, what worthier
thing can there be, thē with a word to winne cities
& whole coūtries? If profite may perswade,
what greater gayne can we haue, then withoute
bloudshed to achiue a conquest? If pleasure may
prouoke vs, what greater delite do we know, thē
to se a whole multitude with the onely talke of a
man rauished & drawen whiche waye him liketh best
to haue them? Boldly then may I aduenture
and without feare steppe forthe to offer that vnto
your Lordeshyppe, whiche for the dignitye is
so excellente, and for the vse so necessarye: that no
man oughte to be withoute it, whiche either shall
beare rule ouer manye, or muste haue to do wyth
matters of a Realme. Consideringe therfore
your Lordshyps hyghe estate, & worthy callyng,
I knowe nothyng more sittynge wyth your honoure,
then to the gyfte of good reason and vnderstandynge,
wherwith we see you notably endued,
to ioyne the perfection of Eloquente vtteraunce.
And because that aswell by your Lordeshyppes
moste tender imbracynge of all suche as
be learned, as also by your right studious exercises,
you do euidently declare, not onely what estimation
you haue of all learnynge and excellente
qualities ingenerall, but also what a speciall desyre
and affection you beare to eloquence: I therfore
commende to youre Lordeshyppes tuition
and patronage, thys traictise of Rhethorique, to

the ende that both ye maye get some furtheraūce
by the same, & I also be discharged of my faithefull
promyse this laste yere made vnto you.
            For where as it pleased you emonge other talke
of learnynge, earnestlye to wyshe that ye myghte
one daye see the Preceptes of Rhetorique sette forthe
by me in Englyshe, as I hadde erste done
the Rules of Logique: hauynge in my Countrey
thys laste Somer a quiet time of vacation wyth
the ryghte worshypfull sir Edwarde Dymmoke
Knyghte: I traueyled so muche as my leasure
myghte serue therunto, not onelye to declare my
good harte to the satisfiynge of youre requeste in
that behalfe, but also throughe that your mocion
to helpe the towardnes of some other, not so well
furnished as your Lordeshyppe is. For as
touchinge your selfe, by the tyme that perfect experience
of manifolde and weyghtye matters of
the commune weale, shall haue encreased the eloquence,
whyche alreadye dothe naturallye flowe
in you: I doubt nothing but that you wil so farre
be better then this my boke, that I shal not onelye
blowshe to chalenge you for a Scholer, in
the Arte of Rhetorique, by me rudelye sette forthe:
but also be driuen to sette this simple Traictise
to your Lordshyppe to Schole, that it may
learne Rhetorique of youre daylye talke, fyndynge
you suche an Oratoure in your speach, as
greate Clarckes do declare what an Oratoure
shoulde be.
            
               In the meane season I shall ryghte humblye
beseche your good Lordshippe so to be a Patrone
and defendoure of these my Laboures to you dedicated:
as I shal be a continuall peticioner
vnto almyghtye God for your preseruation,
and longe continuaunce.
         
         
            
            ¶Eloquence first
geuen by God, after loste by man,
and laste repayred by God
agayne.
            MAn (in whom is poured
the breathe of lyfe) was made at hys
firste beinge an euerliuynge Creature,
vnto the likenes of God, endued with
reason, and appoynted Lorde ouer all
other thinges liuing. But after the fall
of our firste father, Sinne so crepte in,
that our knowledge was muche darkened,
and by corruption of this oure fleshe, mans reason and
entendement were bothe ouerwhelmed. At what time God
beinge sore greued with the folye of one man, pitied of his
mere good uesse, the whole state and posteritie of mankinde.
And therefore (wher as throughe the wicked suggestion of
our ghostelye enemye, the ioyfull fruition of Goddes glorye
was altogether loste:) it pleased our heauenly father to
repayre mankynde of hys free mercye, and to graunte an euerliuynge
enheritaunce vnto all suche as woulde by constante
fayth seeke earnestlye thereafter, Longe it was ere
that man knewe himselfe, beinge destitute of Gods grace,
so that al thinges waxed sauage, the earth vntilled, societye
neglected, Goddes will not knowen, man againste manne,
one agaynste another, and all agaynste order. Some liued
by spoyle, some like brute Beastes grased vpon the ground,
some wente naked, some romed lyke woodoses, none did anye
thing by reason, but most did what they could, by manhode.
None almoste considered the euerliuynge God, but
all liued moste communely after their owne luste. By death
they thoughte that all thinges ended, by life they loked for
none other liuynge. None remembred the true obseruation
of wedlocke, none tendered the education of their chyldren,
lawes were not regarded, true dealinge was not once

vsed. For vertue, vyce 
                  •
               are place, for right & equitie, might
vsed aucthoritie. And therfore where as man through reason
might haue vsed order, manne throughe follye fell into
erroure. And thus for lacke of skill, and for wante of grace,
euyll so preuayled, that the Deuyll was mooste estemed, and
GOD either almost vnknowen emonge theim all, or
elles nothinge feared emonge so manye. Therefore euen
nowe when man was thus paste all hope of amendemente,
God still tendering his owne workemanship, stirred vp his
faythfull and elect, to perswade with reason, all men to societye.
And gaue his appoynted ministers knowledge bothe
to se the natures of men, and also graunted them the gift of
vtteraunce, that they myghte wyth ease wynne folke at
their will, and frame theim by reason to all good order.
            And therefore, where as Menne lyued Brutyshlye
in open feldes, hauing neither house to shroude them in, nor
attyre to clothe their backes, nor yet anye regarde to seeke
their best auayle: these appoynted of God called theim together
by vtteraunce of speache, and perswaded with them
what was good, what was badde, and what was gainefull
for mankynde. And althoughe at firste, the rude coulde
hardelie learne, & either for straungenes of the thing, would
not gladlye receyue the offer, or els for lacke of knoweledge
could not perceyue the goodnes: yet being somewhat drawē
and delighted with the pleasaūtnes of reason, & the swetenes
of vtteraūce: after a certaine space, thei became through
nurture and good aduisement, of wilde, sober: of cruel, gentle:
of foles, wise: and of beastes, men. Suche force hath the
tongue, and such is the power of eloquence and reason, that
most men are forced euen to yelde in that, whiche most standeth
againste their will. And therfore the Poetes do feyne
that Hercules being a man of greate wisdome, had all men
lincked together by the eares in a chaine, to draw them and
leade them euen as he lusted. For his witte was so greate,
his tongue so eloquente, & his experience suche, that no one
man was able to withstand his reason, but euerye one was
rather driuen to do that whiche he woulde, and to wil that

whiche he did, agreing to his aduise both in word & worke,
in all that euer they were able.
            Neither can I see that menne coulde haue bene broughte
by anye other meanes to lyue together in felowshyppe of
life, to mayntayne Cities, to deale trulye, and willyngelye
to obeye one another, if menne at the firste hadde not by Art
and eloquence perswaded that, which they ful oft found out
by reason. For what manne I praye you beinge better abl
                  •
               
to maintayne him selfe by valeante courage, then by liuing
in base subiection: would not rather loke to rule like a lord,
then to lyue lyke an vnderlynge: if by reason he were not
perswaded that it behoueth euerye man to lyue in his owne
vocation, and not to seke anye hygher rowme, then whereunto
he was at the first appoynted? Who woulde digge and
delue from morne till euening? Who woulde trauaile and
toyle with the swea
                  •
               e of his browes? Yea, who woulde for
his kynges pleasure aduenture and hasarde his life, if witte
hadde not so wonne men, that they thought nothing more
nedefull in this world, nor anye thing wherunto they were
more bounden: then here to liue in their duty, and to traine
their whole lyfe accordynge to their callynge. Therfore
where as menne are in manye thynges weake by Nature,
and subiecte to much infirmitye: I thinke in this one point
they passe all other Creatures liuynge, that they haue the
gift of speache and reason.
            And emonge all other, I thinke him most worthye fame,
and emongest menne to be taken for halfe a God, that therin
dothe chiefelye, and aboue all other, excell menne, wherin
men do excell beastes. For he that is emonge the reasonable,
of all moste reasonable, and emonge the wittye, of all moste
wittye, and emonge the eloquente, of all mooste eloquente:
him thincke I emonge all menne, not onelye to be taken for
a singuler manne, but rather to be counted for halfe a God.
For in sekynge the excellencye hereof, the soner he draweth
to perfection, the nygher he commeth to GOD who is
the chiefe wisdome, and therefore called God, because he is
most wise, or rather wisdome it selfe.
            
               Nowe then seinge that God geueth his heauenlye grace
vnto all suche as call vnto him with stretched handes, and
humble harte, neuer wantynge to those, that wante not to
them selues: I purpose by his grace and especial assistence,
to set forthe preceptes of eloquence, and to shewe what obseruation
the wise haue vsed in handeling of their matters,
that the vnlearned by seinge the practise of other, may haue
some knowledge them selues, and learne by their
neyghbours deuise, what is necessarye
for them selues in their owne
case.
         
      
      
         
            
            The arte of Rhetorique.
            
               
                  
                     what is Rhetorique.
                     RHetorique is an art to set furthe by vtteraunce
of wordes, matter at large, or (as Cicero doeth
saie) it is a learned, or rather an artificiall declaracion
of the mynde, in the handelyng of any
cause, called in contencion, that maie through reason largely
be discussed.
                  
                  
                     ¶The matter whereupon an
Oratour must speake.
                     AN Orator muste be able to speake fully of all those
questions, whiche by lawe and mannes ordinaunce
are enacted, and appoyncted for the vse and profite
of man, suche as are thought apte for the tongue
to set forward.Rhetorique occupied aboute all lawes, concernyng man. Now Astronomie is rather learned by
demonstracion, then taught by any greate vtteraunce. Arithmetique
smally nedeth the vse of eloquence, seeyng it
maie be had wholy by nombryng onely. Geometrie rather
asketh a good square, then a cleane flowyng tongue, to set
out the arte.Questions of two sortes. Therfore an Orators profession, is to speake
onely, of all suche matters as maie largely be expounded,
for mannes behoue, and maie with muche grace be set out,
for all men to heare theim.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Questions.
                     EUery question, or demaunde in thynges, is of two
sortes. Either it is an infinite question, and without
ende, or els it is definite, and comprehended
within some ende.
                     Those questions are called infinite,Questions infinite. whiche generally
are propounded, withoute the comprehension of tyme,
place, and person, or any suche like: that is to saie, when no
certain thyng is named, but onely woordes are generally
spoken. As thus, whether it be best to marie▪ or to liue single.
Whiche is better, a courtiers life, or a scholers life.
                     Those questions are called definite,Questions definite. whiche set furthe a
matter, with the appoynctment, and namyng of place, time
and persone. As thus. Whether now it be best here in Englande,
for a Prieste to Marie, or to liue single. Whether

it were mete for the kynges maiestie, that now is, to marie
with a straūger, or to mary with one of his awn subiectes.Questions definite, belong properly to an Orator.
Now the definite question (as the whiche concerneth some
one persone) is moste agreyng to the purpose of an Orator
consideryng particuler matters in the Lawe, are euer debated
betwixte certain persones, the one affirmyng for his
parte, and the other deniyng, as fast again for his parte.
                     Thynges generally spoken without al circumstaunces,
are more proper vnto the Logiciā,Questions infinite, proper vnto Logiciās who talketh of thynges
vniuersally, without respect of persone, time, or place. And
yet notwithstandyng, Tullie doeth saie, that whosoeuer
will talke of a particuler matter, must remēber that within
thesame also, is comprehended a generall. As for example.
If I shall aske this question, whether it be lawfull for
Willyam Conqueroure to inuade Englande, and wynne
it by force of armour, I must also consider this, whether it
be lawfull for any man, to vsurpe power, or it be not lawfull.
That if the greater cannot be borne withall, the lesse
cannot be neither. And in this respecte, a generall question
agreeth well to an Orators profession, and ought well to
be knowen, for the better furtheraunce of his matter, notwithstandyng
the particuler questiō, is euer called in controuersie,
and the generall onely thereupon considered, to
comprehende and compasse thesame, as the whiche is more
generall.
                  
                  
                     ¶The ende of Rethorique.
                     Three thynges are required of an Orator.Orators boūd to perfourme 
                              〈◊〉
                            thynges.
                     
                     
                        To teache.
                        To delight.
                        And to perswade.
                     
                     FIrst therefore an Orator muste labour to tell his
tale, that the hearers maie well knowe what he
meaneth, and vnderstande him wholy, the whiche
he shall with ease do, if he vtter his mind in plain
wordes,Plain wordes proper vnto an Oratour. suche as are vsually receiued, and tell it orderly,
without goyng aboute the busshe. That if he doe not this,
he shall neuer do the other. For what manne can be delited

or yet be perswaded, with the onely hearyng of those thynges,
whiche he knoweth not what thei meane. The tongue
is ordeined to expresse the mynde, that one mighte vnderstande
anothers meanyng: Nowe what auaileth to speake,
when none can tell, what the speaker meaneth? Therefore
Phauorinus the Philosophier (as Gellius telleth ye tale)
did hit a yong man ouer the thumbes, very handsomely for
vsyng ouer olde, and ouer straunge woordes, Sirha (ꝙ he)
when our old great auncesters and graundsires wer aliue
thei spake plainly in their mothers tongue,A Philosophier
                              •
                            wittie saiyng to a yong manne, that soughte to speake darke language. & vsed old language,
suche as was spokē then at the buildyng of Rome.
But you talke me suche Latin, as though you spake with
them euen now, that were two or thre thousande yeres ago,
and onely because you would haue no man, to vnderstand
what you saie. Now wer it not better for the a thousand
fold (thou foolishe fellowe) in sekyng to haue thy desire,
to holde thy peace, and speake nothyng at all? for then
by that meanes, fewe should knowe what were thy meanyng.
But thou saiest, the olde antiquitee doeth like thee
best, because it is good, sobre, & modest. Ah, liue man as thei
did before thee, and speake thy mynde now, as menne do at
this daie. And remember that, whiche Cesar saith, beware
as long as thou liuest, of straunge woordes, as thou wouldest
take hede and eschewe greate rockes in the Sea.
                     The next parte that he hath to plaie, is to chere his gestes,
and to make thē take pleasure, with hearyng of thynges
wittely deuised, and pleasauntly set furthe.Orators muste vse delightful woordes, and saiynges. Therfore
euery Orator should earnestly laboure to file his tongue,
that his woordes maie slide with ease, and that in his deliueraunce,
he maie haue suche grace, as the sound of a lute,
or any suche instrument doeth geue. Then his sentencies
must be well framed, and his wordes aptly vsed, throughout
the whole discourse of his Oracion.
                     Thirdly, suche quicknesse of witte must be shewed, and
suche pleasaunt sawes so well applied, that the eares maie
finde muche delite, whereof I will speake largely, when
I shall entreate of mouyng laughter. And assuredly nothyng
is more nedefull, then to quicken these heauie loden

wittes of ours, and muche to cherishe these our lompishe
and vnweldie natures, for excepte menne finde delight,
thei will not long abide: delight theim, and wynne them:
werie theim, and you lose theim for euer. And that is
the reason, that menne commonly tary the ende of a merie
plaie, and cannot abide the halfe hearyng of a sower checkyng
Sermon.Preachers not so diligentely heard, as common plaiers. Therefore, euen these auncient preachers,
must now and then plaie the fooles in the pulpite, to serue
the tickle eares of their fleetyng audience, or els thei are
like some tymes to preache to the bare walles, for though
the spirite bee apte, and our will prone, yet our fleshe is so
heauie, and humours so ouerwhelme vs, that wee cannot
without refreshyng, long abide to heare any one thyng.Prechers must sometymes be merie, when thei speake to the people.
Thus we se, that to delight, is nedefull, without the whiche,
weightier matters will not be heard at all, and therefore
hym cunne I thanke, that bothe can & will euer, myngle
swete,Deli
                              ••
                           ng nedefull. emong the sower, be he Preacher, Lawyer, yea,
or Cooke either hardely, when he dresseth a good dishe of
meate: now I nede not tell that scurrilitie,Scurrilitie odious. or Alehouse iestyng,
would bee thought odious, or grosse mirthe would
be deamed madnesse: consideryng that euen the meane witted
doe knowe that already, and as for other, that haue no
witte, thei will neuer learne it, therefore God spede them.
Now when these twoo are dooen, he muste perswade, and
moue the affeccionsAffecciōs must be moued. of his hearers in suche wise, that thei
shalbe forced to yelde vnto his saiyng, wherof (because the
matter is large, and maie more aptly bee declared, when I
shall speake of Amplificacion) I wil surcease to speake any
thyng therof at this tyme.
                  
                  
                     ¶By what meanes Eloquence is attained.
                     FIrste nedefull it is that he, whiche desireth to excell
in this gift of Oratorie, and longeth to proue
an eloquent man, must naturally haue a wit, and
an aptnesse thereunto: then must he to his boke, &
learne to be well stored with knowlege, that he maie be able
to minister matter, for all causes necessarie. The which
when he hath gotte plentifully, he muste vse muche exercise,
bothe in writyng, and also in speakyng. For though he

haue a wit and learnyng together, yet shal thei bothe litle
auaile without much practise.Practise maketh all thynges perfect. What maketh the lawyer to
haue suche vtteraunce? Practise. What maketh the Preacher
to speake so roūdly? Practise. Yea, what maketh women
go so fast awaie with their wordes? Marie practise I
warraunt you. Therfore in all faculties, diligent practise,
and earnest exercise, are the onely thynges, that make men proue
excellent. Many men knowe the arte very well, and
be in all poynctes throughly grounded, & acquainted with
the preceptes, and yet it is not their hap to proue eloquent
And the reason is, that eloquēce it self, came not vp first by
the arte, but the arte rather was gathered vpon eloquēce.Rhetorique firste made by wise men, and not wise men firste made by Rhetorique.
For wise menne seyng by muche obseruacion, and diligent
practise, the compasse of diuerse causes, compiled thereupō
preceptes and lessons, worthie to bee knowen and learned
of all men. Therefore before arte was inuented, eloquence
was vsed, and through practise made parfecte, the whiche
in all thynges is a souereigne meane, most highly to excell.
                     Now before we vse either to write, or speake eloquently
we must dedicate our myndes wholly, to folowe the moste
wise and learned menne, and seke to fashion, aswell their
speache and gesturyng, as their wit or endityng.Imitacion or folowyng the waies of wise men, is nedefull. The whiche
when we earnestly mynde to do, we cannot but in time
appere somewhat like theim. For if thei that walke muche
in the sōne, and thinke not of it, are yet for the moste part
sonne burnt, it cannot be but that thei, whiche wittyngly
and willyngly trauaile to counterfecte other, muste nedes
take some colour of theim, and be like vnto theim, in some
one thyng or other, accordyng to the Prouerbe, by companiyng
with the wise, a man shall learne wisedome.
                  
                  
                     ¶To what purpose this arte is set furthe.
                     TO this purpose and for this vse,Rhetorique, to what purpose it serueth. is the arte compiled
together, by the learned and wise men, that
those whiche are ignorant, might iudge of the lerned,
and labour (when tyme should require) to folow
their workes accordyngly. Again, the art helpeth well
to dispose and order matters of our awne inuencion, the
whiche we may folowe, aswell in speakyng, as in writyng

for though many by nature without art, haue proued worthie
menne,Arte, surer guide, then nature. yet is arte a surer guide, then nature, consideryng
we se as liuely by the art, what we do, as though we
red a
                           •
                        thyng in writtyng, wheras natures doynges are not
so open to all men. Again, those that haue good wittes, by
nature, shall better encrease theim by arte, and the blunte
also shalbe whetted through art, that want nature to help
them forward.
                  
                  
                     ¶Fiue thynges to be considered in an Oratour.
                     ANy one that will largely handle any matter, muste
fasten his mynde, first of all vpon these fiue especial
poynctes that folowe, and learne theim euery one.Orators must haue fiue thinges to make them perfect.
                     
                     
                        j. Inuencion of matter.
                        ij. Disposicion of thesame.
                        iij. Elocucion.
                        iiij. Memorie.
                        v. Utteraunce.
                     
                     THe findyng out of apte matter, called otherwise
Inuencion,Inuencion, what it is. is a searchyng out of thynges true, or
thynges likely, the whiche maie reasonably sette
furth a matter, and make it appere probable. The
places of Logique, geue good occasion to finde out plentitifull
matter. And therefore thei that will proue any cause
and seke onely to teache thereby the truthe, muste searche
out the places of Logique, and no doubte thei shall finde
muche plentie. But what auaileth muche treasure and apt
matter, if man cānot apply it to his purpose. Therefore in
the seconde place is mencioned, the settelyng or orderyng
of thynges inuented for this purpose, called in Latine,
Dispositio,
                        Disposicion, what it is. the whiche is nothyng els, but an apt bestowyng,
and orderly placyng of thynges, declaryng where euery
argument shalbe sette, and in what maner euery reason
shalbe applied, for confirmacion of the purpose.
                     But yet what helpeth it though we can finde good reasons,
and knowe howe to place theim, if we haue not apte
wordes, and picked sentences, to commēde the whole matter.

Therefore this poynct must nedes folowe, to beautifie
the cause, the whiche beyng called Elocucion,Elocucion, what it is. is an appliyng
of apte wordes and sentēces to the matter, founde out
to confirme the cause. When all these are had together, it
auaileth litle, if manne haue no Memorie to contein theim.
The Memorie therefore must be cherished,Memorie, what it is. the whiche is a
fast holdyng, bothe of matter and woordes couched together,
to confirme any cause.
                     Be it now that one haue all these .iiij, yet if he want the
fift, all the other dooe litle profite. For though a manne can
finde out good matter, and good woordes, though he canne
handsomely set them together, and cary them very well awaie
in his mynde, yet it is to no purpose, if he haue no vtteraunce,
when he should speake his minde, and shewe men
what he hath to saie. Utteraunce therefore is a framyng of
the voyce, countenaūce, and gesture, after a comely maner.Pronunciatiō what it is.
                     
                     Thus we se that euery one of these must go together, to
make a perfecte Oratoure, and that the lacke of one, is an
hynderaunce of the whole, and that aswell all maie be wā
                        tyng,
as one, if we loke to haue an absolute Oratour.
                  
                  
                     ¶There are .vii. partes in euery Oracion.Oracions in generall, consist vpon seuen partes.
                     
                     
                        j. The enteraunce or beginnyng.
                        ij. The Narracion.
                        iij. The Proposicion.
                        iiij. The diuisiō or seuerall partyng of thynges
                        v. The Confirmacion.
                        vi. The Confutacion.
                        vii. The Conclusion.
                     
                     THe Enteraunce or beginnyng,Enteraunce, what it is. is the former part
of the Oracion, whereby the will of the standers
by, or of the Iudge is sought for, and required to
heare the matter.
                     The Narraciō,Narration. is a plain and manifest poynctyng of the
matter, and an euident settyng furthe of all thynges, that
belong vnto thesame, with a brief rehersall, grounded vpon
some reason.
                     
                        The ProposicionProposicion. is a pithie sentence, comprehendyng in
a smale roume, the some of the whole matter.
                     The diuisionDiuision. is an openyng of thynges, wherin we agree
and rest vpon, and wherein we sticke, and stande in trauerse
shewyng what we haue to saie, in our awne behalfe.
                     The Confirmacion,Confirmacion. is a declaraciō of our awne reasons
with assured and constaunt profes.
                     The Confutacion,Confutacion. is a dissoluyng or wipyng awaie, of
all suche reasons as make against vs.
                     The ConclusionConclusion. is a clarkely gatheryng of the matter,
spoken before, and a lappyng vp of it altogether.
                     Now because in euery one of these, greate hede ought to
be had, and muche arte must be vsed, to content and like all
parties: I purpose in the second boke to set furthe at large
euery one of these, that bothe we maie knowe in all partes,
what to folowe, and what to eschewe. And first when tyme
shalbe to talke of any matter, I would aduise euery man,
to consider the nature of the cause self, that the rather he
might frame his whole Oracion thereafter.
                  
                  
                     ¶Euery matter is conteined in one of these .iiii.
                     EIther it is an honest thyng, whereof we speake, or
els it is filthy and vile, or els betwixte bothe, and
doubtfull what to bee called, or els it is some triflyng
matter,Matters ī general, stand in iiii. poynctes. that is of small weight.
                     
                         That is called an honest matter,Matters honest. when either wee take in
hande suche a cause, that all menne would maintein, or els
gainsaie suche a cause, that no man can well like.
                     
                         Then do we hold and defende a filthy matter,Matters, filthie. whē either
wee speake against our conscience in an euill matter, or els
withstande an vpright truthe.
                     
                         The cause then is doubtfull, when the matterMatters, doubtfull. is half honest,
and halfe vnhonest.
                     
                         Suche are triflyngMatters, trifelyng. causes, whē there is no weight in thē
as if one should phantasy, to praise a Gose, before any other
beast liuyng (as I knowe who did) or of fruict to commende
nuttes chefly, as Ouid did, or the feuer quartaine, as Phauorinus
did, or the Gnatte, as Uirgill did, or the battaill of
Frogges as Homere did, or dispraise beardes, or commende

shauen heddes.
                  
                  
                     ¶Good hede to bee taken at the firste, vpon the
handelyng of any matter in Iudgement.
                     NOT onely it is necessarie to knowe, what maner
of cause wee haue taken in hande, when wee firste
enter vpon any matter, but also it is wisedome to
consider the tyme,Circūstaunces necessary in al causes to bee noted. the place, the man for whom we
speake, the man against whom we speake, the matter whereof
we speake, and the iudges before whom we speake, the reasons
that best serue to further our cause, and those reasons
also, that maie seme somewhat to hynder our cause, and in
no wise to vse any suche at all, or els warely to mitigate by
protestacion, the euill that is in theim, and alwaies to vse
whatsoeuer can bee saied, to wynne the chief hearers good
willes, and perswade theim to our purpose.Fauoure wynnyng, and affeccions mouyng, when thei are moste necessarie. If the cause go
by fauour, and that reason cannot so muche auaile, as good
wil shalbe able to do: or els if mouyng affecciōs can do more
good, then bryngyng in of good reasons, it is meete alwaies
to vse that waie, whereby we maie by good helpe, get the ouer
hand. That if mine aduersariesAduersaries reasons, when thei shuld best be confuted. reasons, by me beyng cō
                        futed,
serue better to help forward my cause, then mine awn
reasons confirmed, can be able to doe good: I should wholy
bestowe my tyme, and trauaill to weaken and make slender,
all that euer he bringeth with hym. But if I can with more
ease, proue myne awne saiynges, 
                           •
                        ither with witnesses, or
with wordes, then be able to cōfute his with reason, I must
labour to withdrawe mennes myndes,Argumentes whō thei shuld chiefly be vsed from myne aduersaries
foundacion, and require thē wholy to herken vnto that
whiche I haue to saie, beyng of it self so iust and so reasonable,
that none can rightly speake against it, and shewe theim
that greate pitie it were, for lacke of the onely hearyng, that
a true matter, should want true dealyng. Ouer and besides
all these, there remain twoo lessons, the whiche wisemenne
haue alwaies obserued, and therefore ought of all men, assuredly
to be learned. The one is, that if any matterMatters, hard to auoide, shuld alwaies bee past ouer, as thoughwe saw them not at al be laied against
vs, whiche by reason can hardely bee auoyded, or the
whiche is so open, that none almoste can deny, it were wisedome
in confutyng all the other reasons, to passe ouer this

one, as though we sawe it not, and therefore speake neuer a
worde of it. Or els if necessitie shall force a man to saie some
what,Good to bee bolde in moste daungier, if otherwise wee cannot escape. he may make an outward bragge, as though there wer
no matter in it, euer so speakyng of it, as though he would
stande to the triall, makyng men to beleue, he would fight in
the cause, whē better it were (if necessitie so required) to run
clene awaie. And herein though a man do flie and geue place,
euermore the gladder, the lesse rauyng there is or stirryng in
this matter: yet he flieth wisely, and for this ende, that beyng fensed
otherwise, & strongly appoyncted, he maie take his
aduersary at the best aduauntage, or at the least, werie hym
with muche lingeryng, and make hym with oft suche fliyng,
to forsake his chief defence.
                     The other lesson is, that whereas we purpose alwaies to
haue the victorie, wee should so speake, that we maie labour
rather not to hynder, or hurt our cause, then to seke meanes
to further it.Better not to hurte a good matter by euil speach, then to further it by good talke. And yet I speake not this, but that bothe these
are right necessarie, and euery one that will doo good, muste
take peines in theim bothe, but yet notwithstandyng, it is a
fouler faulte a greate deale, for an Orator to be founde hurting
his awne cause, then it should turne to his rebuke, if he
had not furthered his whole entent. Therefore not onely is
it wisedome,
                           
                              •
                           arenesse in speakyng, and forbearyng to speake. to speake so muche as is nedefull, but also it is
good reason, to leaue vnspoken so muche as is nedelesse, the
whiche although the wisest can do, and nede no teachyng, yet
these common wittes offende muche nowe and then, in this
behalfe.The person before whom we speake, must be well marked. Some man beyng stirred, shall hurt more our cause
then twentie other. Tauntyng wordes before some menne,
will not be borne at all. Sharpe rebukyng of our aduersary
or frumpes geuen before some persones: cannot be sufferd at
all. Yea,Tyme must be obserued. sometymes a man must not speake all that he knoweth,
for if he doo, he is like to finde small fauour, although
he haue iuste cause to speake, and maie with reason declare
his mynde at large. And albeit that witlesse folke, can soner
rebuke that, whiche is fondly spoken, then redely praise that
whiche is wisely kept close, yet the necessitie of the matter,
must rather be marked, then the fonde iudgement of the people
estemed. What a sore saiyng were this? When a lawyer

should take in hande a matter, concernyng life and death,
and another should aske how he hath sped, to heare tel that
the lawyer, hath not onely cast awaie his cliēt, but vndoen
hymself also, in speakyng thynges inconsideratly, as no
doubt it oftē happeneth, that wise men, and those also that
bee none euill men neither, maie vnwares speake thynges,
which afterward thei sore repent, & would cal backe again
with losse of a greate so
                           ••
                        e. Now what a foly it is, not to
remember the tyme and the men. Or who will speake that
whiche he knoweth will not be liked, if he purpose to finde
fauour at their handes, before whom he speaketh, what mā
of reason will praise that before the Iudges, (before whom
he knoweth the determinacion of his cause resteth) whiche
the Iudges self cannot abide to heare spoken at all? Or
doeth not he muche hinder his awne matter, that wtthout
al curtesie or preface made, will largely speake euil of those
men, whom the hearers of his cause, tenderly doo fauour?
Or be it that there be some notable faulte in thyne aduersary,
with whiche the Iudges also are infected, were it not
foly for thee, to charge thyne aduersary with thesame. Cō
                        sideryng
the Iudges thereby maie thynke, thou speakest against
theim also, and so thou maiest perhappes, lose their
fauour in sekyng suche defence, made without all discrecion.
And in framing reasons, to confirme the purpose, if any
be spoken plainly false, or els contrary to that, which was
spoken before, dooeth it not muche hynder a good matter?
Therefore in all causes, this good hede ought to bee had,
that alwaies we labour to do some good, in furtheryng of
our cause, or if we cannot so do, at the least that we doo no
harme at all.
                  
                  
                     ¶There are three kyndes of causes, or Oracions,
whiche serue for euery matter
                     NOthyng can be handled by this arte, but thesame
is conteined, within one of these .iij. causes.Orations, o
                              •
                            causes of thr
                              •
                           e kyndes, Either
the matter consisteth in praise, or dispraise of
a thyng, or els in consultyng, whether the cause
be profitable, or vnprofitable, or lastly, whether the matter
be right, or wrong. And yet this one thyng is to be learned

that in euery one of these foure causes, these three seuerall
endes, maie euery of them be conteined, in any one of them.
And therfore he that shall haue cause, to praise any o
                           •
                        e body,
shall haue iuste cause to speake of iustice, to entreate of
profite, and ioyntly to talke of one thyng with another.
But because these three causes, are commonly and for the
moste part, seuerally parted, I will speake of them, one after
another, as thei are sette furthe by wise mennes iudgementes,
& particularly declare their properties, all in order
                     The Oracion demonstratiue,Oracion Demonstratiue. standeth either in praise, or
dispraise of some one man, or of some one thyng, or of some
one deede doen.
                  
                  
                     ¶The kynde Demonstratiue, wherein
chiefly it is occupied.
                     THere are diuerse thynges, whiche are praised, and
dispraised, as menne, Countreis, Citees, Places,
Beastes, Hilles, Riuers, Houses, Castles, dedes
doen by worthy menne, and pollicies inuented by
greate warriers, but moste commonly me
                           •
                         are praised, for
diuerse respectes, before any of the other thynges are taken
in hande.
                     Nowe in praisyng a noble personage,Noble personages, howe thei should be praised. and in settyng
furthe at large his worthinesse, Quintilian geueth warnyng,
to vse this threfolded order.
                     
                        To obserue thynges.
                        
                           
                              Before his life.
                              In his life.
                              After his death.
                           
                        
                     
                     Before a mannes life, are considered these places.
                     
                        The Realme.
                        The Shire.
                        The Toune.
                        The Pareutes.
                        The Auncestours.
                     
                     IN a mannes life, praise muste be parted threfolde.
That is to saie, into the giftes of good thynges of
the mynde, the body, and of fortune. Now the giftes
of the body, and of fortune, are not praise worthy,

of their awne nature: but euen as thei are vsed, either
to, or fro, so thei are either praised, or dispraised. Giftes of
the mynde, deserue the whole trumpe and sound commendacion
aboue all other, wherein wee maie vse the rehersall
of vertues, as thei are in order, and beginnyng at his infā
                        cie,
tell all his doynges, till his last age.
                  
                  
                     ¶The places whereof, are these.
                     
                        
                           
                              The birthe, and infancie.
                              Whether the person be a man, or a womā
                              
                           
                           
                              The childhode.
                              The bryngyng vp, ye nurturyng, and the behauour of his life.
                           
                           
                              The stripelyng age, or spryng tide
                              To what study he taketh hymself vnto, what company he vseth, how he liueth.
                           
                           
                              The mānes state.
                              Wherunto are referred these.
                              Prowesses doen, either abrode, or at home.
                           
                           
                              The olde age.
                              His pollicies & wittie deuises in behoue of the publique wele
                           
                           
                              The tyme of his departure, or deth
                              Thynges that haue happened aboute his death.
                           
                        
                     
                     NOw to open al these places more largely, aswell
those that are before a mannes life, as suche as
are in his life, and after his death, that the reader
maie further se the profite, I will do the best I cā
                     
                     The house wherof a noble personage came,The house o
                              •
                            aūcestrie wherof a noble personage cometh. declares the
state and nature of his auncesters, his alliaunce, and his
kynsfolke. So that suche worthy feactes, as thei haue heretofore
doen, and al suche honors as thei haue had, for suche
their good seruice, redowndes wholy to the encrease and

amplifiyng of his honour, that is now liuyng.
                     The Realme,ii. The realme. declares the nature of the people. So that
some Countrey brengeth more honor with it, then another
doth. To be a Frenche manne, descendyng there of a noble
house, is more honor then to be an Irishe manne: to bee an
Englishe manne borne, is muche more honour, then to be a
Scotte, because that by these men, worthy prowesses haue
been dooen, and greater affaires by theim attempted, then
haue been doen by any other.
                     The Shire or Touneiii. The Shire or Toune. helpeth somewhat, towardes the
encrease of honour: As it is muche better, to bee borne in
Paris, then in Picardie, in Lōdon, then in Lincolne. For
that bothe the aire is better, the people more ciuill, and the
wealth muche greater, and the menne for the moste parte
more wise.
                     To bee borne a manchilde, declares a courage, grauitie,
and constancie. To be borne a woman, declares weakenes
of spirite, neshenes of body, and fikilnesse of mynde.iiii. The se
                              •
                           e or kynde.
                     
                     Now for the bringing vp of a noble personage,v. Educac
                              •
                           on. his nurse
must be considered, his plaie felowes obserued, his teacher
and other his seruauntes, called in remembraunce. Howe
euery one of these liued then, with whom thei haue liued
afterwardes, and how thei liue now.
                     By knowyng what he taketh hymself vnto, and wherin
he moste deliteth, I maie commende hym for his learnyng,
for his skill in the Frenche, or in the Italian, for his knowlege
in Cosmographie: for his skill in the lawes, in the histories
of all countreis, and for his gift of endityng.vi. Inclinaciō of nature. Again,
I maie cōmende hym for plaiyng at weapons, for runnyng
vpon a greate horse, for chargyng his staffe at the Tilte, for
vautyng, for plaiyng vpon instrumentes, yea, and for paintyng,
or drawyng of a platte, as in old tyme noble princes,
muche delited therein.
                     Prowesse doen, declare his seruice to the Kyng, and his
countrey, either in withstandyng the outwarde e
                           •
                        emie, or
els in aswagyng the rage of his awne coūtreymē at home.vii Attemptes worthy.
                     
                     His wise counsaill, and good aduise geuen, settes furthe
the goodnesse of his witte.viii.
                     
                     
                        At the tyme of his departyng,Tyme of it. departing this worlde. his sufferaunce of all sicknesse,
may muche commende his worthinesse. As his strong
harte, and cherefull pacience euen to the ende, cannot wāt
greate praise. The loue of all men towardes hym, and the
lamentyng generally for his lacke, helpe well moste highly
to set furthe his honour.
                     After a mannes death,After departure. are considered his tombe, his cote
armour set vp, and all suche honours, as are vsed in funeralles.
If any one liste to put these preceptes in practise, he
maie doo, as hym liketh best. And surely I do thynke, that
nothyng so muche furthereth knowlege, as daiely exercise,
and enuryng our selfes to do that in dede, whiche we know
in woorde. And because examples geue greate lighte, after
these preceptes are set furthe, I will commende two noble
gentlemen, Henry Duke of Suffolk, and his brother lorde
Charles DukeDuke of Suffolke, and lord Charles. with hym.
                  
                  
                     ¶An example of commendyng a noble personage.
                     BEtter or more wisely can none do, then thei which
neuer bestowe praise, but vpon those that best deserue
praise, rather myndyng discretly, what thei
ought to dooe, then vainly deuisyng what thei best
can doo, sekyng rather to praise menue, suche as are founde
worthy, then curiously findyng meanes to praise matters,
suche as neuer wer in any. For thei which speake otherwise
then truthe is, mynd not the commendacion of the perso
                           •
                        e,
but the settyng furthe of their awne learnyng. As GorgiasGorgias.
in Plato, praisyng vnrighteousnes, HeliogabalusHeliogabalus Oratours,
commendyng whoredome, PhauorinusPhauorinus. the Philosophier,
extollyng the feuer Quartaine, thought not to
speake as the cause required, but would so muche saie as
their wit would geue, not weighyng the state of the cause,
but myndyng the want of their brain, lookyng how muche
could be said, not passyng how litle should be saied. But I
bothe knowyng the might of Gods hand, for suche as loue
fables, and the shame that in yearth redoundeth to euil re
                        
                           •
                        orters,
will not commende that or those, whiche neede
no good praise, but will commende them, that no man iustly
can dispraise, nor yet any one is well able worthely to

praise. Their towardnes was suche, & their giftes so great,
that I know none whiche loue learnyng, but hath sorowed
the lacke of their beeyng, and I knowe that the onely namyng
of theim, will stirre honest hartes, to speake well of
them. I will speake of twoo brethren, that lately departed,
the one Henry Duke of Suffolke, and the other Lorde
Charles his brother,Henry duke of
Suffolke, and lorde Charles his brother. whom God thinkyng 
                           ••
                        eter for heauen,
then to liue here vpon yearth, toke from vs in his anger,
for the betteryng of our doynges, and amendement of
our euill liuyng. These twoo gentlemen were borne in
noble England, bothe by father and mother, of an high parentage.
The father called Duke Charles, by mariage beyng
brother, to the worthy kyng of famous memorie, Hēry
theight, was in suche fauour, and did suche seruice, that all
Englaude at this houre, doeth finde his lacke, and Fraunce
yet doth fele, that suche a duke there was, whom in his life
tyme, the godly, loued: the euil, feared: the wise men, honored
for his wit, and the simple, vsed alwaies for their counsaill.
Their mother, of birthe noble, and witte great, of nature
gētle, and mercifull to the poore, and to the godly, and
especially to the learned, an earnest good patronesse, and
moste helpyng Lady aboue all other. In their youthe their
father died, the eldest of thē beyng not past .ix. yeres of age.
After whose death, their mother knowyng, that welth without
wit, is like a sworde in a naked mannes hand, & assuredly
certain, that knowlege would confirme iudgemēt, prouided
so for their bringyng vp, in al vertue and learnyng, that
ij. like were not to be had, within this realme again. When
thei begā bothe, to wa
                           •
                        e somewhat in yeres, beyng in their
primetide, & spryng of their age, thelder waityng of the kynges
maiestie that now is, was generally well estemed, and
sucheh ope was conceiued of his towardnes, both for learnyng,
and al other thinges, that fewe wer like vnto hym in
al the courte. The other kepyng his boke, emong the Cambrige
men, profited (as thei all well knowe) bothe in vertue
and learnyng, to their greate admiracion. For the Greke,
the Latine, and the Italian, I knowe he could dooe more,
then would be thought true by my report. I leaue to speke

of his skill in pleasaunt instrumentes, neither will I vtter
his aptnes in Musike, & his toward nature, to all exercises
of the body. But his elder brother in this tyme (besides
his other giftes of the mynde, whiche passed all oth
                           •
                        r,
and were almoste incredible) folowyng his fathers nature
was so delited with ridyng, and runnyng in armour vpon
horsebacke, and was so comely for that feacte, and could do
so well in chargyng his staffe, beyng but .xiiij. yeres of age,
that menne of warre, euen at this houre, mone muche the
want of suche a worthy gentleman. Yea, the Frenche men
that first wondered at his learnyng, when he was there emong
theim, and made a notable Oracion in Latine: were
muche more astonied whē thei saw his comely ridyng, and
litle thought to finde these twoo ornamentes, ioyned bothe
in one, his yeres especially beyng so tender, and his practise
of so small tyme. Afterward commyng from the courte, as
one that was desierous to be emong the learned, he laie in
Cambrige together with his brother, where thei bothe so
profited, and so gently vsed themselfes, that all Cambr
                           •
                        ge
did reuerence, bothe hym and his brother, as two iewelles
sent frō God. Thelders nature was suche, that he thought
hymself best, when he was emong the wisest, and yet contempned
none, but thankefully vsed all, gentle in behauor
without childishenes; stoute of stomacke without al pride,
bold with all warenesse, and frendly with good aduisemēt.
The yonger beeyng not so ripe in yeres, was not so graue
in looke, rather chereful, then sad: rather quicke, then auncient:
but yet if his brother were sette a side, not one that
went beyonde hym. A childe that by his awne inclinacion,
so muche yelded to his ruler, as fewe by chastement haue
doen the like, pleasaunt of speeche, prompte of witte, stiryng
by nature, hault without hate, kynde without crafte,
liberall of harte, gentle in behauiour, forward in all thynges,
gredy of learnyng, and lothe to take a foyle, in any
open assembly. Thei bothe in al attemptes, sought to haue
the victory, and in exercise of witte, not onely the one with
the other, did ofte stande in contencion, but also thei bothe
would matche with the best, and thought themselfes moste

happie, when thei might haue any iust occasion, to put their
wittes in triall. And now when this grene fruicte began to
waxe ripe, and all menne lo
                           •
                        ged to haue tast, of suche their
greate forwardnesse: God preuentyng mannes expectacion,
toke theim bothe aboute one houre, and in so shorte tyme,
that first thei wer knowen to be dedde, or any abrode could
tell thei were sicke. I neede not to reherse, what bothe thei
spake, before their departure (cōsideryng, I haue seuerally
written, bothe in Latine and in Englishe, of thesame matter)
neither will I heape here so muche together as I can,
because I should rather renewe greate sorowe to many,
then do moste men any great good, who loued them so well
generally, that fewe for a greate space after, spake of these
twoo gentle menne, but thei shewed teares, with the onely
vtteraunce of their wordes, and some through ouer muche
sorowyng, wer fain to forbeare speakyng. God graūt vs also
to liue, that the good men of this world, may be alwaies
lothe to forsake vs, and God maie still be glad to haue vs,
as no doubt the
                           •
                        e twoo children so died, as all men should
wishe to liue, and so thei liued bothe, as al should wishe to
die. Seyng therfore these two wer suche, bothe for birthe,
nature, and all other giftes of grace, that the like are hardely
founde behynde theim: let vs so speake of theim, that
our good report maie warne vs, to folowe their godly natures,
and that lastly, wee maie enioye that enheritaunce,
whereunto God hath prepared thē and vs (that feare him)
from the beginnyng. Amen.
                     
                        The partes of an
Oracion, made in
praise of a manne.
                        
                           
                              The Enteraunce.
                              The Narracion.
                              Sometymes the confutacion.
                              The Conclusion.
                           
                        
                     
                     IF any one shall haue iust cause, to dispraise an euill
man, he shall sone do it, if he can praise a good man.
For (as Aristotle doeth saie) of contraries, there is
one and thesame doctrine, and therefore he that can
do the one, shall sone be able to do the other.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Of an Oracion demonstratiue,
for some deede doen.
                     THe kynd demonstratiue of some thyng doen is this,Oracion Demo
                              •
                           stratiue of a deede.
when a man is commended or dispraised, for any acte
committed in his life.
                  
                  
                     ¶The places to confirme this cause, when any
one is commended, are sixe in nomber.
                     
                        The places of Cofirmacion.
                        
                           
                              j. It is honest.
                              ij. It is possible.
                              iij. Easie to be doen,
                              iiij. hard to be doen.
                              v. Possible to be doen,
                              vi. Impossible to be doen.
                           
                        
                     
                     Seuen circumstaunces, whiche are to bee considered in
diuerse matters.
                     
                        The circumstaunces.
                        
                           
                              j. Who did the deede.
                              ij. What was doen.
                              iij. Where it was doen.
                              iiij. What helpe had he to it.
                              v. Wherefore he did it.
                              vi. How he did it.
                              vij. At what tyme he did it.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The circumstaunces in meter.
                     
                        Who, what, and where, by what helpe, and by whose:
                        Why, how, and when, do many thynges disclose.
                     
                     THese places helpe wonderfully, to set out any matter,
and to amplifie it to the vttermoste, not onely in
praisyng, or dispraisyng, but also in all other causes
where any aduisement is to bee vsed. Yet this one
thyng is to bee learned, that it shall not bee necessarie, to vse
theim altogether, euen as thei stande in order: but rather as
tyme and place shall best require, thei maie bee vsed in any
parte of the Oracion, euen as it shall please hym that hath
the vsyng of them.
                     Again, if any manne bee disposed, to rebuke any offence, he
maie vse the places contrary vnto theim that are aboue rehersed,
and apply these circumstaunces euen as thei are, to

the profe of his purpose.
                  
                  
                     ¶An example of commendyng Kyng Dauid, for
killyng greate Goliah, gathered and made
by o
                           •
                        seruacion of circumstaunces.
                     GOD beyng the aucthor of mankynde, powryng into
hym the breath of life, and framyng hym of claie
in suche a comely wise,Dauid cōmended for killing Goliah. as we al now se, hath from
the beginnyng, been so carefull ouer his electe and
chosen, that in al daungers, he is euer redy to assist his people,
kepyng theim harmelesse, when thei were often paste all
mannes hope. A
                           •
                        d emong all other his fatherly goodnesse, it
pleased hym to shewe his power,who? Dauid against Goliah. in his chosen seruaūt Dauid,
that all mighte learne to knowe his mighte, and reken
with themselfes, that though man geue the stroke, yet God
it is that geueth the ouerha
                           •
                        de. For wheras Dauid was of
small statu
                           •
                        e, weake of body, poore of 
                           •
                        irthe, and base in the
sight of the worldlynges, God called hym firste to matche
with an houge monster, a litle body, against a mightie Gyaunt,
an abiect
                           •
                         Israelite, against a moste valiaunt Philistine,
with whom no Israelite durst encounter. These Philistines
mynded the murder and ouerthrowe, of all the Israelites,
trustyng in their awne strength so muche, that thei
feared no perill, but made an accompte, that all was theirs
before hande. Now when bothe these armies were in sight,
the Philistines vpon an hill of the one side, and the Israelites
vpon an hill, of the other side, a vale beyng betwixte
theim bothe, 
                           •
                        here marched out of the Campe, a base borne
Philistine, called Goliah of Geth, a manne of sixe cubites
high. This souldiour, when through the bignes and stature
of his body, and also with greate bragges, & terrible threatenynges,
he had wonderfully abashed the whole armie of
the Israelites, so that no man durst aduenture vpon hym,
God to the ende he mighte del
                           •
                        uer Israell, and shewe that
mannes helpe, with all his armour, litle auaile to get victory,
without his especiall grace: and again, to the ende he
might set vp Dauid, and make hym honourable emong the
Israeli
                           •
                        es, did then call out Dauid, the sonne of Ephrate
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           ••
                        ,
of Be
                           •
                        hleem Iuda, whose name was Isai, who beeyng

but a child in yeres, did kill out of hande,what? Dauid killed Goliah. by Goddes might
and power, Goliah the moste terrible enemie of all other,
that bare hate against the children of Israell. When this
mightie felowe was slain, aboute the vale of Terebinthus,where? About the vale of Terebithus.
betwixt both tharmies, the Israelites reioysed, that before
quaked, and wondered at hym then, whom thei would scant
knowe before, &▪ no doubt this dede was not onely wonderfull,
but also right godly. For in battaill to kill an enemie,
is thoughte right worthy, or to aduenture vpon a reb
                           •
                        ll,
(though the successe folowe not) is generally commended:
yea, to put one to the worse, or to make hym flie the groūd,
is called manly, but what shall we saie of Dauid, that not
onely had the better hande, not onely bette his enemie, but
killed streight his enemie, yea, and not an enemy, of the cō
                        mon
stature of men, but a mightie Gyaunt, not a man, but
a monster, yea, a deuill in hart, and a beast in body?Dauids enterprise, honest and godly. Can any
be compted more honest, then suche as seke to saue their
coūtrey; by hasardyng their carcasses, and shedyng of their
bloude? Can loue shewe it self greater, then by yeldyng of
life,By what help and by whose? Alone, & without the help of any manne liuyng. for the health of an armie? It had been muche, if half a
dosen had dispatched, suche a terrible Gyaunte, but now,
when Dauid without helpe, beyng not yet a manne, but a
boye in yeres, 
                           •
                        lewe hym hande to hande, what iuste praise
dooeth he deserue? If we praise other, that haue flain euill men,
and compte them haulte, that haue killed their matches,Dauids enterprise, praise worthy.
what shall we saie of Dauid, that beyng wonderfully
ouermatched, made his partie good, and gotte the gole of
a monster? Lette other praise Hercules, that thinke best of
hym: let Cesar, Alexander, and Hanniball, bee bru
                           •
                        ed for
warriers: Dauid in my iudgement, bothe did more manly,
then all the other wer able, & serued his countrey in greater
daunger, then euer any one of theim did. And shall wee
not call suche a noble capitain, a good man of warre? Deserueth
not his manhode and stoute attempte, wonderfull
praise? It vertue could speake, would she not sone confesse
that Dauid had her in full possession? And therfore if well
doynges, by right maie chalenge worthy brute, Dauid wil
be knowen, and neuer can want due praise, for suche an honest

deede. And what man wil not saie, but that Dauid did
mynde nothyng els herein, but the saufegarde of his countrey,why? For the saufegarde of his countrey.
thinkyng it better for himself to die, and his countrey
to liue, then hymself to liue, and his countrey to die. What
gain got Dauid, by the death of Goliah, or what could he
hope, by the death of suche a mōster, but onely that the loue
whiche he bare to the Israelites, forced hym to hasard his
awne life:Dauides enterprise, prost
                              •
                           a
                           
                              •
                           ie to hymself and his countrey. Thinkyng that if the Philistines should preuail
the Israelites wer like to perishe, euery mothers sonne of
theim? Therefore he hassardyng this atttempte, considered
with hymself, the saufegard of the Israelites, the mainteinaunce
of iustice, his duetie towardes God, his obedience
to his prince, and his loue to his countrey.Dauides enterprise, appered easy to himself And no doubte,
God made this enterprise appere full easie, before Dauid
could haue the harte, to matche hymself with suche a one.
For though his harte might quake, beeyng voyde of Gods
helpe, yet assuredly he wanted no stomacke, when God did
set hym on. Let tirauntes rage, let hell stand open, let Sathan
shewe his mighte, if God bee with vs, who can bee against
vs? Though this Goliah appered so strong, that .x.
Dauides were not able, to stande in his hande: yet .x. Goliaths
were all ouer weake for Dauid alone. Man cannot
iudge, neither can reason comprehende, the mightie power
of God. When Pharao with all his armie, thoughte fully
to destroye the children of Israell, in the redde sea, did not
God preserue Moses, and destroye Pharao? What is man
and all his power that he can make, in the handes of God,
vnto whō all creatures, bothe in heauen and in yearth, are
subiecte at his commaundement? Therefore it was no mastery
for Dauid, beyng assisted with God, aswel to matche
with the whole army, as to ouerthrowe this one man. But
what did the Israelites, when thei sawe Dauid take vpon
hym, suche a bolde enterprise?Dauides enterprise, accompted of his frē
                           des, harde aud impossible. Some saied he was rashe, other
mocked hym to scorne, & his brethren called hym foole.
For thought thei, what a madde felowe is he, beeyng but a
lad in yeres, to matche with suche a monster in body? How
can it be possible otherwise, but that he shalbe torne in pe
                        
                           •
                        es,
euen at his firste commyng? For if the Philistine maie
ones hit hym, he is goen though he had tenne mennes lifes.
Now what should he meane, so vnegally to matche himself
except he were, wery of his life, or els were not well in his
wittes? Yea, and to geue his enemies, all the aduauntage
that could bee, he came vnarmed, and whereas the Philistine,
had very strōg armour, bothe to defende hymself, a
                           •
                        d
a strong weapon to fight withall, Dauid came with a slyngHow? with a slyng.
onely, as though he would kill crowes, whereat, not onely
the Philistine laughed, & disdained his folie, but also bothe
the armies thought he was but a dedde man, before he gaue
one stroke. And in deede, by all reason and deuise of manne
there was none other waie, but deathe with hym, out of
hande, Dauid notwithstandyng, beeyng kyndeled in harte
with Gods might, was strong enough for him, in his awne
opinion, and forced nothyng, though all other were muche
against hym. And therefore made no more a dooe, but beyng
redy to reuenge in Goddes name, suche greate blasphemie,
as the Philistine then did vtter, marched towardes his enemie,
and with castyng a stone out of a slyng, he ouerthrewe
the Philistine at the first. The whiche when he had dooen,
out with his sworde, and chopt of his hedde, cariyng it with,
his armoure, to the Campe of the Israelites: whereat the
Philistines wer greatly astonied, and the Israelites much
praised God, that had geuen suche grace, to suche a one, to
compasse suche a deede. And the rather this manly acte, is
highly to be praised, because he subdued this houge enemie,
when Saul firste reigned kyng ouer Israell, and was sore
assaied with the greate armie of the Philistines. Lette vs
therefore that be now liuyng, when this acte or suche like,
come into our myndes: remember what God is, of how infinite
power he is, and let vs praise God in them, by whom
he hath wrought suche wonders, to the strengthenyng of
our faithe, and constaunt kepyng of our profession, made to
hym, by euery one of vs, in our Baptisme.
                  
                  
                     ¶Examinyng of the circumstaunces
                     
                        
                           j. Who did the deede?
                           DAuid beeyng an Israelite, did this deede, beeyng the
sonne of Isai, of the Tribe of Iuda, a boye in yeres,

This circumstaunce was vsed, not o
                                 •
                              ely in the narracion,
but also when I spake of the honestie and godlinesse, whiche
Dauid vsed, when he slewe Goliah.
                        
                        
                           ij. What was doen?
                           He slewe Goliah, the strongest Giaunt emong the Philistines.
This circumstaunce I vsed also, when I spake of
the honestie, in killyng Goliah.
                        
                        
                           iij. Where was it doen?
                           Aboute the vale of Terebinthus.
                        
                        
                           iiij. What helpe had he to it?
                           He had no help of any man, but went himself alone. And
wheras Saul offred him harnes, he cast it away, & trusting
onely in God, toke him to his sling, with .iiij. or .v. smal stones
in his hand, the whiche wer thought nothyng in mānes
sight, able either to do litle good, or els nothing at al. This
circumstaunce I vsed, when I spake of the easenesse & possibilite,
that was in Dauid, to kill Goliah, by Goddes help.
                        
                        
                           v. Wherefore did he it?
                           He aduentured his life, for the loue of his countrey, for
the maintenaunce of iustice, for thaduauncement of Gods
true glory, and for the quietnesse of all Israell, neither seekyng
fame, nor yet lokyng for any gain. I vsed this circū
                              staunce,
when I shewed what profite he sought, in aduenturyng
this deede.
                        
                        
                           vi. How did he it?
                           Marie he put a stone in his slyng, and when he had cast it
at the Philistine, Goliah fel doune straight. I vsed this circumstaunce,
when I spake of the impossibilitie of the thing.
                        
                        
                           vij. What tyme did he it?
                           This deede was doen, when Saul reigned, first kyng ouer
the Israelites, at what tyme the Philistines, came against
the Israelites. Thus by the circumstaunces of thynges,
a right worthy cause, maie be plentifully enlarged.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the Oracion demonstratiue, where thynges
are sette furthe, and matters commended.
                     THe kynde demōstratiue of thynges, is a meane wherby
we do praise, or dispraise thynges, as vertue, vice, tounes,
citees, castles, woddes, waters, hilles, and moūtaines.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Places to confirme thynges are .iiii.
                     
                        Places of confirmacion.
                        
                           
                              i. Thynges honest.
                              ij. Profitable.
                              iij. Easie to be doen.
                              iiij Hard to be doen.
                           
                        
                     
                     MAny learned, will haue recourse to the places of
Logique in stede of these .iiij. places, when they
take in hand to commende any suche matter. The
whiche places if they make them serue rather to
commende the matter, then onely to teache men the truth of
it, it were wel done & Oratourlike▪ for seyng a man wholly
bestoweth his wit to plaie the Oratour, he shoulde chefely
seke to cōpasse that whiche he entēdeth, & not do that onely
which he but half mynded. for by plaine teachyng, the Logician
shewes hymselfe, by large amplification and beautifiyng
of his cause, the Rhetorician is alwaies knowne.
                  
                  
                     ¶The places of Logique are these.
                     
                        Definition.
                        Causes.
                        Partes.
                        Effectes.
                        Thy
                              •
                           ges adioy
                              •
                           y
                              •
                           g.
                        Contraries.
                     
                     I Do not se otherwise but that these places of Logique
are confounded with thother .iiiij. of confirmacion,Logique must be learned for confirmacion of causes.
or rather I thinke these of Logique must first
be mynded ere thother can well be had. For what is
he that can cal a thyng honest & by reason proue it, except
he first knowe what the thyng is, the whiche he can not better
doe, then by definyng the nature of the thyng. Againe
how shal I know whether myne attempte be easie, or hard,
if I know not the efficient cause, or be assured how it maie
be doen. In affirmyng it to be possible, I shall not better
knowe it, then by searchyng thende, and learnyng by Logique
what is the final cause of euery thyng.
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶An example in commendacion of Iustice,
or true dealyug.
                     SO many as loke to liue in peaceable quietnesse, beyng
mynded rather to folowe reason, than to be
led by wilfull affection: desire iusticeIustice commended. in al thynges
without the which no countrie is able long to cō
                        tinue.
Then may I be bolde to commende that, whiche all
men wishe & fewe can haue, whiche all men loue, & none can
want: not doubtyng but as I am occupied in a good thyng,
so al good men wil heare me with a good wil. But woulde
God I were so wel able to perswade all men to Iustice, as
al men know the necessarie vse therof: and then vndoubtedly
I woulde be muche boulder, and force some by violence,
whiche by faire wordes can not be entreated. And yet what
nedes any perswasion for that thyng, whiche by nature is
so nedeful, & by experience so profitable, that looke what we
want, without iustice we get not, loke what we haue, without
iustice we kepe not. God graūt his grace so to worke in
the hartes of al men, that they may aswel practise well doyng
in their owne lyfe, as they would that other should folowe
iustice in their lyfe: I for my part wil bestow some labor
to set forth the goodnes of vpright dealing that al other
men the rather may do therafter. That if through my wordes,
God shal worke with any man, than may I thynke my
self in happy case, & reioyce much in the trauaile of my wit.
And how can it be otherwyse, but that al men shalbe forced
inwardly to allowe that, whiche in outwarde acte many do
not folowe: seyng God poured first this law of nature into
mans hart, & graūted it as a meane wherby we might know
his wil, & (as I might saie) talke with him, groundyng stil
his doinges vpō this poinct, that mā should do as he would
be done vnto, the whiche is nothyng elles, but to lyue vprightly,
without any wil to hurte his neighbour.Iustice naturally in euery one of v
                              •
                           . And therfore
hauyng this light of Goddes wil opened vnto vs thorowe
his mere goodnesse, we ought euermore to referre al
our actions vnto this ende, both in geuyng iudgement, and
deuisyng lawes necessarie for mans lyfe. And here vpon it
is that when men desire the lawe for trial of a matter, they

meane nothyng elles but to haue iustice,Iustice what it is, and howe largely it extendeth. the whiche iustice
is a vertue that yeldeth to euery man, his owne: to the euer
liuyng God, loue aboue al thynges: to the Kyng, obedience: to
the inferiour, good counsel: to the poore mā, mercie: to
the hateful and wicked, sufferaunce: to it self, truthe:
and to al men, perfite peace, and charitie. Now what can be
more said in praise of this vertue, or what thyng can be like
praised? Are not al thynges in good case, when al men haue
their owne? And what other thyng doeth iustice, but seketh
meanes to contente al parties? Then how greatly are they
to be praised, that meane truely in al th
                           •
                        ir doynges, and not
onely, do no harme to any, but seke meanes to helpe al. The
sunne is not so wonderful to the world (saith AristotelAristotel.) as
the iust dealyng of a gouernour is merueilous to al mē. No
the yerth yeldeth not more gaine to al creatures, than doth
the iustice of a Magistrate to his whole Realme. For, by a
lawe, we liue, and take the fruites of the yearth, but where
no law is, nor iustice vsed: there, nothyng cā be had, though
al thynges be at hande: For, in hauyng the thyng, we shall
lacke the vse, and liuyng in great plentie, we shal stande in
great nede. The meane therfore that maketh men to enioye
their owne, is iustice, the whiche beyng ones taken away,
all other thynges are lost with it, neither can any one saue
that he hath, nor yet get that he wanteth. Therfore if wrōg
doyng shoulde be borne withal, and not rather punished by
death,Wvrong dealyng deserueth death. what man coulde lyue in reste? Who coulde be suer
either of his lyfe, or of his liuyng one whole day together?
Now because euery man desiereth the preseruation of hym
selfe, euery man should in lyke case desire the sauegarde of
his neighbour. For if I shoulde wholly mynde myne own
ease, and folowe gaine without respect to the hinderaunce
of myne euen Christian: why should not other vse thesame
libertie, and so euery man for hymselfe, and the deuil for vs al,
catche that catche may? The whiche custome if all men
folowed, the earth woulde soone be voide for want of men,
one woulde be so gredie to eate vp an other. For in sekyng
to lyue, we shoulde lose our lyues, & in gapyng after gooddes,
we shoulde soone go naked. Therefore to represse this

rage, and with holsome deuises to traine men in an order,
God hath lightened man with knowledge, that in al thynges
he may se what is right, and what is wrong, and vpon
good aduisement deale iustly with al men. God hath created
al thynges for mans vse, and ordeined man for mannes
sake, that one man might helpe another. For thoughe some
one haue giftes more plentifully then the cōmune sorte, yet
no man can liue alone without helpe of other.Iustice necessarie for almō. Therfore we
shoulde striue one to helpe another by iuste dealyng, some
this way, & some that way, as euery one shal haue nede, and
as we shalbe alwaies best able, wherein the lawe of nature
is fulfilled, and Goddes commaundemēt folowed. We loue
them here in yearth that geue vs faire wordes, and we can
be content to speake wel of them, that speake wel of vs: and
shall we not loue them, and take them also for honest men,
whiche are contented from tyme to time to yelde euery mā his
owne, and rather woulde dye then consent to euill doyng?From the lesse to the greater.
If one be ientle in outwarde behauiour, we lyke hym
wel, and shal we not esteme hym that is vpright in his outward
liuyng? and like as we desire that other should be to
vs, ought not we to bee likewyse affected towardes them?
Euen emong brute beastes nature hash appoincted a law, &
shal we men lyue without a lawe? The StorkeYoung Storkes. beyng not
able to feede her selfe for age, is fedde of her youngones,
wherin is declared a natural loue, and shal we so lyue, that
one shal not loue another? Man shoulde be vnto man as a
God, & shal man be vnto man as a Deuil? Hath God created
vs, and made vs to his owne likenesse, endewyng vs
with al the riches of the yearth, that we might be obedient
to his wil, and shal we neither loue him, nor like his? How
can we say that we loue God,Vnnaturalnes in man towardes God. if there be no charitie in vs?
Do I loue hym, whose mynde I wil hot folowe, although
it be right honest? If you loue me (saith Christe) folow my
commaundementes.Ihon. 
                              •
                           iiii. Matth. 
                              •
                           ix. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              •
                           . Christes will is suche that we shoulde
loue God aboue al thinges, and our neighbour as our self.
Then if we do not iustice (wherin loue doeth consist) we do
neither loue man, nor yet loue God. The Wyse man saith:
The begynnyng of a good lyfe, is to do iustice.Proner. 
                              •
                           v
                              •
                           . Yea, the blessyng

of the Lorde is vpon the heade of the iuste.Prouer. iiii. Heauen is
theirs (saith Dauid) that do iustly frō tyme to tyme.Psal. xcvi. What
els then shal we do that haue any hope of the general resurrection,
but do the will of God, and lyue iustly all the daies
of our life? Let euery man, but consider with hymself what
ease he shal finde therby, & I doubt not but euery one depely
waiyng the same, wil in hart confesse that iustice maketh
plentie,Profite of iustice. and that not one man coulde long hold his owne, if
lawes were not made to restraine mans will. We trauaile
now, Wynter & Sommer, we watche, and take thought for
maintenaunce of wife & children, assuredly purposyng (that
though God shal take vs immediatly) to leaue honestly for
our familie.Sauegarde had by iustice. Now to what ende were all our gatheryng together,
if iust dealyng were set a side, if lawes bare no rule,
if what the wicked list, that they may, and what they may,
that they can, & what they can, that they dare, & what they
dare, the same they do, & whatsoeuer they do, no man of power
is agreued therwith?Gradation. What maketh wicked mē (which
els woulde not) acknowlege the Kyng as their souereigne
lorde, but the power of a lawe, & the practise of iustice for euil
doers?The necessitie of iustice. Could a Prynce mainteine his state royal, if law
and right had not prouided that euery man shoulde haue his
owne? Would seruauntes obey their masters, the sonne his
father, the tenaunt his landlorde, the citezen his maiour, or
Shirife
                           •
                        if orders were not set & iust dealyng appoincted for
al states of men? Therfore the true meanyng folke in all ages
geue thē selues some to this occupacion, & some to that,
sekyng therin nothing els, but to mainteine a poore life, and
to kepe them selues true men both to God and the worlde.
What maketh men to performe their bargaines, to stand to
their promises, & yelde their debtes, but an order of a lawe
grounded vpō iustice?Vvhere iustice is executed, vice is exiled. Where right beareth rule, there craft
is coumpted vice. The lyar is muche hated, where truth is
wel estemed. The wicked theues are hāged, where good men
are regarded. None can holde vp their heades, or dare showe
their faces in a well ruled commune weale, that are not
thought honest, or at the least haue some honest way to lyue.
The Egiptians therfore hauyng a worthy and a wel gouerned

publike weale, prouided that none shoulde lyue idlye,
but that euery one monethly should geue an accompte how
he spente his tyme, and had his name regestrede in a Booke
for the same purpose.¶Aegiptians what order they vsed to banishe ydelnesse. But Lorde, if this lawe were vsed in
England, how many would come behynde hande with their
reckenynges at the audite daie. I feare me there doynges
woulde be suche, that it would be long ere they gotte there
quietus est. Therfore the wourse is our state, the lesse that
this euil is loked vnto. And suerly, if in other thynges we
shoulde be as negligent, this Realme could not long stand.
But thankes be to God, we hang theim a pace that offende
a lawe, and therfore we put it to their choise, whether they
wil be idle and so fal to stealyng, or no: they knowe their rewarde,
go to it, when they will. But if therewithall some
good order were taken for education of youthe, and settyng
loiterers on worke (as thankes be to God the Citie is most
Godly bent that way) all would sooue be well without all
doubt. The wyse and discrete persons in al ages sought all
meanes possible to haue an order in all thynges, & loued by
iustice to directe al their doynges, wherby appereth both an
apt wil in suche men, & a natural stirryng by Godes power
to make al men good.Iustice easy to be obserued, if wil be not wā
                           
                           
                              •
                           yng. Therfore, if we doe not well, we must
blame our selues, that lacke a wil, and do not cal to God for
grace. For though it appere hard to do wel, because no man
can get perfection without continaunce: yet assuredly to an
humble mynde that calleth to God, and to a willyng harte
that faint would do his best, nothing can be hard. God hath
set al thinges to sale for labour, and kepeth open shop, come
who will. Therefore in all ages whereas we see the fewest
good, we must wel thinke, the most did lacke good wil to aske,
or seke for the same. Lorde, what loue had that worthie
Prince Seleueus to maintein iustice, & to haue good lawes
kepte, of whome suche a wondrefull thyng is written.
For whereas he established moste holsome lawes for sauegarde
of the Locrensiās, and his owne sonne thereupon taken
in adultrie, should lose bothe his iyes accordyng to the
lawe then made, and yet notwithstandyng, the whole Citie
thought to remitte the necessitie of his punishement for the

honour of his father, Seleucus woulde none of that in any
wyse.Valer. lib. vi. Yet at last through importunitie beyng ouercome, he
caused first one of his owne iyes to be pluckte out, & next after,
one of his sonnes iyes, leauyng onely the vse of sight to
hymself & his sonne. Thus through equitie of the lawe, he
vsed the dew meane of chastisement, showyng hymself by a
wonderful temperature both a merciful father, & a iust lawe
maker. Nowe happy are thei yt thus obserue a law, thinking
losse of body, lesse hurt to the man, then sparyng of punishemēt,
mete for the soule. For God wil not faile thē, that haue
suche a desire to folowe his wil, but for his promise sake, he
wil rewarde them for euer. And now, seeyng that iustice naturally
is geuē to al men without the whiche we could not
liue, beyng warned also by God alwaies to doe vprightly,
perceauyng againe the commodities that redounde vnto vs
by liuyng vnder a lawe, & the sauegard wherin we stand hauyng
iustice to assiste vs: I trust that not onely all men wil
cōmende iustice in worde, but also wil liue iustly in dede, the
which that we may do, God graunt vs of his grace, Amen.
                  
                  
                     ¶An Oration deliberatiue.
                     AN Oration deliberatiue,Oration deliberatiue. is a meane, wherby we do
perswade, or disswade, entreate, or rebuke, exhorte, or
dehorte, commende, or cōforte any man. In this kynd
of Oration we doe not purpose wholly to praise any
body, nor yet to determine any matter in cōtrouersie, but the
whole compasse of this cause is, either to aduise our neighbour
to that thyng, whiche we thynke most nedeful for hym
or els to cal him backe frō that folie, which hindereth muche
his estimacion. As for exāple, if I would counseil my frende
to trauaile beyond the Seas for knowlege of the tongues, &
experience in forein countries: I might resorte to this kinde
of Oration, & finde matter to cōfirme my cause plentifully.
And the reasons which are commonly vsed to enlarge suche
matters, are these that folowe.
                     
                        The thyng is honest.
                        Saufe.
                        Profitable.
                        Easie.
                        Pleasaunt.
                        Harde.
                     
                     
                        
                        Lawful and meete.
                        Praise worthie.
                        Necessarie.
                     
                     NOW in speakyng of honestie, I may by deuision of
the vertues make a large walke.
                           
                              •
                           onestie comprehendeth al vertues. Againe loke what
lawes, what customes, what worthie dedes, or saiynges
haue bene vsed heretofore, all these might
serue wel for the confirmacion of this matter▪ lastly where
honestie is called in, to establish a cause: there is nature and
God hym selfe present from whome commeth al goodnesse.
In the seconde place where I spake of profite,Profite howe largely it extendeth. this is to be
learned, that vnder the same is comprehended the gettyng
of gaine, and the eschewyng of harme. Againe, concernyng
profiteProfite beareth the name of goodnes, whiche is thre folded. (which also beareth the name of goodnesse) it partely
perteineth to the bodie, as beautie, strength, and healthe,
partely to the mynde, as the encrease of witte, the gettyng
of experience, and heaping together of muche learnyng: and
partely to fortune (as Philosophers take it) wherby bothe
wealth, honor, and frendes are gotten. Thus he that diuideth
profite, can not want matter. Thirdely in declaryng it
is p
                           •
                        easaunt, I might heape together the varietie of pleasures,Pleasures, largely sette out.
whiche comme by trauaile, firste the swetnesse of the
tongue, the holsomnesse of the ayer in other countries, the
goodly wittes of the ientlemen, the straunge and auncient
buildynges, the wonderful monumentes, the great learned
Clerckes in al faculties, with diuerse other like, and almost
infinite pleasures.
                     The easines of trauaileEas
                              •
                           nesse of trauaile. may thus beperswaded, if we shew
that freepassage is by wholsō lawes appointed, for al straū
                        gers,
& waie fairers. And seyng this life is none other thyng
but a trauaile, & we as pilgrymes wander frō place to place,
muche fondenesse it were to thinke that hard, which nature
hath made easie, yea & pleasaunt also. None are more healthful,
none more lusty, none more mery, none more strōg of body,
thē suche as haue trauailedTrauaile vnto whome it is 
                              •
                           arde. countries. Mary vnto them
that had rather sleape al day, then wake one houre, chosyng
for honest labour sleuthful ydlenesse: thinking this life to be
none other thyng but a continual restyng place, vnto suche

pardy, it shall seme painfull to abide any labour. To learne
Logique, to learne the Lawe, to s
                           •
                        me it semeth so harde,
that nothyng can enter into their heddes, and the reason is,
that thei wan
                           •
                         a will, and an ea
                           •
                        nest mynde to do their endeuour.
For vnto a willyng har
                           •
                        e, nothyng can bee harde,
laie lode on suche a manne
                           •
                         backe, and his good harce maie
soner make his backe to a
                           •
                        e, then his good will, can graunt
to yelde and refuse the weighte.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         And now where the sweete
hath his sower ioyned with hym, it shalbee wisedome to
speake some what of it, to mitigate the sowernesse thereof,
as muche as maie be possible.
                     That is lawfullLawfull. and praise worthy, whiche lawes dooe
graunt, good men do allowe, experience commendeth, and
men in all ages haue moste vsed.
                     A thyng is necessary twoo maner of waies.Necessary 
                              〈◊〉
                            waies taken. Firste, when
either we must do some one thyng, or els do worse. As if one
should threaten a woman, to kill her, if she would not lie wt 
him, wherin appereth a forcible necessitie. As touchyng trauaile
we might saie, either a man must be ignoraunt, of many
good thinges, and want greate experience, or els he must
trauaill. Now to be ignoraunt, is a greate shame, therefore
to trauaill is moste nedefull, if we will auoyde shame. The
other kynde ef necessitie is, when we perswade men to beare
those crosses paciently, whiche God doeth sende vs, consideryng
will we, or nill we, nedes must we abide them.
                  
                  
                     ¶To aduise one, to study the lawes of Englande.
                     AGain, when we se our frende, enclined to any kynde
of learnyng, wee muste counsaill hym to take that
waie still, and by reason perswade hym, that it wer
the metest waie for hym, to dooe his countrey moste
good. As if he geue his mynde, to the LawesLawes of Englande. of the realme,
and finde an aptnes thereunto, we maie aduise hym, to continue
in his good entent, and by reason perswade hym, that
it were moste mete for him so to do. And first we might shew
hym, that the study is honest and godly, consideryng it onely
foloweth Iustice, and is grounded wholy vpon naturall
reason. Wherein we mighte take a large scope, if we would
fully speake of all thynges, that are cōprehended vnder honestie.

For he that will knowe what honestie is, muste haue
an vnderstandyng, of all the vertues together. And because
the knowlege of theim is moste necessary, I will brifely set
them furth.Vertnes especiall and chief foure in nō
                           
                              ••
                           e There are foure especial and chief vertues, vnder
whom all other are comprehended.
                     
                        Prudence, or wisedome.
                        Iustice.
                        Manhode.
                        Temperaunce.
                     
                     PRudencePrudence what it is? or wisedome (for I will here take theim
bothe for one) is a vertue that is occupied euermore,
in searchyng out the truthe. Nowe wee all
loue knowlege, & haue a desire to passe other therin,
and thinke it shame to be ignoraunt: and by studiyng the
lawe, the truth is gotten out, by knowyng the truth, wisedome
is attained. Wherefore, in perswadyng one to studie
to Lawe, you maie sh
                           •
                        we hym that he shall get wisedome
thereby. Under this vertue are comprehended.Partes of Prudence.
                     
                     
                        Memorie.
                        Understandyng.
                        Foresight.
                     
                     THE memorie calleth to accompte those thynges,
that wer doen heretofore, and by a former remembraūce,
getteth an after witte, and learneth to auoyde
deceipt.
                     Understandyng seeth thynges presently dooen, and perceiueth
what is in them, waiyng and debatyng them, vntill
his mynde be fully contented.
                     Foresight, is a gatheryng by coniectures, what shall happen,
and an euident perceiuyng of thynges to come, before
thei do come.
                     Iustice.
                     IusticeIustice, what it is. is a vertue, gathered by long space, geuyng euery
one his awne, mindyng in all thynges, the cōmon profite of
our countrey, whereunto man is moste bounde, and oweth
his full obedience.
                     Now, nature firste taught manne, to take this waie, and
would euery one so to do vnto another, as he would be doe
                           •
                        
                        
vnto hymself. For whereas Rain watereth all in like, the
Sonne shineth indifferently ouer all, the fruict of the yerth
encreaseth equally, God warneth vs to bestowe our good
wil after thesame sort, doyng as duetie byndeth vs, and as
necessitie shall best require. Yea, God graunteth his giftes
diuersly emong men, because he would man should knowe,
and fele, that man is borne for man, and that one hath nede
of another. And therefore, though nature hath not stirred
some, yet through the experiēce that man hath, concernyng
his commoditie: many haue turned the lawe of nature, into
an ordinary custome, and folowed thesame, as though thei
were bounde to it by a Lawe. Afterwarde, the wisedome of
Princes, and the feare of Goddes threate, whiche was vttered
by his woorde, forced men by a 
                           •
                        awe, bothe to allowe
thinges cōfirmed by nature, and to beare with old custome
or els thei should not onely suffer in the body, temporal punishement,
but also lose their soules for euer. NatureNature, what it is. is a
righte, that phantasie hath not framed, but God hath graffed,
& geuen man power therunto, wherof these are deriued.
                     
                        Religion and acknowlegyng of God.
                        Naturall loue to our children, and other.
                        Thankfulnesse to all man.
                        Stoutnesse bothe to withstande and reuenge.
                        Reuerence to the superiour.
                        Assured and constaunt truthe in thynges.
                     
                     REligionReligion. is an humble worshippyng of God, acknowlegyng
hym to be the creatour of creatures, and the
onely geuer of al good thynges.
                     Naturall loueNaturall loue. is an inward good will, that we beare to
our parentes, wife, children, or any other that bee nighe of
kynne vnto vs, stirred thereunto not onely by our fleshe,
thinkyng that like as we wold loue our selfes, so we shuld
loue theim but also by a likenesse of mynde: and therefore
generally we loue all, because all bee like vnto vs, but yet
we loue them moste, that bothe in body and mynd, be moste
like vnto vs. And hereby it cometh that often we are liberal,
& bestowe our goodes vpon the nedy, remembryng that

thei are all one fleshe with vs, and should not wante, when
we haue it, without our greate rebuke, and token of our
moste vnkynde dealyng.
                     ThankefulnesseThankfulnes. is a requityng of loue, for loue, and wil,
for will, shewyng to our frendes, the like goodnesse that we
finde in them, yea, striuyng to passe theim in kyndenesse, losyng
neither tyme nor tide, to do them good.
                     StoutnesStoutenesse. to withstand & reuenge euil, is then vsed whē
either we are like to haue harme, and do withstand it, or els
whē we haue suffred euill for the truthsake, & therupon do
reuenge it, or rather punishe the euill, whiche is in the man
                     Reuerence,Reuerence. is an humblenesse in outward behauor, whē
we do our dutie to them, that are our betters, or vnto suche
as are called to serue the kyng, in some greate vocacion.
                     Assured and constant truthe is,Assured and constant truth when we doo beleue that
those thynges, whiche are or haue been, or hereafter are aaboute
to be, cannot otherwise be, by any meanes possible.
                     That is right by custome,Right by custome. whiche long tyme hath confirmed,
beyng partly grounded vpon nature, and partly vpon
reason, as where we are taught by nature, to knowe the euer
liuyng God, and to worship him in spirite, we turnyng
natures light, into blynde custome, without Goddes will,
haue vsed at lengthe to beleue,Custome with 
                              〈◊〉
                            grounde, vn
                           
                              ••
                           dly. that he was really with vs
here in yearthe, and worshipped hym not in spirite, but in
Copes, in Candlestickes, in Belles, in Tapers, and in Cē
                        sers,
in Crosses, in Banners, in shauen Crounes and long
gounes, and many good morowes els, deuised onely by the
phantasie of manne, without the expresse will of God. The
whiche childishe toyes, tyme hath so long confirmed, that
the truthe is scant able to trie theim out, our hartes bee so
harde, and our wittes be so farre to seke.
                     Again wher we se by nature, that euery one should deale
truely, custome encreaseth natures will, and maketh by
auncient demeane, thynges to bee iustly obserued, whiche
nature hath appoyncted.
                     
                        As
                        
                           
                              Ba
                                    •
                                 gainyng.
                              Commons, or equalitee.
                              Iudgement geuen.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        BArgainyng is, when twoo haue agreed, for the sa
                           •
                        e
of some one thyng, the one will make his felowe to
stande to the bargain, though it be to his neighbors
vndoyng, restyng vpon this poyncte, that a bargain
is a bargain, and must stand without all excepciō, although
nature requireth to haue thynges dooen by conscience, and
would that bargainyng should bee builded vpon Iustice,
whereby an vpright dealyng, and a charitable loue is vttered
emongest all men.
                     CommunesCommons. or equalitee, whē the people by long time
haue a ground, or any suche thyng emong theim, the whiche
some of them will kepe still, for custome sake, and not suffer
it to be fensed, and so turned to pasture, though thei mighte
gain ten tymes the value: but suche stubburnesse in kepyng
of Commons for custome sake, is not standyng with Iustice,
because it is holden against all right.
                     Iudgement geuen,Iudgement geuen. is when a matter is confirmed by a
Parlamente, or a Lawe, determined by a Iudge, vnto the
whiche many hed strong men, wil stande to dye for it, without
sufferaunce of any alteracion, not remembryng the circumstaunce
of thynges, and that tyme altereth good actes.
                     That is righte by a Lawe,Right by Lawe. when the truthe is vttered in
writyng, and commaunded to bee kepte, euen as it is sette
furthe vnto them.
                  
                  
                     ¶Fortitude or manhode.
                     FOrtitude is a considerate hassardyng vpon daunger,Manhode.
and a willyng harte to take paines in bahalfe
of the right. Now when can stoutnes be better vsed,
then in iust maintenaunce of the lawe, and cō
                        staunt
triyng of the truthe? Of this vertue there are foure
braunches.
                     
                        Honourablenesse.
                        Stoutenesse.
                        Sufferaunce.
                        Continuaunce.
                     
                     HOnorablenesse,Honorablenes is a noble orderyng of weightie matters,
with a lustie harte, and a liberall vsyng of his
wealthe, to the encrease of honour.
                     
                        StoutnesseStoutenesse. i
                           •
                         an assured trust in hymself, when he myndeth
the compasse of moste weightie matters, and a couragious
defendyng of his cause.
                     SufferaunceSufferaunce. is a willyng and a long bearyng of trouble
and takyng of paines, for the mainteinaunce of vertue, and
the wealthe of his countrey.
                     ContinuaunceContinuaunce is a stedfast and constant abidyng, in a purposed
and well aduised matter, not yeldyng to any manne in
querell of the right.
                  
                  
                     ¶Temperaunce.
                     TEmperaunceTemperaunce. is a measuryng of affeccions, accordyng
to the will of reason, and a subduyng of luste
vnto the Square of honestie. Yea, and what one
thyng doth soner mitigate the immoderate passions
of our nature, then the perfect knowlege of right and wrong
and the iuste execucion appoyncted by a lawe, for asswagyng
the wilfull? Of this vertue there are three partes.
                     
                        Sobrietie.
                        Ientlenesse.
                        Modestie.
                     
                     SObrietieSobrietie. is a bridelyng by discrecion the wilfulnesse
of desire.
                     IentlenesseIeutlenesse. is a caulmyng of heate, when wee
begin to rage, and a lowly behauior in all our body
ModestieModestie. is an honest shamefastnesse, whereby we kepe a
constant loke, and appere sober in all our outward doynges.
Now euen as we should desire the vse of all these vertues,
so should we eschewe not onely the contraries herunto, but
also auoyde all suche euilles, as by any meanes dooe withdrawe
vs from well doyng.
                  
                  
                     ¶It is profitable.
                     AFter we haue perswaded our frend, that the lawe is
honest, drawyng our argumētes frō the heape of vertues,
we must go further with hym, & bryng hym in
good beleue, that it is very gainfull. For many on seke not
the knowlege of learnyng for the goodnesse sake, but rather
take paines for the gain▪
                        Hope of rewarde maketh men take paines. which thei se doth arise by it. Take
awaie the hope of lucre, and you shall se fewe take any paines:

No, not in the vineyard of the lorde. For although none
should folowe any trade of life, for the gain sake, but euē as
he seeth it is moste necessary, for thaduauncement of Gods
glory, & not passe in what estimacion thinges are had in this
worlde: yet because we are all so weake of wit, in our tēder
yeres, that we cannot weigh with our selfes what is best, &
our body so neshe, that it loketh euer to bee cherished, wee
take that, whiche is moste gainfull for vs, and forsake that
altogether, whiche we oughte moste to folowe. So that for
lacke of honest meanes, and for want of good order, the best
waie is not vsed, neither is Goddes honor in our first yeres
remembred. I had rather (saide one) make my child a cobler
then a preacher, a tankerd bearer, then a scholer. For what
shall my sonne seke for learnyng, when he shall neuer gette
therby any liuyng? Set my sonne to that, whereby he maie
get somewhat? Do ye not se how euery one catcheth & pulleth
frō the churche what thei can? I feare me one day thei
will plucke doune churche and all. Call you this the Gospell,
when men seke onely to prouide for their belies, & care
not a grote though their soules go to helle? A patrone of a
benefice wil haue a poore yngrame soule, to beare the name
of a persone for .xx. marke, or .x. li: and the patrone hymself,
wil take vp for his snapshare, as good as an .c. marke. Thus
God is robbed, learnyng decaied, England dishonored, and
honestie not regarded. Thold Romaines not yet knowyng
Christ,The Romaynes lawes for Churche digni
                              •
                           ees. and yet beyng led by a reuerēt feare towardes God,
made this lawe. Sacrum sacroue commendatū qui clepserit,
rapseritue, parricida est He that shall closely steale, or
forcibly take awaie that thyng, whiche is holy, or geuen to
the holy place: is a murderer of his coūtrey. But what haue
I said, I haue a greater matter in hand, then wherof I was
a ware, my penne hath run ouer farre, when my leasure serueth
not, nor yet my witte is able to talke this case in suche
wise, as it should bee, and as the largenesse therof requireth.
Therefore to my lawyer again, whom I doubte not to perswade,
but that he shall haue the deuill and all, if he learne a
pase, and dooe as some haue dooen before hym. Therefore
I will shewe howe largely this profice extendeth, that

I may haue him the soner, to take this matter in hand. The
laweLawe, profitable to the purse. therefore not onely bryngeth muche gain with it, but
also auaunceth men bothe to worshippe, renoume, and honour.
All men shall seke his fauour, for his learnyng sake:
the best shall like his cōpany, for his callyng: and his welth
with his skill shalbe suche, that none shalbe able to woorke
hym any wrong. Some consider profite, by these circumstaunces,
folowyng.
                     
                        To whom.
                        When.
                        Where.
                        Wherefore.
                     
                     NEither can I vse a better order, then these circumstaunces
minister vnto me.Circumstaunces, in obseruyng profite. To whom therefore is
the Lawe profitable? Marie to them that bee best
learned, that haue redy wittes, and will take paines.
When is the lawe profitable? Assuredly both now and
euermore, but especially in this age, where all men go together
by the eares for this matter, and that matter. Suche
alteracion hath been heretofore, that hereafter nedes muste
ensue muche altercacion. And where is all this a do? Euen
in litle Englande, or in Westminster hall, where neuer yet
wanted busines, nor yet euer shall. Where
                           •••
                        e is the lawe
profitable? Undoubtedly because no manne could hold his
awne, if there were not an order to staie vs, and a Lawe to
restrain vs. And I praie you who getteth the money? The
lawyers no doubt. And were not lande sometymes cheaper
bought, then got by the triall of a lawe? Do not men commonly
for trifles fall out?Foly in many, that go to the Lawe. Some for loppyng of a tree, spē
                        des
al that euer thei haue, another for a Gose, that graseth
vpon his ground, tries the lawe so hard, that he proues him
self a Gander. Now when men bee so mad, is it not easie to
gette money emong theim. Undoubtedly the lawyer neuer
dieth a begger.Lawyers, ne
                           
                              ••
                           r dy beggers And no maruaill. For an .C. begges for hym,
and makes awaie all that thei haue, to get that of hym, the
whiche the oftener he bestoweth, the more still he getteth.
So that he gaineth alwaies, aswell by encrease of lernyng
as by storyng his purse with money, wheras the other get a

warme sonne often tymes, and a flappe with a foxe 
                           〈◊〉
                         for
al that euer thei haue spent. And why woulde they? Tushe,
if it were to do againe, thei would do it: therfore the lawyre
can neuer want a liuyng, til the yearth want men, and al be
voyde.
                  
                  
                     ¶The lawe easie to many, and
harde to some.
                     I Doubt not, but my lawyer is perswaded that the
law is profitable: now must I beare him in hād that
it is an easie matter to become a lawier▪ the whiche
if I shalbe able to proue, I doubt not, but he will
proue a good lawier, & that right shortly▪ the law is groūded
vpon reason. And what hardenesse is it for a man by reason
to fynde out reason. That can not be straung vnto him, the
grounde wherof, is graffed in his brest. What, though the
lawe be in a straunge tongue, the wordes may be gotte without
any paine, when the matter selfe is compast with ease.
Tushe, a litle lawe will make a greate showe, and therfore
though it be muche to becomme excellent, yet it is easie, to
get a taist. And surely for getting of money, a litle wil do asmuche
good oftentymes, as a greate deale. There is not a
word in the law, but it is a grote in ye lawiers purse. I haue
know 
                           •
                        e diu
                           •
                        rse that by familiar talkyng, & moutyng together
haue comme to right good learning without any great
booke skil, or muche beating of their braine by any close studie,
or secrete musyng in their chāber. But where some say
the lawe is very harde, and discourage young men from the
studie therof, it is to be vnderstande of suche as wil take no
paines at al, nor yet mynde the knowlege therof. For what
is not hard to man, when he wanteth wil to do his best. As
good slepe, and saie it is harde: as wake, and take no paines.
                     
                        The lawe.
                        
                           
                              Godly.
                              Iuste.
                              Necessarie.
                              Pleasaunt.
                           
                        
                     
                     WHat nedeth me to proue the lawe to be Godly, iust, or
necessarie, seeyng it is grounded vpon Goddes

wil, and all lawes are made for the maintenaunce of iustice.
If we will not beleue that it is necessarie, let vs haue rebelles
againe to disturbe the Realme. Our nature is so
fonde that we knowe not the necessitie of a thyng, til wee
fynde some lacke of the same. Bowes are not estemed as
they haue bene emong vs Englishmen, but if we were ones
well beaten by our enemies wee shoulde soone knowe the
wante, and with feelyng the smarte lament muche our folie.
Take awaie the lawe, and take awaie our lifes, for nothyng
mainteineth our wealthe,L
                              •
                           wes mainteine lyfe. our health, & the sauegard
of our bodies, but the lawe of a Realme, wherby the wicked
are condempned, and the godly are defended.
                  
                  
                     ¶An Epistle to perswade a young ientleman to
Mariage, deuised by Erasmus in the
behalfe of his frende.
                     ALbeit you are wyse enough of your selfe throughe
that singulare wisedome of yours (most louyng Cosyn)
and litle needes the aduise of other, yet either
for that olde fryndshippe whiche hath bene betwixt
vs, and continued with our age euen from our cradles, or
for suche your greate good turnes showed at all tymes towardes
me, or elles for that faste kynred and alliaunce
whiche is betwixt vs: I thought my selfe thus muche to
owe vnto you if I woulde be suche a one in deede, as you
euer haue taken me, that is to saie a man bothe frendly and
thankeful, to tell you freely (whatsoeuer I iudged to apperteine
either to the sauegarde, or worshippe of you, or
any of yours) and willyngly to warne you of the same. We
are better seen oftentymes in other mens matters, than we
are in our owne. I haue felte often your aduise in myne
owne affaires, and I haue founde it to be as fortunate vnto me,
as it was frendly. Nowe if you wil likewyse in your
awne matters folowe my counsail, I truste it shal so come
to passe that neither I shal repent me for that I haue geuen
you counsail, nor yet you shal forthynk
                           •
                         your self, that you
haue obeyed, and folowed myne aduise. There was at supper
with me the twelfe daie of Aprill when I laie in the

countrie, Antonius Baldus, a man (as you knowe) that
most earnestly tendreth your welfare, and one that hath
bene alwaies of great acquaintaunce and familiaritie with
your sonne in lawe: A heauie feast we had, and ful of muche
mournyng. He tolde me greatly to bothe our heauinesse,
that your mother that moste godly woman, was departed
this lyfe, & your sister beyng ouercome with sorow & heauinesse,
had made her selfe a Nunne, so that in you onely remaineth
the hope of issue and maintenanuce of your stocke▪
whereupon your frendes with one consent haue offerde
you in Mariage a ientlewoman of a good house, and muche
wealthe, fayre of bodie, very well brought vp, and suche
a one as loueth you with all her harte. But you (either for
your late sorowes whiche you haue in freshe remembraunce
or elles for Religion sake) haue so purposed to lyue a syngle
lyfe, that neither can you for loue of your stocke, neither
for desier of issue, nor yet for any entreatie that your frendes
can make, either by prayeng, or by wepyng: be brought
to chaunge your mynde.
                     And yet notwithstandyng all this (if you wil folowe my
counsaill) you shalbe of an other mynde, and leauyng to
lyue syngle whiche bothe is barren, and smally agreeyng
with the state of mannes nature, you shall geue your selfe
wholy to moste holy wedlocke. And for this parte I will
neither wishe that the loue of your fryndes, (whiche elles
ought to ouercome your nature) nor yet myne aucthoritie
that I haue ouer you, shoulde doe me any good at all
to compasse this my requeste, if I shall not proue vnto
you by moste plaine reasons, that it will be bothe muche
more honest, more profitable, and also more pleasaunt for
you, to marie, than to lyue otherwyse. Yea, what will you
saie, if I proue it also to be necessarie for you at this tyme
to Marie. And firste of all, if honestie maie moue you in
this matter (the whiche emong all good men ought to bee
of muche weighte,) what is more honest then Matrimonie,
the whiche CHRISTE hym selfe did make honest,
when not onely he, vouchesaufed to bee at a Mariage
with his Mother, but also did consecrate the Mariage

feaste with the first miracle that euer he did vpon yearche?
What is more holie then Matrimonie whiche the creatour
of all thynges did institute, did fasten, and make holie, and
nature it selfe did establishe? What is more praise worthiePraise worthie to marie.
than that thyng, the whiche whosoeuer shall dispraise,
is condempned streight for an Heretique? Matrimonie
is euen as honourable, as the name of an Heretique, is
thought shamefull. What is more right, or m
                           •
                        ete,Right and 
                              〈◊〉
                            to ma
                              •
                           te. than to
geue that vnto the posteritie, the whiche we haue receiued
of our auncesters? What is more inconsiderate than vnder
the desire of holinesse to escew that as vnholie, which God
hym selfe the fountaine and father of al holinesse, woulde
haue to be counted as moste holie? What is more vnmanly
than that man shoulde go against the lawes of mankynde?
what is more vnthankfull than to deny that vnto youngelynges,
the whiche (if thou haddest not receyued of thine elders)
thou couldest not haue bene the man liuyng, able
to haue denied it vnto theim. That if you woulde knowe
who was the first founder of Mariage, you shal vnderstande
that it came vp not by Licurgus, nor yet by Moses, nor yet
by Solon, but it was first ordeined, & instituted by the chief
founder of all thynges, commended by the 
                           •
                        ame,Mariage first made by God. made honourable
and made holie by thesame. For at the firste when
he made man of the yearthe, he did perceyue that his lyfe
shoulde be miserable and vnsauerie, excepte he ioyned Eue
as ma
                           •
                        e vnto hym.After mā was made, the woman was ioyned vnto hym. Wherupon he did not make the wyfe vpon
the same claie wherof he made man, but he made her of
Adams ribbes, to the eude we might plainely vnderstande
that nothyng ought to be more deare vnto vs thē our wyfe,
nothyng more nigh vnto vs, nothyng surer ioyned, and (as
a man woulde saie) faster glewed together. The selfe same
GOD after the generall floude,Matrimonie renewed after the floude. beyng reconciled to mankynde
is saied to proclaime this lawe firste of all, not that
men shoulde lyue single, but that they shoulde encrease, be
multiplied, and fill the yearth. But howe I praie you could
this thyng be, sauyng by mariage and lawful comyng together?
And first least we shoulde allege here either the libertie
of Moyses lawe, or els the necessitie of that tyme: What

other meanyng els hath that commune and commēdable reporte
of Christe in the Gospell,¶Na
                              ••
                           re worke allowe
                              •
                            by Goddes worde. for this cause (saieth he)
shall man leaue father and mother and cleaue to his wyfe.
And what is more holie than the reuerence and loue due vnto
parentes? and yet the truthe promised in Matrimon
                           •
                        e is
preferred before it. and by whose meanes? Mary by GOD
hym self. at what time? Forsouth not onely emōg the Iues,
but also emong the Christians. Men forsake father and mother
and takes themselfes wholie to their wyfes. The sonne
beyng past one and twentie yeres, is free and at his libertie.
Yea the sonne beyng abdicated, becommeth no sonne. But
it is death onely that parteth maried folke, if yet death doe
part them. Now if the other Sacramentes (whereunto the
Churche of Christe chiefely leaneth) bee reuerently vsed,
who doeth not see that this Sacramente shoulde haue the
most reuerence of al, the whiche was instituted of GOD,
and that firste and before all other. As for the other they
were instituted vpon yearthe, this was ordeined in Paradise:
the other were geuen for a remedie, this was appoincted
for the felowshippe of felicitie: the other were applied
to mannes nature after the fall, this onely was geuen when
man was in moste perfite state. If we counte those lawes
good that mortall men haue enacted, shall not the lawe of
Matrimonie be moste holie, whiche wee haue receyued of
him, by whome we haue receiued lyfe, the whiche lawe was
then together enacted whē man was first created? And lastly
to strengthen this lawe with an example and deede doen
Christe beyng an young man (as the Storie reporteth) was
called to a Mariage,Mariage beautified by a miracle. and came thither willyngly with his
mother, and not onely was he there present, but also he did
honest the feaste with a wonderfull meruaile begynnyng
first in none other place to worke his wounders, and to doe
his miracles. Why then I praie you (will one saie) howe
happeneth it that Christ forbare Mariage? as though good
Seir there are not many thynges in Christe at the whiche
we ought rather to meruaile, than seeke to folowe. he was
borne and had no father, he came into this worlde without
his mothers painefull trauaile, he came out of the graue

when it was closed vp, what is not in hym aboue nature?
Let these thynges be propre vnto hym. Let vs that lyue
within the boundes of nature, reuerence those thynges
that are aboue nature, and folowe suche thynges as are
within our reache suche as we are able to compasse. But
yet (you saie) he woulde bee borne of a Uirgine: Of a
Uirgine (I graunt) but yet of a maried Uirgine. A Uirgyne
beyng a mother did moste become GOD, and beyng
maried she did showe what was beste for vs to doe. Uirginitie
did become her, who beyng vndefiled, brought hym
forthe by heauenly inspiration that was vndefiled. And
yet Ioseph beyng her housbande dothe commende vnto vs
the lawe of chaiste wedlocke. Yea, howe coulde he better
sette out the societie in wedlocke, than that willyng to declare
the secrete societie of his diuine nature with the bodie
and soule of man, whiche is wonderfull euen to the
heauenly Aungelles, and to showe his vnspeakable and euer
abidyng loue towarde his Churche: he doeth call hym
selfe the Brydegrome, and her the Bryde. Greate is the
Sacrament of Matrimonie (saith Paule) betwixt Christe
and his Churche. If there had bene vnder heauen any holier
yoke, if there had bene any more religiouse couenaunt
than is Matrimonie, without doubte the example thereof
had bene vsed. But what lyke thyng doe you reade in all
Scripture of the syngle lyfe?Mariage honorable. The Apostle S. Paul in the
thirteen Chapi. of his Epistle to the Hebrues calleth Matrimonie
honourable emong all men, and a bedde vndefiled,
and yet the syngle lyfe is not so muche as ones named in
the same place. Nay they are not borne withall that lyue
syngle, except they make some recompence with doyng some
greater thyng. For elles, if a man folowyng the lawe of
nature, doe labour to gette children, he is euer to be preferred
before hym that lyueth still vnmaried, for none other
ende, but because he woulde bee out of trouble, and lyue
more free. Wee doe reade that suche as are in very deede
chaiste of their body, and lyue a Uirgines lyfe, haue bene
praised, but the syngle lyfe was neuer praised of it selfe.
Nowe againe the lawe of Moses accurseth the barrenesse

of maried folke, and wee doe reade that some were excemmunicated
for the same purpose, and banished from the aultar.
And wherefore I praie you? Marie Sir because that
they like vnprofitable persones, and liuyng onely to theim
selues, did not encrease the worlde with any issue. In
Deuteronomie it was the chiefest token of Goddes blessynges
vnto the Israelites that none shoulde be barren emong
them,Deut. vi. neither man, nor yet woman. And Lya is
thought to bee out of Goddes fauour,Lia. because she coulde
not bryng furth children. Yea, and in the Psalme of Dauid
an hundreth twentie and eight, it is counted one of the chiefest
partes of blesse to bee a frutefull woman. Thy wyfe
(sayeth the Psalme) shalbe plentifull lyke a vine, and thy
children lyke the braunches of Olyues, rounde about thy
Table. Then if the lawe do condempne, and vtterly dissalowe
barren Matrimonie, it hath alwaies muche more condempned
the syngle lyfe of Bacchelaures. Yf the fault of
nature hath not escaped blame, the will of man can neuer
wante rebuke. Yf they are accursed that woulde haue children,
and can gette none, what deserue they whiche neuer
trauaile to escape barreinesse?
                     The Hebrues had suche a reuerence to maried folke,Hebrues lawe for maried folke.
that he whiche had maried a wyfe, the same yeare shoulde
not be forced to go on warrefaire. A Citie is lyke to fall
in ruine, excepte there be watchemen to defende it with
armour. But assured destruction muste here needes folowe
excepte men throughe the benefite of Mariage supplie issue,
the whiche through mortalitie doe from tyme to tyme
decaie.
                     Ouer & besides this the Romaines did laie a penaltie vpon
their backe that liued a syngle lyfe, yea they would not
suffer thē to beare any office in the cōmure weale. But thei
that had encreased the world with issue,Plutarchus in the lyfe of Cato. had a reward by cō
                        imune
assent, as men that had deserued well of their countrie.
The olde foren lawes did appoincte pe
                           ••
                        lties for suche
as liued syngle, the whiche although they 
                           〈◊〉
                         qualified by
Constantius the Emperour in the fauor of Christes religiō,
yet these lawes do declare howe litle it is for the commune

weales aduauncement, that either a Citie should be lessened
for loue of sole life, or els that the countrie shoulde be filled
ful of bastardes. And besides this, the Emperour AugustusAugustus Cesar.
being a sore punisher of euil behauiour, examined a souldior
because he did not marie his wife accordyng to the lawes,
the whiche souldiour had hardely escaped iudgement, if he
had not gotte .iij. children by her. And in this point doe the
lawes of al Emperours seeme fauourable to maried folke,
that they abrogate suche vowes as were proclaimed to be
kept and brought in by Miscella,Miscella. and woulde that after the
penaltie were remitted, suche couenauntes, beyng made against
al right and conscience, shoulde also be taken of none
effect, and as voide in the lawe. Ouer and besides this, UlpianusVlpianus.
doth declare that the matter of Dowries was euermore
and in al places the chiefest aboue al other, the whiche
should neuer haue bene so, excepte there came to the cōmune
weale some especial profite by mariage. Mariage hath euer
bene reuerenced, but frutefulnesse of body hath bene muche
more. for so sone as one gotte the name of a father, there discended
not onely vnto him enheirtaunce of lande, but al bequestes,
and gooddes of suche his frendes as dyed intestate.
The whiche thyng appereth plaine by the Satyre Poete.
                     
                        Through me thou art made,I
                                 ••
                              enal. an heire to haue lande,
                        Thou hast al bequestes one with another,
                        All gooddes and cattel are come to thy hande
                        Yea gooddes intestate, thou shalt haue suer.
                     
                     Now he that had .iij. children, was more fauoured, for he
was exempted from al outward ambassages. Againe he that
had fyue childen was discharged and free from all personal
office, as to haue the gouernaunce, or patronage of younge
ientlemē, the whiche in those daies was a great charge & ful
of paines without any profit at al. He that had .xiij. children
was free by the Emperour Iulianus law, not onely frō beyng
a mā at Armes, or Captaine ouer horsemen: but also frō
al other offices in the cōmune weale. And the wise founders
of all lawes geue good reason why suche fauor was shewed
to maried folke. For what is more blesseful thā to liue euer?

Now where as nature hath denied this, Matrimony doth
geue it by a certaine sleyght, so muche as maye be. Who
dothe not desire to be bruted, and liue through fame emōg
men hereafter? Now there is no buildinge of pillers, no exectinge
of Arches, no blasinge of Armes, tha
                           •
                         dothe more
sette forthe a mannes name, then doth the encrease of childrē.
Albinus obteined his purpose of the Emperour Adriā,
for none other desert of his, but yt he had begote an housefull
of children. And therefore the Emperoure (to the hinderaūce
of his treasure) suffred the children to enter wholye
vpon their fathers possession, forasmuche as he knewe
well that his realme was more strengthened with encrease
of children, then with store of money. Againe, all other lawes
are neither agreynge for all Countryes, nor yet vsed
at all times. LicurgusLicurgus law against vnma
                           
                              ••
                           ed folke. made a lawe, that they whiche
maried not, shoulde be kepte in Somer from the sighte of
stage playes, and other wonderfull shewes, and in winter
they shoulde go naked aboute the market place, and accursinge
theim selues, they shoulde confesse openly that they
hadde iustlye deserued suche punishment, because they did
not liue accordinge to the lawes. And without any more
a doe, will ye knowe how much our olde Auncesters heretofore
estemed Matrimonie? Waye well, and consider the
punishment for breaking of wedlocke.Punishmētes appoynted for breaking of wedlocke. The Grekes heretofore
thought it mete to punishe the breache of Matrimonie
with battaile that continued ten y
                           ••
                        es.The Grecians reuengement for adu
                              ••
                           trye. Yea, moreouer not
onely by the Romaine lawe, but also by the Hebrues and
straūgers, aduouterous persons wer punished with death.
If a thiefe payde .iiij. times the value of that which he toke
awaye, he was deliuered, but an aduouterers offence, was
punished with the sworde. Emonge the Hebrues,The Hebrues stoned Aduouterers. the people
stoned the aduouterers to death, with their owne handes,
because they had broken that, without which the worlde
could not continue. And yet they thought not this sore
law sufficient inoughe, but graunted further to runne him
thorowe withoute lawe, that was taken in aduoutrye,Lawful for the maried man among the Hebrues to kyll the aduoutere
                              •
                           
                         as
who should saye, they graunted that to the griefe of maried
folke, the whiche they woulde hardlye graunte to hym

that stode in his owne defence for saufegarde of his life, as
though he offended more haynously that 
                           •
                        oke a mans wife,
then he did that toke away a mannes lyfe. Assuredly wedlocke
muste neades seme to be a mooste holye thinge, consideringe
that bringe once broken, it muste neades be purged
with mannes bloude, the reuenger wherof is not forced to
abide either lawe or iudge, the whiche libertie is not graū
                        ted
anye to vse vpon him that hathe killed either his father
or his mother. But what do we with these Lawes written?
This is the lawe of Nature, not written in the Tables
of Brasse, but firmelye prynted in oure myndes, the
whiche Lawe, whosoeuer dothe not obeye, he is not worthye
to be called a manne, muche lesse shall he be counted
a Citezen. For if to liue well (as the Stoikes wittelye
do dispute) is to folowe the course of Nature, what thinge
is so agreynge with Nature as Matrimonye?Matrimonie natural For there
is nothinge so naturall not onelye vnto mankinde, but also
vnto all other liuinge creatures, as it is for euerye one
of theim to kepe their owne kinde from decaye, and throughe
encrease of issue, to make the whole kinde immortall.
                     The whiche thinge (all menne knowe) can neuer be dooen,
withoute wedlocke and carnall copulation. It were a
fowle thinge, that brute beastes shoulde obeye the lawe of
Nature, and menne like Gyauntes shoulde fighte againste
Nature. Whose worcke if we woulde narowly loke vpon,
we shall perceyue that in all thinges here vpon earthe, she
woulde there shoulde be a certaine spice of mariage. I wil
not speake nowe of Trees, wherin (as Plinie mooste certainelye
writeth) there is founde MariageMariage emonge trees. with some manifeste
difference of bothe kyndes, that excepte the housbande
Tree do leane with his boughes euen as thoughe he
shoulde desire copulation vpon the womenne Trees growynge
rounde aboute him: they woulde elles altogether
ware barraine. The same Plinie also dothe report that
certaine aucthoures do thincke there is bothe male and female
in all thinges that the Earthe yeldeth.Mariage emong precious stones. I will not speake of precious stones, wherein the same aucthoure affirmeth,
and yet not he onelye neither, that there is bothe

male and female emonge theim. And I praye you hath not
GOD so knitte all thinges together with certaine lynckes,
that one euer semeth to haue neade of another? What
saye you of the skye or firmamente, that is euer stirrynge
with contiuuall mouinge?Mariage betwene the fir
                           
                              ••
                           ament and the earth. Dothe it not playe the parte of
a husbande, while it puffeth vp the Earthe, the mother of
all thinges, and maketh it fruitefull with castinge seede
(as a manne woulde saye) vpon it. But I thincke 
                           •
                         ouer
tedious to runne ouer all thinges. And to what 
                           ••
                        de are
these thinges spoken? Marye sir, because we might vnderstande
that throughe Mariage, all thing
                           •
                        s are, and do styll
continue, and withoute the same all thinges do decaye, and
come to noughte. The olde auncient and moste wise Po
                        
                           •
                        tes
do feyne (who hadde euer a desire vnder the coloure of
fablesThe fable of Giauntes that fought against Nature. to set forthe preceptes of Philosophie) that the Giauntes
whiche had snakes fete, and were borne of thearth,
builded greate hilles that mounted vp to heauen, minding
thereby to be at vtter defiaunce with God and all his aungelles.
And what meaneth this fable? Marye it sheweth
vnto vs, that certaine fierce and sauage menne, suche as
were vnknowen, coulde not abide wedlocke for anye worldes
good, and ther
                           •
                        fore they were stricken downe headelonge
with lighteninge, that is to saye: they were vtterlye
destroyed, when they soughte to 
                           •
                        schue that, whereby the
weale and saulfegarde of all mankinde onelye dothe 
                           •
                        onsiste.
Nowe againe, the same Poetes do declare that OrpheusOrpheu
                              •
                           .
the musician and minstrell, did styrre and make softe
with his pleasaunte melodye the mooste harde rockes and
stones. And what is their meaninge herein? Assuredlye
nothinge elles, but that a wise and well spoken manne, did
call backe ha
                           •
                        de harted menne, suche as liued abroade like
Beastes, from op
                           •
                        n whoredome, and brought them to lyue
after the mooste holye lawes of Matrimonye. Thus we se plainelye,
that suche a one as hathe no minde of Mariage,
semeth to be no manne, but rather a Stone, an enemye to
Nature, a rebel to God him selfe, seking through his owne

                           •
                        olye, his last ende and destruction.
                     
                        Well, let vs go on still (seynge we are fallen into fables
that are not fables altogether) when the same Orpheus in
the middes of Hell, forced Pluto him selfe and all the deuilles
there, to graunte him leaue to carye awaye his wife
Euridice, what other thinge do we thinke that the Poets
meant, but only to set forthe vnto vs the loue in wedlocke
the whiche euen amonge the Deuilles was compted good
and Godlye.The most wicked can not chose but alow mariage.
                     
                     And this also makes wel for the purpose, that in olde time
they made Iupiter Gamelius, the God of mariage, & Iuno
Lucina ladye midwife, to helpe suche women as laboured
in child bedde, beynge fondlye deceiued, and supersticiouslie
erring in naming of the Gods, and yet not missinge
the trueth, in declaring that Matrimonie is an holy thinge,
and mete for the worthines therof, that the Goddes in
heauen shoulde haue care ouer it. Emonge diuers countries,
and diuers menne, there haue bene diuers lawes and
customes vsed. Yet was there neuer anye countrey so sauage,
none so farre from all humanitie, where the name of
wedlocke was not counted holye, and hadde in great reuerence.All nacions euer estemed mariage.
This the Thraciā, this the Sarmate, this the Indian,
this the Grecian, this the Latine, yea, this the Britain
that dwelleth in the furtheste parte of all the worlde, or if
there be anye that dwell beyonde them haue euer counted
to be moste holye. And why so? Marye because that thinge
must neades be commune to all, whiche the commune mother
vnto all, hath graffed in vs all, and hath so thorowlye
graffed the same in vs, that not onely stockedoues and Pigions,
but also the most wilde beastes haue a natural felinge
of this thinge. For the Lyons are gentle against the Lionesse.
The Tygers fight for safegard of their yong whelpes.
The Asse runnes through the hote fyre (which is made
to kepe her awaie) for safegarde of her issue. And this they
call the lawe of Nature, the whiche as it is of most strengthe
and force, so it spreadeth abroade most largely. Therfore
as he is counted no good gardener, that being content
with thinges present, doth diligently proyne his old trees,
and hath no regard either to ympe or graffe yong settes: because

the selfe same Orcharde (thoughe it be neuer so well
trimmed) muste nedes decaye in time, and all the trees dye
within fewe yeres: So he is not to be counted halfe a diligent
citizen, that beinge contente with the present multitude,
hathe no regarde to encrease the number. Therefore
there is no one man that euer hath bene counted a worthy
Citezen, who hath not laboured to get childrē, and sought
to bring them vp in Godlines.
                     Emonge the HebruesThe Hebrues and Persians had a number of wiues and the Persians he was most
commended, that had most wiues, as thoughe the countrey
were most beholding to him, that encreased the same with
the greatest number of children. Do you seke to be compted
more holie then AbrahamAbraham. him selfe? Well, he should neuer
haue bene compted the father of manye Nacions, and that
through Gods furtheraunce, if he had forborne the companye
of his wife. Do you loke to be reckened more deuoute
then Iacob?Iacob. He doubteth nothinge to raunsome Rach
                           •
                        l
from her greate bondage. Will you be taken for wiser then
Salomon?Salomon. And yet I praye you what a number of wiues
kept he in one house? Will you be compted more chast
                           •
                         thē
Socrates,Socrates who is reported to beare at home with zanti
                           ••
                        e
that verye shrewe, and yet not so muche therefore (as he
is wonte to ieste accordinge to his olde maner) because he
might learne pacience at home, but also because he mighte
not seme to come behinde with his dutye in doyng the wil of nature.
For he beynge a manne, suche a one (a
                           •
                         Appollo iudged
him by his Oracle to be wise) did well 
                           •
                        erceyu
                           •
                        
that he was gote for this cause, borne for this cause, and
therfore bounde to yelde so muche vnto nature. For if the
olde auncient Philosophers haue saide wel, if our diuin
                           •
                        s
haue proued the thinge not without reason, if it be vsed euerye
where for a commune prouerbe, and almost in euerye
mans mouthe, that neither God nor yet Nature, did euer
make any thinge in vayne: Why did he geue vs such membres,
how happeneth we haue suche luste, and suche power
to get issue, if the single lyfe and none other be altogether
prayse worthye? If one shoulde bestowe vpon you a verye
good thinge, as a bowe, a coate, or a sworde, al men would

thincke you were not worthye to haue the thinge, if either
you coulde not, or you woulde not vse it, and occupie it.
                     And where as all other thinges are ordeyned vpon suche
greate considerations, it is not like that Nature slepte or
forgate her selfe when she made this one thinge. And nowe
here will some saye, that this fowle and filthye desire, and
styrringe vnto luste, came neuer in by Nature, but through
Sinne: for whose wordes I passe not a strawe, seinge their
saiynges are as false, as God is true. For I pray you was
not Matrimonye instituted (whose worke can not be done
withoute thes
                           •
                         membres) before there was anye Synne.
And againe, whence haue all other brute beastes their prouocations?
of Nature, or of Sinne? A man woulde thinke
they hadde theim of Nature. But shall I tell you at a
worde, wee make that fil
                           •
                        hye by oure owne Imagination,
whiche of the owne nature is good and Godlye. Or elles
if we will examine matters, (not accordinge to the opinion
of menne, but weye them as they are of their owne Nature)
howe chau
                           •
                        ceth it that we thincke it lesse filthye, to
eate, to chewe, to digest, to emptye the bodye, and to slepe,
then it is to vse carnall copulation, such as is lawfull, and
permitted. Naye sir (you will saye,) we muste folowe vertue,
rather then Nature. A gentle dishe. As thoughe anye
thinge can be called vertue that is contrary vnto Nature.
Assuredly there is nothinge that can be perfectlye gote, either
throughe laboure, or throughe learning, if man grounde
not his doynges altogether vpon Nature.
                     But you will liue an Apostles life, suche as some of
them did that liued single, and exhorted other to the same
kinde of life. Tushe, let them folowe the Apostles that are
A
                           •
                        ostles in deede, whose office seynge it is bothe to teache
and bringe vp the people in Goddes doctrine, they are not
able to discharge their dutyes bothe to their flocke, and to
their wife and familye. Althoughe it is well knowen that
some of the A
                           •
                        ostles had wiues. But beit that Bishoppes
liue single, or graunt we them to haue no wiues. What do
you folowe the profession of the Apostles, beynge one that

is farthest in life from their Uocation, beinge bothe a temporall
manne, and one that liueth of youre owne. They
hadde this Pardon graunted them to be cleane voyde from
Mariage, to the ende they mighte be at leasure to get vnto
Christe a more plentifull number of his children. Let this
be the order of Priestes and Monkes, who belike haue entred
into the Religion and rule of the Essens, (suche as
amonge the Iewes lothed Mariage) but youre callinge is
an other waye. Naye, but (you will saye) Christe him selfe
hath compted theim blessed, whiche haue gelded theim sel
                        
                           •
                        es
for the Kingdome of GOD. Sir, I am contente to
admitte the aucthoritie, but thus I expounde the meaning.
Firste, I thincke that this doctrine of Christe did chieflye
belonge vnto that time, when it behoued theim chieflye to
be voyde of all cares and busines of this Worlde. They
were fayne to trauayle into all places, for the persecutoures
were euer readye to laye handes on theim. But nowe
the worlde is so, that a manne can finde in no place the vprightnes
of behauioure lesse stayned, then emonge maried
folke. Let the swarmes of Monkes and Nun
                           •
                        es sette forthe
their order neuer so muche, let theim boaste and bragge
their bealies full, of their Ceremonies and church seruice,
wherin they chieflye passe all other: yet is wedlocke (beynge
well and trulye kepte) a mooste holye kinde of life.
                     Againe, would to God they were gelded in very dede, what
soeuer they be, that coloure their noughtye liuinge wyth
such a iolye name of geldinge, liuing in muche more filthye
luste vnder the cloke and pretence of chastitie. Neither can
I reporte for verye shame, into howe filthye offences they
do often fall, that will not vse that remedye whiche Nature
hath graunted vnto manne. And last of all, where do
you reade that euer Christe commaunded anye manne to
liue 
                           •
                        ingle, and yet he dothe openlye forbidde diuorcement.
Then he dothe not worste of all (in my Iudgemente) for
the commune weale of Mankinde, that 
                           •
                        raunteth libertye
vnto Priestes:Priestes mariage. yea, and Monkes also (if neade be) to mary,
and to take them to their wiues, namely seing there is suche

an vnreasonable number euerye where, emonge whom I
praye you how many be there that liue chaste. How muche
better were it to turne their concubines into wyues, that
where as they haue them now to their greate shame wyth
an vnquiet conscience, they mighte haue the other openlye
with good report, and get children, and also bringe them vp
godlye, of whom they them selues not onelye mighte not be
ashamed, but also might be counted honest men for them.
                     And I thinke the bishoppes officers woulde haue procured
this matter longe agoe, if they had not founde greater gaiues
by priestes lemmans, thē they were like to haue by priestes
wiues. But virginitieVirginitie. forsothe is an heauenlye thing,
it is an Aungels life. I aunswer, wedlocke is a manly thinge,
suche as is mete for man. And I talke now as man vnto
man. I graunte you, that virginitie is a thinge prayse worthy,
but so farre I am cōtent to speake in praise of it, if it be
not so praised, as though the iust shuld altogether folow it,
for if men cōmenly should begin to like it, what thing could
be inuented more perilous to a commune weale then virginitie.
Nowe be it that other deserue greate prayse for their
maydenheade, you notwithstandinge can not wante greate
rebuke▪ seynge it lieth in your handes to kepe that house frō
decaye wherof you lineallye descended, and to continue still
the name of your auncesters, who deserue moste worthely to
be knowen for euer. And laste of all, he deserueth as muche
prayse, as they whiche kepe their maydenhode: that kepes
him selfe true to his wife, and marieth rather for encrease
of children, then to satisfy his luste For if a brother be commaunded
to stirre vp sede to his brother that dieth without
issue, will you suffer the hope of all youre stocke to decaye,
namely seinge there is none other of your name and stocke,
but your selfe alone, to continue the posteritie. I know wel
inoughe, that the auncient fathers haue set forthe in greate
volumes, the prayse of virginitie, emonge whom, HieromeHierom
                              •
                            praise vpon Virginitie.
dothe so 
                           •
                        ake on, and prayseth it so much aboue the starres,
that he fell in maner to depraue Matrimonie, and therfore
was required of Godly Bishoppes to cal backe his wordes
that he had spoken. But let vs beare with suche heate for

that tyme sake, I would wishe nowe, that thei, whiche exhort
yong folke euery where, and without respect (suche as
yet knowe not thēselfes) to liue a single life, and to professe
virginitie: that thei would bestowe thesame labour, in settyng
furth the descripcion of chast and pure wedlocke. And
yet those bodies that are in suche great loue with virginitie,
are well contented that menne should fight against the
Turkes, whiche in nomber are infinitely greater then wee are.
And now if these menne thinke right in this behalfe, it
must nedes be thought right good and godly, to labour earnestly
for children gettyng, and to substitute youthe from
tyme to tyme, for the maintenaunce of warre. Except parauenture
thei thinke that Gunnes, Billes, Pikes, and nauies,
should be prouided for battaill, and that men stand in
no stede at all with them. Thei also allowe it well, that we
should kill miscreaunt and Heathen parentes, that the rather
their children not knowyng of it, might bee Baptized
and made Christians. Nowe if this bee righte and lawfull,
how muche more ientlenesse were it to haue children Baptized,
beyng borne in lawfull mariage. There is no nacion
so sauage, nor yet so hard harted, within the whole worlde,
but thesame abhorreth murderyng of infauntes, and newe
borne babes. Kynges also and hedde rulers, dooe likewise
punishe moste streightly, all suche as seke meanes to be deliuered
before their tyme, or vse Phisicke to waxe barren,
and neuer to beare childrē. What is the reason? Marie thei
compt small difference betwixt hym, that killeth the child,
so sone as it beginneth to quicken: and thother, that seketh
all meanes possible, neuer to haue any child at all. The self
same thyng that either withereth and drieth awaie in thy
body, or els putrifieth within thee, and so hurteth greatly
thy healthe, yea, that self same, whiche falleth from thee in
thy slepe, would haue been a manne, if thou thy self haddest
been a man. The HebruesHebrues. abhorre that man, and wishe him
Goddes cursse, that (beyng commaunded to marie with the
wife of his dedde brother) did cast his seede vpon the groūd
least any issue should bee had, and he was euer thought vnworthy
to liue here vpon yerth, that would not suffer that

that child to liue, whiche was quicke in the mothers wōbe.
But I praie you how litle do thei swarue from this offence
whiche by
                           •
                        d themselfes to liue barrern, all the daies of their
life? Doo thei no
                           •
                         seme to kill as many men, as were like to
haue been borne, if thei had bestowed their e
                           •
                        deuors to haue
got children? Now I praie you, if a man had lande that wer
very fatte and fertile, and suffered thesame for lacke of maneryng,
for euer to waxe barren, should he not, or wer he not
worthy to be punished by the lawes, consideryng it is for the
cōmon weales behoue, that euery man should wel and truly
husbande his awne. If that mā be punished, who litle hedeth
the maintenaunce of his Tillage, the whiche although it be
neuer so wel manered, yet it yeldeth nothyng els but wheat
barley, bea
                           •
                        es, and peason: what punishement is he worthy
to suffer, that refuseth to Plough that lande, whiche beyng
tilled, yeldeth childrē. And for ploughyng land, it is nothyng
els, but painfull toylyng from tyme to tyme, but in gettyng
children, there is pleasure, whiche beyng ordeined, as a redy
reward for pai
                           •
                        es takyng, asketh a short trauaill for all the
tillage. Therfore if the workyng of nature, if honestie, if vertue,
if inwarde zeale, if Godlinesse, if duetie maie moue you,
why can you not abide that, whiche God hath ordeined, nature
hath established, reason doeth counsaill, Gods worde
and mannes worde do commende, all lawes do commaunde,
the consent of all nacions doeth allowe, whereunto also the
example of all good men, doth exhort you. That if euery honest
man should desire many thynges, that axe
                           •
                         moste painful
for none other cause, but onely for that thei are honeste, no
doubt but matrimonie ought aboue all other, moste of all to
be desired, as the whiche wee maie doubte, whether it haue
more honestie in it, or bryng more delite and pleasure with it.
for what can bee more pleasaunt, then to liue with her, with
whom not onely you shalbe ioyned, in felowship of faithfulnes,
and moste▪ hartie good will, but also you shalbe coupled
together moste assuredly, with the cōpany of bothe your bodies?
If we compt that great pleasure, whiche we receiue of
the good will of our frendes and acquaintaunce, how pleasau
                           ••
                        
a thyng is it aboue all other, to haue one, with whom

you maie breake the botome of your harte, with whō ye maie
talke as frely, as with your self, into whose t
                           •
                        uste, you maie
saufly cōmit your self, suche 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        e as thinketh al your goodes
to be her charge. Now what an heauenly b
                           •
                        isse (
                           •
                        row you) is
the companie of man and wife together, seyng that in all the
worlde, there can nothyng be found, either of greater weight
and worthi
                           •
                        esse, or els of more st
                           •
                        engthe and assuraunce. For
with frendes, we ioyne onely with them in good will, & faith
fulnesse of mynde, but with a wife, we are matched together,
bothe in harte and mynde, in body and soule, sealed together
with the bonde and league of an holy Sacrament, & partyng
all the goodes we haue, indifferently betwixt vs. Again whē
other are matched together in fre
                           •
                        dship, do we not see what
dissemblyng thei vse, what falshode thei practise, and what
deceiptfull partes thei plaie? Yea, euen those whō we thinke
to be our most assured frendes, as swallowes flie awaie whē
sommer is past, so thei hide their heddes, whē fortune gynnes
to faile. And oft tymes when we get a newe frend, we streight
forsake our old. We heare tell of very fewe, that haue cont
                           •
                        
                        nued
frendes, euen till their last ende. Whereas the faithfulnesse
of a wife, is not stained with deceipte, nor dusked with
any dissēbly
                           •
                        g, nor yet parted with any chaūge of the world
but disseuered at last by death onely, no not by death neither.
She forsakes and settes lighte by father and mother, sister &
brother for your sake, and for your loue onely. She only passeth
vpon you, she puttes her trust in you, and leaneth wholy
vpon you, yea, she desires to die with you. Haue you any
worldly substaūce? You haue one that will maintain it, you
haue one that will encrease it. Haue you none? You haue a
wife that will get it. If you liue in prosperitee, your ioye is
doubled: if the worlde go not wt you, you haue a wife to put
you in good comfort, to be at your commaundemēt, & redy to
serue your desire, & to wishe that suche euill as hath happened
vnto you, might chaūce vnto her self. And do you thinke
that any pleasure in al the world, is able to be cōpared with
suche a goodly felowship & familier liuyng together? If you
kepe home, your wife is at hand to kepe your cōpany, the rather
that you might fele no werines of liuing al alone, if you

ride furth, you haue a wife to bid you fare well with a kisse
longyng muche for you, beyng from home, and glad to bidde
you well come at your next returne. A swete mate in your
youthe, a thankfull comforte in your age. Euery societie or
companiyng together, is delitefull and wisshed for by nature
of all menne, forasmuche as nature hath ordeined vs to
be, sociable, frendly, and louyng together. Nowe howe can
this felowship of manne and wife, be otherwise then moste
pleasant, where all thynges are common together betwixt
them bothe. Now I thinke he is moste worthy, to bee despised
aboue all other, that is borne, as a man would saie for
hymself, that liueth to hymself, that seketh for himself, that
spareth for himself, maketh cost onely vpon himself, that loueth
no man, and no man loueth hym. Would not a manne
thinke that suche a monster, were mete to be caste out of all
mennes companie (with Tymon that careth for no manne)
into the middest of the sea.Timon a deadly hater of all companie. Neither do I here vtter vnto you
those pleasures of the body, the which, wheras nature hath
made to be moste pleasaunt vnto man, yet these greate witted
men, rather hide them, and dissemble them (I cannot tel
how) then vtterly contempne them. And yet what is he that
is so sower of witte, and so drowpyng of braine (I will not
saie) blockhedded, or insensate, that is not moued with suche
pleasure, namely if he maie haue his desire, without offence
either of God or man, and without hynderaunce of his estimacion.
Truely I would take suche a one, not to be a man,
but rather to bee a very stone. Although this pleasure of the
body, is the least parte of all those good thynges, that are in
wedlocke. But bee it that you passe not vpon this pleasure,
and thinke it vnworthy for man to vse it, although in deede
we deserue not the name of manne without it, but compte i
                           •
                        
emong the least and vttermoste profites, that wedlocke
hath: Now I praie you, what can be more hartely desired,
then chast loue, what can bee more holy, what can bee more
honest? And emong all these pleasures, you get vnto you a
ioly sort of kinsfolke, in whom you maie take muche delite.
You haue other parentes, other brethren, sisterne, and nephewes.
Nature in deede can geue you but one father, & one

mother: By mariage you get vnto you another father, and
another mother, who cannot chuse, but loue you with all
their hartes, as the whiche haue put into your handes, their
aw
                           •
                        e fleshe and bloud. Now again, what a ioye shal this be
vnto you, when your moste faire wife, shall make you a father,
in bringyng furthe a faire childe vnto you, where you
shall haue a pretie litle boye, runnyng vp and doune youre
house, suche a one as shall expresse your looke, and your wiues
looke, suche a one as shall call you dad, with his swete
lispyng wordes. Now last of all, when you are thus lynked
in loue, thesame shalbee so fastened and bounde together, as
though it wer with the Adamant stone, that death it self cā
neuer be able to vndo it. Thrise happie are thei (ꝙ Horace)
yea, more then thrise happie are thei, whom these sure bandes
dooe holde, neither though thei are by euill reporters,
full ofte sette a so
                           •
                        der, shall loue be vnlosed betwixt theim
two, till death them bothe depart. You haue them that shal
comforte you, in your latter daies, that shall close vp your
iyes, when God shall call you, that shall bury you, and fulfill
all thynges belongyng to your Funerall, by whom you
shall seme, to bee newe borne. For so long as thei shall liue,
you shall nede neuer bee thought ded your self. The goodes
and landes that you haue gotte, go not to other heires, then
to your awne. So that vnto suche as haue fulfilled all thynges,
that belong vnto mannes life, death it self cannot seme
bitter. Old age cometh vpon vs all, will we, or nill we, and
this waie nature prouided for vs, that we should waxe yong
again in our children, and nephewes. For, what man can be
greued, that he is old, when he seeth his awne countenaūce
whiche he had beyng a childe, to appere liuely in his sonne?
Death is ordeined for all mankynd, and yet by this meanes
onely, nature by her prouidence, myndeth vnto vs a certain
immortalitie, while the encreaseth one thyng vpon another

                           •
                        uen as a yong graffe buddeth out, when the old tree is cut
doune. Neither can he seme to dye, that, when God calleth
hym, leaueth a yong child behinde hym. But I knowe well
enough, what you saie to your self, at this while of my lōg
talke. Mariage is an happie thyng, if all thynges hap well,

what and if one haue a curste wife? What if she be lighte?
What if his children bee vngracious? Thus I see you will
remember all suche men, as by mariage haue been vndoen.
Well, go to it, tell as many as you can, & spare not: you shal
finde all these were faultes of the persones, and not the
faultes of Mariage. For beleue me, none haue euill wifes,Euill wifes happen to euil men onely.
but suche as are euill mē. And as for you sir, you may chuse
a good wife, if ye list. But what if she be croked, and marde
altogether, for lacke of good orderyng. A good honest wife,
maie be made an euill woman, by a naughtie husbande, and
an euill wife, hath been made a good woman, by an honest
man. We crie out of wifes vntruly, and accuse them without
cause. There is no man (if you wil beleue me) that euer
had an euil wife, but through his awne default. Now again
an honest father, bryngeth furthe honest children, like vnto
hymself. Although euen these children, how so euer thei are
borne, commonly become suche men, as their education and
bringyng vp is.Ielousie vnknowen to wise men. And as for ielousy you shal not nede to feare
that fault at all. For none be troubled with suche a disease,
but those onely that are foolishe louers. Chaste, godly, and
lawfull loue, neuer knew what ielousie ment. What meane
you to call to your mynde, and remember suche sore tragedies
and doulefull dealynges, as haue been betwixt manne
and wife. Suche a woman beyng naughte of her body, hath
caused her husbande to lose his hedde, another hath poysoned
her goodmā, the third with her churlishe dealyng (whiche
her husbande could not beare) hath been his outer vndoyng,
& brought hym to his ende. But I praie you sir, why
doo you not rather thinke vpon Cornelia,Cornelia. wife vnto Tiberius
Graechus? Why do ye not mynde that moste worthy
wife, of that most vnworthy man Alcestes?Alcestes wife. Why remembre
ye not IuliaIulia. Pompeyes wife, or PorciaPor
                              •
                           ia. Brutus wife?Lucretia. And
why not Artemisia,Artemisia. a woman moste worthie, euer to bee remembred?
Why not Hipsicratea,Hipsicratea. wife vnto Mithridates
kyng of Pontus? Why do ye not call to remembraunce the
ientle nature of Tertia Aemilia?
                           
                              •
                           ertia Aemilia. Why doo ye not consider
the faithfulnesse of Turia?Turia. Why cometh not Lucretia and
LentulaLentula. to your remēbraūce? and why not Arria?A
                              •
                           ria. why not

thousandes other, whose chastite of life, and faithfulnes towardes
their husbandes could not bee chaunged, no not by
death. A good woman (you will saie) is a rare birde, & hard
to be founde in all the worlde. Well then six, imagine your
self worthy to haue a rare wife, suche as fewe men haue. A
good woman (saith the wiseman) is a good porcion.Prouer. x. Be you
bold to hope for such a one, as is worthy your maners. The
chifest poyncte standeth in this, what maner of woman you
chuse, how you vse her, and how you order your self towardes
her. But libertee (you will saie) is muche more pleasaunt:
for, who soeuer is maried, wereth fetters vpon his
legges, or rather carieth a clogge, the whiche he can neuer
shake of, till death part their yoke. To this I answere, I cā not
see what pleasure a man shall haue to liue alone. For if
libertie be delitefull, I would thinke you should get a mate
vnto you, with whō you should parte stakes, and make her
priuey of all your ioyes. Neither can I see any thyng more
free, then is the seruitude of these twoo, where the one is so
muche beholdyng and bounde to thother, that neither of thē
bothe wold be louse, though thei might. You are boūd vnto
him, whō you receiue into your frendship: But in mariage
neither partie findeth fault, that their libertie is takē awaie
from them. Yet ones again your are sore afraied, least when
your childrē are taken awaie by death, you fal to mourning
for wāt of issue▪ well sir, if you feare lacke of issue, you must
marie a wife for the self same purpose, the which onely shal
be a meane, that you shall not want issue. But what do you
serche so diligently, naie so carefully, al the incōmodities of
matrimonie, as though single life had neuer any incōmoditie
ioyned wt it at al. As though there wer any kinde of life
in al the world, that is not subiect to al euils that may happē.
He must nedes go out of this world, y• lokes to liue wtout
felyng of any grief. And in cōparison of y• life which ye sainctes
of god shal haue in heauē, this life of mā is to be cōpted
a deth, & not a life. But if you cōsider thinges within the cō
                        passe
of mankynde, there is nothyng either more saufe, more
quiet, more pleasaunt, more to be desired, or more happy, then
is the maried mānes life. How many do you se, that hauyng

ones felt the swetnesse of wedlocke, doeth not desire eftsones
to enter into thesame? My frende Mauricius, whō you
knowe to be a very wise man, did not he, the nexte monethe
after his wife died (whom he loued derely) get hym streight
a newe wife? Not that he was impacient of his luste, and
could not forbeare any longer, but he said plainly, it was no
life for hym, to bee without a wife, whiche should bee with
hym as his yoke felowe, and companion in all thynges. And
is not this the fourthe wife, that our frende Iouius hath
maried? And yet he so loued the other, whē thei wer on liue
that none was able to comforte hym in his heauinesse: and
now he hastened so muche (when one was ded) to fill vp and
supply the voyde roume of his chamber, as though he had
loued the other very litle. But what do we talke so muche
of the honestie and pleasure herein, seyng that not onely profite
doeth aduise vs, but also nede doeth earnestly force vs,
to seke mariage.Necessitee enforceth mariage. Let it bee forbidden, that man and woman
shall not come together, & within fewe yeres, all mankynde
must nedes decaye for euer. When zerxeszerxes. kyng of the Persians,
behelde from an high place, that greate armie of his,
suche as almoste was incredible, some said he could not forbeare
wepyng, consideryng of so many thousandes, there
was not one like to bee a liue, within seuentie yeres after.
Now why should not we consider thesame of all mankynd,
whiche he meant onely of his armie. Take awaie mariage,
and howe many shall remain after a hundreth yeres, of so
many realmes, countrees, kyngdomes, citees, and all other
assemblies that be of men, throughout the whole world? on
now, praise we a gods name the single life aboue the nocke,
the whiche is like for euer to vndooe all mankynde. What
plague, what infeccion can either heauen or hell, sende more
harmefull vnto mankynd? What greater euill is to be feared
by any floud? What could be loked for, more sorowfull,
although the flame of Phaeton should set the world on fire
again? And yet by suche sore tempestes, many thynges haue
been saued harmelesse, but by the single life of man, there cā
be nothyng left at all. We se what a sorte of diseases, what
diuersitee of missehappes doo night and daie lye in waite to

lessen the smal number of mankynde. Howe many doeth the
plague destroie, how many do the Se
                           •
                        s swallowe, how many
doeth battaile snatche vp? For I will not speake of the
daily dyeng that is in al places. Deathe taketh her flight euery
where rounde about, she runneth ouer theim, she catcheth
theim vp, she hasteneth asmuche as she can possible to
destroie al mankynde▪ & now do we so highly cōmend syngle
lyfe and eschewe Mariage? Except happely we like the profession
of the Essens (of whome Iosephus speaketh thatEssens ha
                           
                              •
                           ed Mariage.
they wil neither haue wyfe, nor seruauntes) or the Dulopolitans,
called otherwyse the Rascalles and Slaues of Cities,Iosephus xv
                              •••
                            cap. li
                              •
                           . ii.
the whiche companie of theim is alwaie encreased and
continued by a sorte of vagabounde peasauntes that continue,
and be from time to time stil together. Do we loke that
some Iuppiter shoulde geue vs that same gifte, the whiche
he is reported to haue geuen vnto Bees that wee shoulde
haue issue without procreacion, and gather with our
mouthes out of flowers, the seede of our posteritie? Or elles
do we desier, that lyke as the Poetes feyne Minerua to be
borne out of Iuppiters head: in lyke sorte there should children
leape out of our heades? Or last of al doe we looke accordyng
as the olde fables haue been, that men shoulde be
borne out of the yerth, out of rockes, out of stockes, stones, &
olde trees. Many thynges breede out of the yearth without
mans labour at all. Young shrubbes growe and shoute vp
vnder the shadowe of their graundsyre trees. But nature
woulde haue man to vse this one waie of encreasyng issue▪
that through labour of bothe the housband and wyfe, mankynd
might stil be kept from destruction. But I promise you
if all men tooke after you, and still forbare to marie: I can not
see but that these thynges whiche you wonder at, and esteme
so muche, could not haue been at al. Do you yet esteme
this syngle lyfe so greatly? Doe you praise so muche virginitie
aboue al other? Why man, there will be neither syngle
men, nor virgines a lyue, if men leaue to marie, and mynde
not procreation. why do you thē preferre virginitie so muche
why set it you so hye, if it be the vndoyng of all the whole
worlde? It hath been muche commended, but it was for that

tyme, and in a fewe. God woulde haue men to see as though
it were a paterne, or rather a picture of that heauenly habitacion,
where neither any shalbe maried, nor yet any shall
geue theirs to Mariage. But when thynges be geuen for an
example, a fewe may suffise, a nomber were to no purpose.
For euen as al groundes though they be very frutefull, are
not therefore turned into tillage for mans vse and commoditie,
but parte lyeth fallowe, and is neuer mannered, parte
is kepte and cherised to lyke the 
                           •
                        ye and for mans pleasure:
and yet in al this plentie of thynges, where so great store of
lande is, nature suffereth very litle to waxe barren: But
nowe if none should be tilled, and plowe m
                           •
                        n went to plaie,
who seeth not but that wee shoulde al sterue, and bee faine
shortely to eate acornes: Euen so, it is praise worthie if a
fewe liue syngle, but if al should seke to lyue syngle, so many
as be in this worlde, it were to great an inconuenience.
Now again be it that other deserue worthie praise that seke
to liue a virgines life, yet it must nedes be a great faulte in
you. Other shalbe thought to seke a purenesse of lyfe, you
shalbe coumpted a parricide, or a murtherer of your stocke:
that whereas you may by honest mariage encrease your posteritie:
you suffex it to decaie for euer, through your wilful
single lyfe. A man may hauyng a house ful of children, commende
one to God to lyue a virgine al his lyfe. The plowe
man offereth to God the tenthes of his owne, and not his
whole croppe al together: But you Sir, muste remember
that there is none lefte aliue of al your stocke, but your self
alone. And nowe it mattereth nothyng whether you kill,
or refuse to saue that creature, which you onely might saue
and that with ease. But you wil folow the example of your
sister, and lyue syngle as she doth. And yet me thynketh you
shoulde chefely euen for this selfe same cause, be afraied to
lyue single. For whereas there was hope of issue heretofore
in you bothe, nowe ye see there is no hope left but in you onely.
Be it that your sister may be borne withal, because she
is a woman, and because of her yeares, for sue beyng but a
girle and ouercome with sorow for losse of her mother toke
the wrong way, she cast her selfe donne headlong, and became

a Nunne at the earnest sute either of folishe women,
or elles of doultishe Munkes: but you beyng muche cl
                           •
                        er,
must euermore remember that you are a man. She woulde
nedes dye together with her auncesters, you muste labour
that your auncesters shal not dye at all. Your sister woulde
not doe her dutie, but shranke away: thynke you nowe with
your selfe that you haue. ij. offices to discharge. The daughters
of LotheDaughters of Loth. neuer stuck at the matter to haue a doe with
their dronken father, thinkyng it better with wicked whore
dome and inceste to prouide for their posteritie, than to suffer
their stocke to die for euer and wil not you with honest,
Godly, and ch
                           •
                        ist Mariage (whiche shalbe without trouble
and turne to your greate pleasure) haue a regarde to
your posteritie most like elles for euer to decaie? Therfore,
let them on Goddes name folow the purpose of chaist Hippolitus,
let them lyue a syngle life, that either can bee maried
men, and yet can gette no children, or els suche, whose
stocke may be continued by meanes of other their kynsfolke
or at the least whose kyndred is suche that it were better
for the commune weale, they were all deade, than that any
of that name shoulde be a lyue, or elles suche men, as the euerliuyng
God of his moste especiall goodnes hath chosen
out of the whole worlde to execute some heauenly office,
wherof there is a marueilouse smal nomber. But whereas
you accordyng to the reporte of a Phisicion that neither is
vnlearned,The conclusion. nor yet is any lyar, are lyke to haue many children
hereafter, seeyng also you are a man of greate landes,
and reuenues by your auncesters, the house whereof you
came, beyng bothe right honourable and right auncient, so
that you coulde not suffer it to perishe without youre
great offence, and greate harme to the commune weale: againe
seeyng you are of lustie yeares, and very comely for your
personage, and may haue a maide to your wyfe suche
a one as none of your countrie hath knowen any to bee
more absolute for all thynges, commyng of as noble a
house as any of theim, a chaiste one, a sobre one, a Godlie
one, an excellent fayre one, hauyng with her a wonderfull
Dowrie: seeyng also youre frendes desyre you,

your kynsfolke we
                           •
                        e to wynne you, your Cosyns and aliaunce
are earnest in hande with you, your countrie calles
and cries vpon you: the asshes of your auncesters from their
graues make harty sute vnto you, do you yet holde backe, do
you stil mynde to lyue a syngle lyfe? Yf a thyng were asked
you that were not halfe honest, or the whiche you could not
wel compasse, yet at the instaunce of your frendes, or for the
loue of your kynsfolke, you woulde be ouercome, and yelde
to their requestes: Then howe muche more reasonable were
it that the wepyng teares of your frendes, the hartie good
wil of your countrie, the deare loue of your elders might
wynne that thyng at your handes, vnto the whiche bothe
the lawe of God and man doth exhorte you, nature pricketh
you forwarde, reason leadeth you, honestie allureth you, so
many commodities cal you, and last of all, necessitie it selfe
doeth constraine you. But here an ende of al reasonyng. For
I trust you haue now and a good while ago chaunged your
mynde thorowe myne aduise, and taken your selfe to better
counsell.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Exhortation.
                     THe places of exhortyngExhortyng. and dehortyng, are the same
whiche wee vse in perswadyng and dissuadyng, sauyng
that he whiche vseth perswasion, seeketh by
argumētes to compasse his deuise: he that laboures
to exhorte, doeth stirre affections.
                     Erasmus sheweth these to be the most especiall places
that do perteine vnto exhortation.
                     
                        Praise, or Commendacion.
                        Expectation of al men.
                        Hope of victorie.
                        Hope of renowme.
                        Feare of shame.
                        Greatnesse of rewarde.
                        Rehersall of examples, in all ages, and
especially of thynges lately doen.
                     
                     PRaisyngPraisyng 
                              •
                            d
                              •
                           ede, is either of the man, or of some deede doen.
We shall exhorte men to doe the thyng, if we showe

them that is a worthy attempte, a Godly enterprise, & suche
as fewe men hetherto haue aduentured.
                     In praisyng a man,Praisyng a man, the rather to encourage him. we shal exhorte hym to go forwarde,
consideryng it agreeth with his wounted māhode, and that
hetherto he hath not slacked to hasarde boldely vpon the
best and worthiest deedes, requiryng hym to make this ende
aunswereable to his mooste worthie begynnynges, that he
maye ende with honour, whiche hath so long continued
in suche renowme. For it were a foule shame to lose honour
through folie, whiche hath been gotte through virtue, and
to appere more slacke in kepyng it, than he semed 
                           •
                        arefull at
the first to atteine it.
                     Againe whose name is renowmed, his doynges from time
to tyme wil be thought more wonderfull, and greater promises
wil men make vnto them selues of suche mens aduentures
in any commune affaires, than of others, whose vertues
are not yet knowne. A notable Master of fence is marueilouse
to beholde, and men looke earnestly to see hym doe
some wonder, howe muche more will they looke when they
heare tel that a noble Captaine, & an aduenturouse Prince
shal take vpon hym the defence, and sauegarde of his countrie
against the ragyng attemptes of his enemies? Therfore
a noble man can not but go forwarde with most earnest wil,
seyng al menExpectacion of al men. haue suche hope in hym, and count hym to bee
their onely comforte, their fortresse, and defe
                           •
                        se. A
                           •
                        d the rather
to encourage suche right worthie, we may put them in
good hope to compasse their attempte,
                           
                              •
                           ope of victorie. yf wee showe them
that God is an assured guide vnto all those, that in an honest
quarell aduenture them selues, and showe their manly
stomake. Sathan hym selfe the greatest aduersarie that man
hath, yeldeth lyke a captiue, when GOD dothe take our
parte, muche sooner shal al other be subiecte vnto hym, and
crye Peccaui. for if God be with hym, what matereth who
be against hym?
                     Nowe when victorie is got, what honour doeth ensewe? here
openeth a large fielde to speake of renowme, fame, and
endles honour.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         In all ages the worthiest men haue alwaies
aduentured their carcases for the sauegarde of their countrie,

thynkyng it better to dye with honor, than to liue with
shame. Againe the ruine of our Realme shoulde put vs to
more shame,Shame foloweth fearfulnesse, when manhode is thought nedeful. than the losse of our bodies should turne vs to
smarte. For our honestie beyng stained, the paine is endles,
but our bodies beyng gored, either the wounde maie sone be
healed, or elles our paine beyng sone ended, the glory endureth
for euer.
                     Lastely he that helpeth the nedelesse, defendeth his poore
neighbours,Heauen, the rewarde of hault Capitoines. & in the fauour of his countrie, bestoweth his
lyfe: wil not God besides al these, place hym where he shall
lyue for euer, especially seeyng he hath doen all these enterprises
in faith and for Christes sake?
                     Nowe in al ages to recken suche as haue bene right souerayne,
and victoriouse, what name gotte the worthie Scipio
that withstood the rage of Annibal? what Brute hath Cesar
for his most worthie cōquestes? What triūphe of glory doth
sounde in al mennes eares vpon the onely namyng of mightie
Alexander, and his father Kyng Philippe? And now to
come home, what head cā expresse the renowmed Henry the
fifte Kyng of Englande of that name after the conquest?
What witte can sette out the wonderful wysedom of Henry
the seuenth, and his greate foresight to espie mischiefe
like to ensewe, and his politique deuises to escape daungers
to subdewe rebelles, and mainteyne peace?
                  
                  
                     ¶Of mouyng pitie, and stirryng men to shewe mercie.
                     LIkewise we may exhorte men to take pitie of the fatherlesse,Mo
                              •
                           yng of pitie.
the widowe, and the oppressed innocent,
if we set before their iyes the lamentable afflictions
the tyrannouse wronges, and the miserable calamities,
whiche these poore wretches do susteine. For if fleshe
and bloude moue vs to loue our children, our wyfes, and
our kynsfolke: muche more shoulde the spirite of God and
Christes goodnes towardes mā stirre vs to loue our neighbours
moste e
                           •
                        tirely. These exh
                           •
                        rtacions the preachers of
God may most aptely vse, when they open his Gospell to

the people, and haue iust cause to speake of suche matters.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Commendyng.
                     IN commendyngThe maner of commendyng▪
                         a man, wee vse the reporte of his
witte, honestie, faithfull seruice, painefull labour,
and carefull nature to do his maisters will, or any
suche lyke, as in the Epistles of Tullie there are
examples infinite.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Comfortyng.
                     NOw after al these, the weake would be comfortedThe maner of comfortyng.
and the soroufull woulde bee cherised that there
grief might bee aswaged, and the passions of man
brought vnder the obedience of reason. The vse
hereof is great, aswell in priuate troubles, as in commune
miseries. As in losse of gooddes, in lacke of frendes, in sicknes,
in darthe, & in death. In all whiche losses, the wyse vse
so to comforte the weake, that they geue them not iust cause
euen at the firste to refuse all comforte.Comforty
                              •
                           g two waies 
                              •
                           sed. And therefore they
vse two waies of chereshyng the troubled mindes. The one
is when wee showe that in some cases and for some causes
either they shoulde not lament at all, or elles bee sory very
litle: the other is when we graunt that they haue iust cause
to bee sadde, and therfore wee are sad also in their behalfe,
and woulde remedie the matter, if it coulde be, and thus enteryng
into felowshippe of sorowe, wee seeke by litle and
litle to mitigate their grief. For all extreme heauinesse, and
vehement sorowes, cannot abyde comforte, but rather seeke
a mourner that woulde take parte with theim.
                     Therefore muche warenesse ought to be vsed, when wee
happen vpon suche excedyng sorowfull, leaste wee rather
purchace hatred, than aswage grief.
                     Those harmes shoulde bee moderatly borne, whiche
muste needes happen to euery one, that haue chaunced
to any one. As deathe, whiche spareth none, neither
Kyng, nor Cayser, neither poore, nor riche. Therefore
to bee impacient for the losse of our frendes, is to fall

out with God, because he made vs men, and not Aungelles.
But the Godly (I truste) will alwaies remitte thorder of
thynges to the wil of God, and force their passions to obey
necessitie. When God lately visited this Realme with the
sweatyng disease,Sweatyng disease. and receiued the two worthie ientlemen
He
                           •
                        ry Duke of Suffolke, & his brother Lorde Charles: I
seeyng my Ladies grace their mother takyng their deathe
most greauouslie could not otherwise for the duetie whiche
I then did, and euer shall owe vnto her, but comforte her in
that her heauinesse, the whiche vndoubtedly at that tyme
muche weakened her bodie. And because it may serue for an
example of comforte, I haue been boulde to set it forthe as
it foloweth hereafter.
                  
                  
                     ¶An example of comforte.
                     THough myne enterprise maie be thought folishe,
and my doynges very slender in busiyng
my braine to teache the expert, to gyue counsel
to other when I lacke it my self, and wheras
more neede were for me to be taught of other,
to take vpon me to teache my betters, yet dutie byndyng
me to doe my beste, and emong a nomber though I can
doe leaste, yet good will settyng me forthe with the foremest:
I cannot chouse but write what I am able, and speake
what I can possible for the better comfortyng of your grace
in this your great heauines, and sore visitacion sent from
GOD, as a warnyng to vs all. The Phisician then deserueth
moste thanke, when he practiseth his knowlege in
tyme of necessitie, and then traueileth moste painefullie,
when he feeleth his paciente to be in moste daunger. The
souldiour at that tyme, and at no tyme so muche is thought
most trustie, when he showeth at a nede his faithfull harte,
and in tyme of extreme daunger doeth vse, and bestowe
his moste earnest labour. In the wealthe of this worlde
what valiaunt man can wante assistence? What mightie
Prince can misse any helpe to compasse his desire? who lacketh
men that lacketh no monie? But when God striketh
the mightie with his strong hand, and displaceth those that

were hyghelye placed, what one manne dothe once looke
backe for the better 
                           •
                        asemente of his deare Brother, and
Godlye comfortynge his euen. Christian, in the chiefe of all
his sorowe. All menne communelye more reioyce in the
Sunne risynge, then they doe in the Sunne set
                           •
                        inge. The
hope of Lucre and expectation of priuate gayne, maketh
manye one to bear oute a countenaunce of fauoure, whose
herte is inwardelye fretted wyth deadlye rancoure. But
suche Frendes, euen as prosperi
                           •
                        ye do
                           •
                        he gette theim, so
aduersitye dothe trye theim. God is the searcher of euery
mannes thought, vnto whose iudgemente I referre the assuraunce
of my good wyll.
                     And thoughe I can do little, and therfore deserue as little
thancke, as I loke for prayse (whyche is none at all) yet
will I endeuoure earnestlye at all tymes, as well for mine
owne discharge, to declare my duty, as at this present to say
somewhat for the better easemente of youre grace, in thys
your heauines. The passionsPassions wo
                           
                              •
                           ke diuerslye of the mynde haue diuers effectes,
and the
                           •
                        fore worke straungelye, accordynge to theyr properties▪
For like as ioye comforteth the harte, nourisheth
bloude, and quickeneth the whole bodye: so heauinesse and
care hinder digestion, engender euyll humoures, waste the
principall partes, and wyth tune consume the whole bodye.
For the better knowledge hereof, and for a liu
                           •
                        lye syght of
the same, wee neade not to seeke farre for a
                           •
                        ye exampl
                           •
                        , but
euen to come strayghte vnto youre grace, whose bodye as I
vnderstande crediblye, and partelye see my selfe, is soore appayred
within shorte tyme, your mynde so troubled, & youre
harte so heauye, that you hate in a maner all lyght, you lyke
not the sighte of anye thynge that myght be your comforte,
but altogether stricken in a dumpe, you seke to be solitarye,
detestinge all ioye, and delitynge in sorowe, wishynge wyth
harte (if it w
                           ••
                        e Goddes will) to make youre last ende. In
whyche youre heauinesse, as I desire to be a comfortoure
of youre grace, so I can no
                           •
                         blame your naturall sorowe, if
that nowe after declaration of the same, you woulde moderate
all youre griefe hereafter, and call backe your pensifenes,
to the prescripte order of reason.
                     
                        And firste, for the better remedye of euerye disease, and
troubled passion, it is beste to knowe the principall cause,
and chiefe occasion of the same. Youre grace hadde two
sonnes, howe noble, howe wittye, howe learned, and how
Godlye, manye thousandes better knowe it, then anye one
is able well to 
                           •
                        ell it. God at his pleasure hath taken them
bothe to his mercy, and placed them with him, which were
surelye ouer good to tarye here with vs. They bothe died
as your grace knoweth verye younge, whiche by course
of Nature, and by mannes estimation, mighte haue liued
muche longer. They bothe were together in one house,
lodged in two seuerall chambers, and almoste at one time
bothe sickened, and both departed. They died bothe dukes,
bothe well learned, bothe wise, and bothe right Godlye.
They bothe before gaue straunge tokens of death to come.
The elder sittinge at Supper, and verye merye, saide soudainlye
to that ryghte honeste Matroue, and Godly aged
gentilwoman, that most faythful & longe assured seruaunt
of yours, whose life God graunte longe to continue: Oh
Lorde, where shall we suppe tomorowe at night, whereupon
she beinge troubled, and yet saiynge comfortablye, I
truste my lorde, either here, or elles where at some of your
frendes houses: Naye (quod he) we shall nauer suppe together
againe in this worlde, be you well assured, and with
that seinge the gentilwoman discomforted, turned it vnto
mirthe, and passed the reste of his Supper with much ioye,
and the same night after .xij. of the clocke, beynge the .xiiij.
of Iulye sickened, and so was taken the nexte morning aboute
.vij. of the clocke, to the mercye of God, in the yeare
of our Lorde .M.D.Li. When the elder was gone, the
younger woulde not tarye, but tolde before (hauinge no
knowledge therof by anye bodye liuinge) of his brothers
Deathe, to the greate wonderinge of all that were there,
declaringe what it was to lose so deare a frende, but comfortinge
him selfe in that passion, saide: well, my brother
is gone, but it maketh no matter, for I will go straight after
him, and so did within the space of halfe and houre, as
your grace can best tell, whiche was there presente. Nowe

I renue these wordes to youre graces knowledge, that you
might the more stedfastlie consider their time to be then appointed
of GOD to forsake this euill worlde, and to liue
with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the Kingedome of
heauen. But wherfore did God take two suche awaye, and
at that time? Surelye to tell the principall cause,The cause why God taketh awa
                              •
                            the moste worth
                              •
                           
                           est. we maye
by all likenes affirme, that they were taken awaye from vs
for our wretched sinnes, and mooste vile naughtines of life,
that therby we beinge warned, might be as readie for God,
as they nowe presentlie were, aud amend our liues in time,
whom God will call, what time we knowe not. Then as
I can see, we haue small cause to lament the lacke of them,
whiche are in suche blessed state, but rather to amende our
owne liuinge, to forthinke vs of oure offences, and to wishe
of GOD to purge oure hartes, from all filthines and vngodlie
dealinge, that we maie be (as they nowe be) blessed
with God for euer. Notwithstandinge the worckes of God
are vns
                           •
                        archeable, without the compasse of mannes braine
preciselye to comprehende the verie cause, sauinge that this
perswasion oughte surelye to be grounded in vs, euermore
to thinke that God is offended with sinne, and that he punisheth
offences to the thirde and fourthe generation of all
them that breake his commaundementes, beinge iuste in all
his worckes, and doinge all thinges for the beste. And therfore
when God plagueth in suche sorte. I would with that
our faithe might a
                           •
                        waies be staied vpon the admiration of
Goddes glorie, througheoute all his doinges, in whom is
none euil, neither yet was there euer any guile found. And
I doubt not but your grace is thus affected, and vnfaynedlye
confessinge your owne offences, taketh this scourge to
come from God as a iuste punishmen
                           •
                        e of Sinne, for the amendemente
not onelye of your owne selfe, but also for the
amendemente of all other in generall. The lamentable
voyce of the pore (whiche is the mouthe of God) throughout
the whole Realme declares full well the wickednes of
this life, and showes plainelye that this euill is more generallye
felte, the
                           •
                         anye man is able by worde, or by wri
                           •
                        inge
at full to set forthe.
                     
                        When God therfore that is Lord, not onelye of the riche
but also of the poore, seeth his grounde spoyled frome the
holesome profite of manye, to the vayne pleasure of a fewe,
and the earthe made priuate to suffise the lus
                           •
                        e of vnsaciable
couetousnesse, and that those whiche be his true membres
cannot liue for the intollerable oppression, the soore
enhaunsynge, and the moost wicked grasing of those throughout
the whole Realme, whiche otherwise myght well
lyue with the onelye value and summe of their landes and
yerelye reuenues: he striketh in his anger the innocentes
and tēder yonglinges, to plague vs with the lacke of them,
whose innocencye and Godlines of life mighte haue bene a
iuste example for vs to amende our mooste euill doynges.
                     In whiche wonderfull worcke of God, when he receiued
these two mooste noble ympes, and his chyldren elected to
the euerlastinge Kingedome, I can not but magnifye his
mooste glorious name, from time to tyme, that hath so graciouslye
preserued these two worthy gentilmenne from the
daunger of further euil, and moost vile wretchednes, moost
like righte shortelye to ensue, excepte wee all repente, and
forthincke vs of oure former euill liuynge. And yet I speake
not this, as thoughe I knewe anye cryme to be more
in you, then in anye other: but I tell it to the shame of all
those vniuersallye within this Realme, that are gyltye of
suche offences, whose inward consciences condem
                           •
                        ne their
owne doinges, and their open d
                           •
                        edes beare witnes against
their euil nature. For it is not one house that shal feele the
fall of these two prynces, neither hath God taken them for
one priuate personnes offence: but for the wickednes of the
whole Realme, whyche is lyke to feele the smarte, excepte
God be merciful vnto vs. But now tha
                           •
                         they be gone, thoughe
the fleshe be frayle, weake, & tender, and muste neades
smart, being woūded or cut: yet I doubt not but your grace
lackinge two suche porcions of your owne fleshe, and hauinge
theim (as a manne woulde saye) cutte awaye frome
youre owne bodye,Vvhe
                              •
                            necessitie ruleth, sorow is nedeles
                              •
                           
                         will suffer the 
                           〈◊〉
                         with a good stomake,
and remembre that sorowe is but an euil remedye to
heale a sore. For if your hande were detrenched, or youre

bodie maimed with some soubdaine stroake, what profite
were it for you to wepe vpon your wounde, and when the
harme is done, to lamente still the sore? seinge that with
wepinge it wil not be lesse, and maye yet throughe weping
full sone be made more. For the sore is encreased, when sorowe
is added, and the paine is made double, whiche before
was but single. A constante christian shoulde beare all miserie,
and with pacience abide the force of necessitie, shewinge
with sufferaunce the strengthe of his faithe, and especiallie
when the chaunge is from euyll to good, from woe
to weale, what folye is it to so
                           •
                        owe that, for the whiche
they ioye that are departed? They haue taken nowe their
rest, that liued here in trauaile: they haue forsaken their bodies,
wherin they were bounde, to receiue the spirite, wherby
they are free. They haue chosen for sickenes, healthe: for earth,
heauen: for life transitorie, life immortall: and for
manne, God: then the whiche, what can they haue more?
Or howe is it possible they can better? Undoubtedly
if euer they were happye, they are nowe moste happie: if 
                           •
                        
                        uer
they were well, they are nowe in beste case, beynge deliuered
frome this presente euyll worlde, aud exempted
from Sathan, to lyue for euer with Christe our Sauioure.
                     Then what meane we that not onelye lamente the want
of other, but also desire to tarye here oure selues, hopinge
for a shorte, vayne, and therewith a paynefull pleasure, and
refusynge to enioye that continuall, perfecte, and heauenlye
enheritaunce, the whiche so soone that happen vnto vs,
as Nature dissolueth this Earthlye bodye. Truthe it is
wee are more fleshelye then spirituall, soner fealynge the
ache of our bodye, then the griefe of oure Soule: more studious
with care to be healthfull in carkasse, then sekynge
with prayer to be pure in Spirite. And therfore if oure
frendes be stayned with Synne, wee dooe not, or we wyll
not espye their sore, we counte theim faulteles, when they
are mooste wicked: neither sekinge the redresse of their euyll
doynge, nor yet once amendynge the faultes of oure
owne liuyuge.
                     
                        But when oure frende departeth this worlde, and then
forsaketh vs when Synne forsaketh him: wee begynne to
shewe ouce fleshelye natures, w
                           •
                         wepe, and we wayle, and
with louge sorowe withoute discretion declare our wante
of Goddes grace, and all goodnes.The folye of such as sorow the want of the
                              •
                           e frendes. For wheras we see that
as some be borne, some do dye also, m
                           •
                        nne, women, and children,
and not one houre certaine to vs of all oure life, yet
we neuer mourne, we neuer w
                           •
                        epe, neither markyuge the
deathe of suche as we knowe, nor regardynge the euyll lyfe
of those whom we loue. But when suche departe as were
either nigheste of oure ky
                           •
                        red, or elles mooste oure frendes,
then wee lamente withoute all comforte, not the synnes of
their Soules, but the chaunge of their bodyes, leauinge to
doe that whiche we shoulde, and doynge that onelye whyche
we shoulde not do at all. Wherin not onelye we declare
muche wante of Faythe, but also we shewe greate lacke of
wytte. For as the other are gone before, either to heauen or
elles to hell: so shall oure fre
                           •
                        des and kin
                           •
                        folke folowe after.
We are all made of one metall, and ordeyned to dye, so
manye as liue.Deathe commune to all. Therfore what folye is it in vs, or rather
what fleshelye madnesse immoderatelye to wayle their death
whom God hathe ordeyned to make their ende, excepte wee
lamente the lacke of oure owne liuinge? For euen as well
we myghte at theyr firste byrthe bewayle theyr Natiuitye,
consideryng they must nedes dye, because they are borne to
lyue. And whatsoeuer hath a beginnynge, the same hath also
an endynge, and the ende is not at oure will whiche desire
continuaunce of life, but at hys wyll whyche gaue the
begynnynge of lyfe. Nowe then, s
                           •
                        ynge God hath ordeyned
all 
                           •
                        o dye, accordynge to his appointed wil, what meane they
that woulde haue theirs to lyue? Shall God alter his fyrst
purpose for the onelye satisfiynge of oure folyshe pleasure?
And where God hathe mynded that the whole worlde shall
decaye, shall anye man desyre that anye one house may stand?
In my mynde, there can be no greater comforte to anye one
liuynge for the lacke of his frende, then to thinke that thys
happened to him, whyche all other eyther haue felte, or elles
shall feele hereafter: And that God the rather made Deathe

commune to all, that the vniuersall plague and egalnes to
all, myght abate the fierce
                           •
                        es of deathe, and comfore vs in
the crueltie of the same, considerynge no one man hath an
ende, but that all shall haue the lyke, and dye we muste euerye
mothers sonne of vs, at one time or other. But you
will saye: my chyldren might haue liued longer, they dyed
younge. Sure it is by mannes estimation they myght haue
liued longer, but had it bene best for them thincke you to
haue continued styll in this wretched worlde, where Uyce
beareth rule, and Uertue is subdued, where GOD is
neglected, his lawes not obserued, his worde abused, and
his Prophetes that preache the iudgemente of God almost
euery where contemned.Euil, to liue emonge the euil. If your children were aliue, & by
thaduice of some wicked person were brought to a brothell
house, where entisinge harlottes liued, and so were in daū
                        ger
to commit that fowle sinne of whoredome, and so, ledde
from one wickednes to another: I am assured your grace
woulde call them backe with laboure, and would with exhortations
induce theim to the feare of God, and vtter detestation
of al synne, as you haue ful often heretofore done,
rather fearing euil to come, then knowing any open faulte
to be in either of them. Nowe then, seynge God hath done
the same for you him selfe, that you woulde haue do
                           •
                        e for
them if they hadde liued, that is, in deliuerynge them bothe
from this present euil worlde, whiche I counte none other
then a brothel house, and a life of al noughtines: you ought
to thanke God highlye, that he hath taken awaye your two
sonnes, euen in their youthe, beynge innocentes bothe for
their liuynge, and of such expectation for their towardnes,
that almoste it were not possible for them hereafter o satisfye
the hope in their age, whyche all menne presently hadde
conceyued of their youthe. It is thought, and in dede it is
no lesse thē a great poynct of happines to dye happely.To dye happelye is great happines. Now
when coulde youre two noble gentilmen haue dyed better
then when they were at the best, mooste Godlye in manye
thynges, offendinge in fewe, beloued of the ho
                           •
                        este, aud hated
of none, (if euer they were hated) but of suche as hate
the best. As in deede, noble vertue neuer wan
                           •
                        ed cankarde

enuy to folow her. And considering that this life is so wretched,
that the beste are euer most hated, & the vilest alwayes
most estemed, and your .ii. sonnes of the other side beynge in
that state of honestie, & trained in that pathe of Godlines (as
I am able to b
                           •
                         a liuely witnes, none hath ben like these many
yeres, or at the lest, none better brought vp) what thinke
you of god, did he enuye them, or els did he prouidently forsee
vnto them bothe, when he toke them bothe from vs. Assuredly
whom god loueth best, those he taketh sonest, accordinge
to the saiyng of Salomon:Vvisd. iiii. The righteous man (meaninge
Enoch and other the chosen of God) is sodainely taken
away, to the entente that wickednes shoulde not alter
his vnderstandinge, and that hypocrisie should not begile
his soul. For the craftie bewitching of lies, make good thinges
darke, the vnstedfastnes also and wickednes of voluptuouse
desire, turne aside the vnderstanding of the simple.
And thoughe the righteous was sone gone, yet fulfilled he
much time, for his soule pleased God, and therfore hasted he
to take him away from amonge the wicked. Yea, the good
men of god in al ages, haue euer had an earnest desire to be
dissolued.Psal. lxxxiiii. My soule (quod Dauid) hath an earnest desire to
enter into the courtes of the lord. Yea, like as the herte desireth
the water brookes,Psal. xlii. so longeth my soule after the O
God. My soule is a thyrst for God: yea, euen for the liuing
God, when shall I come to appeare before the presence of
God? Paule and al the Apostles wished and longed for the
daye of the Lord, and thought euery daye a thousand yere,
till their soules were parted from their bodies. Thē what
should we waile them which are in that place where we al
shuld wish to be, and seke so to liue, that we might be ready
whē it shal please god of his goodnes to cal vs to his mercy
Let vs be sicke for our owne sinnes, yt liue here on earth, &
reioyce in their most happy passa
                           •
                        e that are gone to heauē.
They haue not left vs, but gone before vs to enherite with
Christ, their kingdom prepared. And what shuld this greue
your grace that they are gone before, cōsidering our whole
lyfe is nothing els but the righte waye to death.Life, the right way to death. Shoulde
it trouble any one yt his frend is come to his iournies end?

Our life is nothyng els, but a continuall trauaill, & death
obtaineth rest after all our laboure.Death purchaseth re
                              •
                           t. Emong men that trauaill
by the high waie, he is best at ease (in my mynde) that
sonest cometh to his iourneis ende. Therfore, if your grace
loued your children (as I am wel assured you did) you must
reioyce in their rest, and geue God hartie thankes, that thei
are come so sone to their iourneis ende. Marie, if it were so
that man might escape the daunger of death, and liue euer,
it were another matter: but because we must all dye, either
first or last, and of nothyng so sure in this life, as we are all
sure to dye at length, and nothyng more vncertain vnto mā
then the certain tyme of euery mannes latter tyme: what
forceth when wee dye, either this daie, or to morowe, either
this yere,Death more frendly, the soner it cometh. or the next, sauyng that I thinke them moste happie
that die sonest, and death frendely to none so muche, as
to theim whom she taketh sonest. At the tyme of an execuciō
doen for greuous offences, what mattereth who dye firste,
when a dosen are condempned together, by a lawe, consideryng
thei muste all dye one and other. I saie still, happie are
thei, that are sonest ridde out of this worlde, and the soner
gone, the soner blessed. The ThraciansThracians. lament greatly at
the birthe of their children, & reioyce muche at the burial of
their bodies, beyng well assured that this world is nothyng
els but miserie, & the worlde to come, ioye for euer.Children by wepyng, declare out 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Now again,
the child newe borne, partly declareth the state of this
life, who beginneth his tyme with wailyng, & firste sheweth
teares, before he can iudge the cause of his wo. If we beleue
the promises of God, if we hope for the generall resurreccion,
and constantly affirme, that God is iust in all his woorkes:
we cānot but ioyfully saie, with the iust man Iob:Iob. The
lorde gaue them, the lorde hath taken them again, as it pleaseth
God, so maie it be, and blessed be the name of the lorde,
for now and euer. God dealeth wrongfully with no man, but
extendeth his mercie moste plentifully, ouer all mankynde.
God gaue you twoo children, as the like I haue not knowen
happie are you moste gracious ladie, that euer you bare thē.
God lent you them twoo for a tyme, and toke them twoo again
at his tyme, you haue no wrong doen you, that he hath

taken thē: but you haue receiued a wonderfull benefite, that
euer you had thē.Lent goodes, muste be restored at the awne
                              •
                           s will. He is very vniust that boroweth, and wil
not pay again, but at his pleasure. He forgetteth muche his
duetie, that boroweth a iewell of the kynges maiestie, & will
not restore it with good will, when it shall please his grace,
to call for it. He is vnworthy hereafter to borowe, that will
rather grudge, because he hath it no longer, then ones geue
thankes, bicause he hath had the vse of it so long He is ouer
coueteous, that compteth not gainfull, the tyme of his borowyng:
but iudgeth it his losse, to restore thynges again.
He is vnthankfull, that thynkes he hath wrong doen, when
his pleasure is shortened, and takes the ende of his delite, to
bee extreme euill. He loseth the greatest parte of his ioye
in this worlde, that thynketh there is no pleasure, but of
thynges present: that cānot comfort hymself with pleasure
past, and iudge them to be moste assured, consideryng the memorie
of them ones had, can neuer decaye. His ioyes be ouer
straighte, that bee comprehended within the compasse of his
sighte, and thynketh no thyng comfortable, but that whiche
is euer before his iyes. All pleasure whiche man hath in this
worlde, is very shorte, and sone goeth it awaie, the remembraunce
lasteth euer, and is muche more assured, then is the
presence or liuely sight of any thyng. And thus your grace
maie euer reioyce, that you had twoo suche, whiche liued so
verteously, and died so Godly: and though their bodies bee
absent from your sight, yet the remembraunce of their vertues,
shall neuer decaye from your mynde. God lendeth life
to all, and lendeth at his pleasure for a tyme. To this man
he graunteth a long life, to this a shorte space, to some one,
a daie, to some a yere, to some a moneth. Now whē God taketh,
what man should be offended, consideryng he that gaue
frely, maie boldely take his awne when he will, and dooe no
manne wrong. The Kynges Maiestie geueth one .x. pounde
another fourtie pounde, another three skore pounde, shall
he be greued, that receiued but tenne pound, and not rather
geue thankes, that he receiued so muche? Is that man happier,
that dieth in the latter ende of the monethe, then he is
that died in the beginnyng of thesame Monethe? Doeth distance

of tyme, and long tar
                           •
                        yng from God, make men more
happie, when thei come to God? By space of passage we differ
muche, and one liueth longer then another, but by death
at the last, we all are matched, and none the happier, that liueth
the longer, but rather moste happie is he, that died the
sonest, & departed best in the faithe of Christ. Thinke therfore
your self most happie, that you had two suche, and geue God
hartie thākes, that it pleased him so sone, to take two suche.
Necessitie is lawles, and that whiche is by God appoyncted
no man can alter. Reioyce we, or wepe we, die we shall, how
sone, no man can tell. Yea, we are all our life tyme warned
before, that death is at hande, and that when we go to bedde
we are not assured to rise the nexte daie in the mornyng▪ no,
not to liue one houre lōger. And yet to se our foly, we would
assigne God his tyme, accordyng to our sacietie, and not cō
                        tent
our selfes with his doynges, according to his appoynctment.
And euer we saie, when any dye young, he might haue
liued longer, it was pitie he died to sone. As though for sothe
he were not better with God, then he can bee with manne.
Therefore. whereas for a tyme your grace, muche bewailed
their lacke, not onely absentyng your self from all company
but also refusyng all kynde of comforte, almoste dedde with
heauinesse, your body beyng so worne with sorowe, that the
long continuance of thesame, is muche like to shorten your
daies: I shall desire your grace for Goddes loue, to referre
youre will to Goddes will, and whereas hetherto nature
hath taught you to wepe the lacke of your naturall children
lette reason teache you hereafter, to wipe awaie the teares,
and lette not phantasie encrease that, whiche nature hath
commaunded moderately to vse. To bee sory for the lacke of
oure dearest, wee are taughte by nature, to bee ouercome
with sorowe, it commeth of oure awne fonde opinion, and
greate folie it is, with naturall sorowe, to encrease all sorowe,
and with a litle sickenesse, to purchase readie deathe.
The sorowes of brute beastes are sharpe,The nature of brute beastes. and yet thei are
but shorte. The Cowe lackyng her Caulfe, leaueth Loweyng
within three or foure daies at the farthest. Birdes of
the ayre perceiuyng their youngones taken from their neast,

chitter for a while in trees there aboute, and streighte after
thei flie abrode, and make no more a dooe. The Doo lackyng
her Faune, the Hynde her Caulfe, braie no long tyme after
their losse, but seyng their lacke to be without remedy, thei
ceasse their sorowe within short space. Man onely emong al
other, ceaseth not to fauour his sorowe, and lamenteth not
onely so muche as nature willeth him, but also so muche as
his awne affeccion moueth hym. And yet all folke do not so
but suche as are subiect to passions, and furthest from fortitude
of mynde, as women commonly, rather then men, rude
people, rather then godly folke: the vnlearned, soner then the
learned: foolishe folke, soner then wise men: children, rather
then yong men. Whereupon we maie well gather, that immoderate
sorowe is not naturall,Immoderate sorowe, not naturall. (for that whiche is naturall,
is euer like in al) but through folie mainteined, encreased
by weakenesse, and for lacke of reason, made altogether
intollerable. Then I doubte not but your grace, will rather
ende your sorowe, by reason: then that sorowe should
ende you, through foly: And whereas by nature, you are a
weake woman in body, you will shewe your self by reason,
a strong man in harte: rather endyng your grief by godly aduertisementes,
and by the iust consideracion of Gods wonderfull
doynges: then that tyme and space, should we are awaie
your sorowes, whiche in deede suffer none continually
to abide in any one, but rather ridde thē of life, or els ease
them of grief.Tyme, a remedie for fooles, to take awaie their sorowe. The foole, the vngodly, the weake harted haue
this remedy, your medecine must be more heauenly, if you do
(as you professe) referre all to Goddes pleasure, and saie in
your praier. Thy will bee doen in yearth, as it is in heauen.
Those whom God loueth, those he chasteneth, and happie is
that body, whom God scourgeth, for his amendement.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         The
man that dieth in the faithe of Christ is blessed, and the chast
                           •
                        ned
seruaunt, if he doo repent and amende his life, shalbe
blessed. We knowe not what we doo
                           •
                        , when we bewaile the
death of our dearest, for in death is altogether all happines,
and before deathe,The great miserie of this worlde, makes 
                              〈◊〉
                            of life not one is happie. The miseries in this
worlde declare, small felicitee to be in thesame. Therefore,
many men beyng ouerwhelmed with muche woe, and wretched

wickednes: haue wished and praied to God, for an ende
of this life, and thought this worlde to be a let, to the heauē
                        ly
perfeccion, the whiche blisse all thei shall attain hereafter
that hope well here, and with a liuely faith declare their assuraunce.
Your graces two sonnes, in their life wer so godly,
that their death was their aduauntage: for, by death thei
liued, because in life thei wer dedde. Thei died in faithe, not
wearie of this worlde, nor wishyng for death, as ouerloden
with synne: but paciently takyng the crosse, departed with
ioye. At whose diyng, your grace maie learne an example of
pacience, and of thankes geuyng, that God of his goodnesse,
hath so graciously taken these your two children, to his fauourable
mercy. God punisheth, partly to trie your constā
                        cie,
wherein I wishe that your grace, maie nowe bee as well
willyng to forsake theim, as euer you were willyng to haue
them. But suche is the infirmitie of our fleshe, that we hate
good comforte in wordes, when the cause of our comforte in
deede (as we take it) is gone.Impacience without comforte. And me thinkes I heare you cry
notwithstādyng all my wordes, alacke my children are gone.
But what though thei are gone? God hath called, & nature
hath obeyed. Yea, you crie still my children are dedde: Marie
therefore thei liued, and blessed is their ende, whose life was
so godly. Wo worthe, thei are dedde, thei are dedde. It is no
new thyng, thei are neither the first that died, nor yet the last
that shall die. Many went before, and all shall folowe after.
Thei liued together, thei loued together, and now thei made
their ende bothe together. Alas thei died, that wer the fruicte
of myne awne body, leauyng me comfortlesse, vnhappie woman
that I am. You do well, to cal thē the fruict of your body,
& yet you nothyng the more vnhappie neither. For, is the
tree vnhappy, frō whiche the appelles fall?Trees, not accursed, because Apples fall from cheins. Or is the yearth
accurssed, that bringeth furthe grene Grasse, whiche hereafter
notwithstandyng doth wither. Death taketh no order of
yeres, but when the tyme is appoyncted, be it earely or late,
daie or nighte, awaie we muste. But I praie you, what losse
hath your grace? Thei died, that should haue died, yea, thei
died, that could liue no longer. But you wished theim lōger
life. Yea, but God made you no suche promise, & mete it wer

not that he shuld be led by you, but you rather should be led
by him. Your children died, & that right godly, what would
you haue more? All good mothers desire, that their children
maie die Goddes seruauntes, the whiche youre grace hath
moste assuredly obteined. Now again mannes nature altereth,
and hardely tarieth vertue long in one place, without
muche circumspeccion, & youth maie sone be corrupted. But
you will saie. These were good and godly broughte vp, and
therefore moste like to proue godly hereafter, if thei had liued
still. Well, thoughe suche thynges perhappes had not
chaunced, yet suche thynges mighte haue chaunced, and although
thei happen not to al, yet do thei happe to many, and
though thei had not chaunced to your children, yet we knew
not that before, and more wisedome it had been, to feare the
worst with good aduisement, then euer to hope, and loke stil
for the best, without all mistrustyng. For, suche is the nature
of mā, and his corrupt race, that euermore the one foloweth
soner, then thother. CommodusCommodus was a verteous childe, and
had good bringyng vp, and yet he died a moste wicked man.
NeroNero. wanted no good counsaill, and suche a master he had,
as neuer any had the better, and yet what one aliue, was
worse then he? But now death hath assured your grace, that
you maie warrant your self, of their godly ende, whereas if
God had spared them life, thynges might haue chaunced otherwise.
In wishyng longer life, we wishe often tymes lō
                        ger
woe, longer trouble, longer foly in this world, and weye
all thynges well, you shall perceiue wee haue small ioye to
wishe longer life. This imaginacion of longer life, when the
life standeth not by nomber of yeres, but by the appoyncted
will of God, maketh our foly so muche to appere, & our teares
so continually to fall frō our chekes. For if we thought
(as we should dooe in deede) that euery daie risyng, maie be
the ende of euery man liuyng, and that there is no difference
with God, betwixt one daie, and an hūdreth yeres: we might
beare all sorowes, a greate deale the better. Therfore it wer
moste wisedome for vs all, and a greate poynct of perfeccion
to make euery daie an euen rekeuyng of our life, and talke so
with God euery houre, that we maie bee of euen borde with

hym, through fulnes of faithe, and redy to go the next houre
folowyng, at his commaundemente, and to take alwaies his
sendyng in good part. The lorde is at hande. We knowe not
when he will come (at mid night, at cocke crowe, or at noone
daies) to take either vs, or any of ours. Therfore, the rather
that we maie be armed, let vs folowe the examples of other
godly men, and lay their doynges before our iyes. And emōg
all other, I knowe none so mete for your graces comfort, as
the wise and Godly behauiour of good Kyng Dauid.Dauid .ii. Regu
                              •••
                            .xii. Who
when he was enfourmed, that his sonne was sicke, praied to
God hartly, for his amendement, wept, fasted, & with muche
lamentacion, declared greate heauinesse. But when woorde
came of his sonnes departure, he left his mournyng, he called
for water, and willed meate to be set before hym, that he
might eate. Wherupō, when his men marueiled why he did
so, consideryng he toke it so greuously before, when his child
was but sicke, and now beyng dedde, toke no thought at all,
he made this answere vnto theim: so long as my child liued,
I fasted, and watered my plantes for my young boye, and I
saied to my self, who can 
                           •
                        ell, but that God perhappes will
geue me hym, and that my child shall liue, but now seyng he
is dedde, to what ende should I faste? Can I call hym again
any more? Naye, I shall rather go vnto hym, he shall neuer
come againe vnto me. And with that Dauid comforted his
wife Bethsabe, the whiche example, as I truste your grace
hath redde, for your comfort, so I hope you will also folowe
it for youre healthe, and bee as strong in pacience, as euer
Dauid was. The historie it self shall muche delighte youre
grace, beeyng redde as it lieth in the Booke, better then my
bare touchyng of it can dooe, a greate deale. The whiche I
doubte not but your grace will often reade, and comforte other
your self, as Dauid did his sorowfull wife. IobIob. losyng
his children, and all that he had, forgatte not to praise God
in his extreme pouertie. TobiasTobias. lackyng his iye sighte, in
spirite prased GOD, and with open mouthe, confessed his
holy name to bee magnified throughout the whole yearthe.
Paule the Apostle of God, reproueth thē as worthy blame,
whiche mourne and lament, the losse of their derest. I would

not brethren (ꝙ he) that you should be ignorant,
                           
                              •
                           . Thessa .iiii. concernyng
them whiche be fallen on slepe, that you sorowe not as other
doo, whiche haue no hope. If we beleue that Iesus died, and
rose again, euen so thei also, whiche slepe by Iesus, wil God
bryng again with hym. Then your grace, either with leauyng
sorowe, must shewe your self faithfull, or els with yeldyng
to your wo, declare your self to be without hope. But
I trust your grace, beyng planted in Christ, will shew with
sufferaunce, the fruicte of your faithe, and comforte your self
with the wordes of Christ,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         I am the resurrecciō and the life
he that beleueth on me, yea, though he wer dedde, yet should
he liue, and whosoeuer liueth, and beleueth in me, shal neuer
die. We read of those that had no knowlege of God, and yet
thei bare in good worth, the discease of their children. AnaxogorasAnaxogoras.
hearyng tell, that his sonne was dedde, no maruail ꝙ
he, I knowe well I begot a mortall body. PericlesPericles. chief ruler
of Athens, hearyng tell that his twoo sonnes, beyng of
wonderfull towardnesse, within foure daies wer bothe ded,
neuer greately chaunged countenaunce for the matter, that
any one could perceiue, nor yet forbare to go abrode, but accordyng
to his wōted custome, did his duetie in the counsail
house, in debatyng matters of weighte, concernyng the state
of the common peoples weale. But because your grace is a
woman, I will shewe you an example of a noble woman, in
whom appered wonderfull pacience. Cornelia,Cornelia. a worthy ladie
in Rome, beyng comforted for the losse of her twoo children,
Tiberius, and Caius Gracchus, bothe valiaunt ientle
men, although bothe not the moste honest menne, whiche died
not in their beddes, but violently were slain in Ciuill battaill,
their bodies liyng naked and vnburied, when one emō
                        gest
other saied: Oh vnhappie woman, that euer thou shouldest
se this daie. Naie ꝙ she, I wil neuer thinke my self otherwise,
then moste happy, that euer I brought furthe these two
Gracchions. If this noble lady, could thinke her self happie,
beyng mother to these twoo valiaunt ientlemen, & yet both
rebelles, and therefore iustly slain: Howe muche more maye
youre grace, thynke youre self moste happie, that euer you
broughte furthe twoo suche Brandons, not onely by natural

birth, but also by most godly education, in such sort that
the lyke .ij. haue not been for their towardnes vniuersallie.
Whose deathe the general voice of all men declares howe
muche it was lamented. So that whereas you might euer
haue feared some daungerouse ende, you are nowe assured
that they both made a most godly ende, the whiche thyng is
the ful perfection of a Christiā lyfe. I reade of one BibulusBibulus.
that hearyng of his two children to dye both in one daie, lamented
the lacke of them bothe for that one daye, and mourned
no more. And what coulde a man doe lesse than for two
children to lament but one daie: and yet in my mynde he lamented
enough and euē so muche as was reason for hym to
do, whose doynges if all Christians woulde folowe, in my
iudgement they shoulde not onely fulfill natures rule, but
also please God highly. Horatius PuluillusHoratius Puluillus. beeyng highe
Prieste at Rome when he was occupied about the dedicatyng
of a Temple to their greate God Iuppiter in the Capitoly,
holdyng a post in his hande, and hard as he was vtteryng
the solempne wordes, that his sonne was dead, euen
at thesame present: he did neither plucke his hande from the
post lest he shoulde trouble suche a solempnitie, neither yet
turned his countenaunce from that publique religiō to his
priuate sorowe, least he should seeme rather to doe the office
of a father, then the dutie of an highe minister. Paulus EmiliusPaulus Emilius.
after his moste noble victorie had of Kyng Perse,
desired of God, that if after suche a triumphe there were any
harme lyke to happen to the Romaines, the same might
fal vpon his owne house. Whereupon when God had taken
his two children from hym immediatly after, he thancked
God for graūtyng him his bound. For in so doyng he was a
meane that the people rather lamented Paulus Emilius
lacke, thē that Paulus or any bewailed any misfortune that
the Romains had. Examples be innumerable of those
whiche vsed lyke moderation in subduyng their affections,
as Zenophon, Quintus Martius,Quintus 
                              •••
                           
                           tius. Iulius Cesar,Iulius Cesar. Tiberius
Cesar,Tyberius Cesar. Emperours bothe of Rome. But what seeke I for
misfortunate men, (if any suche be misfortunate) seyng it is
an harder matter and a greater peece of worke to finde out

happie men, Let vs loke round about euen at home, and we
shal finde enowe subiect to this misfortune. for who liueth
that hath not lost? Therfore I woulde wishe your grace euen
nowe to come in againe with God, and although he be
angry, yet show you your self most obedient to his wil, cō
                        sideryng
he is Lorde ouer Kynges, Emperours, and ouer
al that be bothe in heauen and in yearth, and spareth noone
whom he listeth to take, and no doubt he wil take all at the
last. His dart goeth daily, neither is any darte cast in vaine
whiche is sent amongest a whole armie standyng thicke together.
Neither can you iustly lament that they lyued no
longer, for they lyued long enough, that haue liued well enough.
You muste measure your children by their vertues,
not by their yeres.Sap .iiii. For (as the wise man saith) a mans wisedom
is the grey heeres, and an vndefiled life, is the old age.
Happie is that mother that hath had Godly children, and
not she that hath had long lyuyng children. For if felicitie
should stande by length of tyme, some treeTrees lyue lō
                           ger then men. were more happy
then is any man, for it liueth longer, and so likewyse brute
beastes, as the Stagge,The Stagge how long he liueth. who liueth (as Plinius dothe say)
two hundreth yeares, and more. If we woulde but consider
what man is, we shoulde haue small hope to lyue, and litle
cause to put any great assuraunce in this lyfe.Man, what he is, concernyng his body. Let vs se him
what he is: Is his body any thyng els but a lumpe of earth
made together in suche forme as we do see? A frail vessell, a
weake carion, subiect to miserie, cast doune with euery light
disease, a man to daie, to morowe none. A flower that this
daie is freshe, to morowe withereth. Good Lorde do we not
see that euen those thynges whiche nourishe vs, doe rotte &
dye, as herbes, birdes, beastes, water, and al other without
the whiche we cannot lyue. And how can we lyue euer, that
are susteined by dead thinges? Therfore when any one doth
dye, why do we not thynke, that this may chaunse to euery
one, whiche now hath chaunsed to any one. We be now as
those that stande in battail raie. Not one man is suer of him
selfe before an other, but al are in daunger in lyke maner to
death▪ That your children died before other that were of ri
                        
                           •
                        er
yeares, we may iudge that their ripenes for vertue and

all other giftes of nature were brought euen to perfection,
wherby dea
                           •
                        h th
                           •
                         soner approched for nothyng long lasteth
that is sone excellent. God gaue your grace two most excellent
childrē,Rype thynges last not long. God neuer geueth for any long tyme those that
be right excellent. Their natures were heauenly, and therfore
more meete for God then man. Emong frute we se some
appels are sone ripe and fal from the tree in the middest of
summer
                           •
                         other be stil greene, & tary til winter, & hereupō are
cōmonly called wynter frute: Euen so it is with me
                           •
                        , some
dye young, some dye old, & some die in their midle age. Your
sunnes wer euen .ij. suche already, as some hereafter may be
with long cōtinuance of tyme. Thei had that in their youth
for the giftes of nature, whiche al men would require of thē
bothe scacelie in their age. Therfore beeyng both now ripe,
they were now most ready for God. There was a childe in
Rome of a mans quantite, for face, legges & o
                           •
                         her partes of
his body, wherupon wise men iudged he would not be long
liuyng. How could your grace thynke, that when you sawe
auncient wisdō in the one, & most pregnant wit in the other
meruailouse sobriete in the elder, & most laudable gentlines
in the younger, them bothe most studious in learnyng, most
forward in al feates aswel of the body, as of the mind, beyng
two suche, & so excellent, that they were lyke long to continue
with you? God neuer suffreth such excellēt & rare iewels
long to enherite therth. Whatsoeuer is nie perfectiō the
same is most nigh falling. Uertue being o
                           •
                        s absolute cānot
long be seen with these our fleshly iyes, neither can that cary
the latter end with other, that was ripe it self first of al &
before other. Fier goth out the soner, the clearer that it burneth:
& that light lasteth longest, that is made of most course
matter. In greene wood we may see that where as the fuel
is not most apt for burning, yet the fier lasteth lōger, than if
it were nourished with like quantitie of drie wood. Euē so
in the nature of man the mynde beeyng ripe, the body decaiyeth
streight, and life goeth away beeyng ones brought to
perfection. Neither can there be any greater token of shorte
lyfe, than full ripenes of naturall witte: The whiche is to
the bodie, as the heate of the Sunne is to thynges yearthly.

Therfore iudge right honourable ladie, that euen now they
both died, when they both wer most readie for God, neither
thinke that thei died ouer soone, because thei liued no lōger.
They died both Gods seruauntes, & therfore they died wel
and in good tyme. God hath set their tyme, and taken them
at his tyme blessed children as they be, to reigne with hym
in the kyngdom of his father prepared for them from the beginnyng.
Unto whose wil, I wishe and I truste your grace
doth wholy referre your wil, thankyng hym as hartely for
that he hath taken them, as you euer thanked hym, for that
he euer lent you them. I knowe the wicked wordes of some
vngodly folke haue muche disquie
                           •
                        ed your grace, notwithstandyng
God beyng iudge of your naturall loue towardes
your children, and al your faithful frendes, and seruauntes
bearyng earnest witnes with your grace of the same: there
vngodly talke the more lightely is to bee estemed, the more
vngodly that it is. Nay your grace may reioyce rather, that
whereas you haue doen well, you heare euill, accordyng to
the wordes of Christe:Math. v. Blessed are you, when men speake al
euil thynges against you. And again consider GOD is not
ledde by the reporte of men to iudge his creatures, but perswaded
by ye true knowlege of euery mans conscience, to take
them for his seruauntes, & furthermore the harme is theirs
whiche speake so lewdlie, and the blesse theirs whiche beare
it so paciētly. For loke what measure thei vse to other, with
the same they shalbe measured againe. And as they iudge so
shal they be iudged. Be your grace therfore strong in aduersitie,
and pray for them that speake amisse of you, rendryng
Gode for euil,Paci
                              •
                           
                           ̄ce praise worthie in aduersitie. and with charitable dealyng showe your self
long suffryng, so shal you heape cooles on their heades. The
boisterouse Sea trieth the good mariner, and sharpe vexatiō
declareth the true Christian. Where battaill hath not been
before, there neuer was any victorie obteined. Yow then beyng
thus assailed, show your self rather stowte to withstād,
than weake, to geue ouer: rather cleauyng to good, than yeldyng
to euil. For if God be with you, what forceth who bee
against you. For when al frendes faile, GOD neuer faileth
them that put their trust in him, and with an vnfained hart

cal to hym for grace. Thus doyng I assure your grace, God
wilbe pleased, and the Godly wil muche praise your wisdō,
though the worlde ful wickedly saie their pleasure. I praie
God your grace may please the Godlie, and with your vertuouse
behauiour in this your wydohode, winne there commendation
to the glory of God, the reioysyng of your frendes,
and the comforte of your soule. Amen.
                     Thus, the rather to make pre
                           •
                        eptes plaine, I haue
added examples at large both for counsel geuyng, & for comfortyng.
And most nedeful it were in suche kynd of Oraciōs
to be most occupied, considering the vse hereof appereth full
ofte in al partes of our life, and confusedly is vsed emong al
other matters. For in praisyng a worthie man, we shal haue
iust cause to speake of all his vertues, of thynges profitable
in this lyfe, and of pleasures in generall. Lykewyse in trauersyng
a cause before a iudge, we cannot wante the aide of
persuasion, and good counsel, concernyng wealth, health, life
and estimacion, the helpe wherof is partely borowed of this
place. But whereas I haue sette forthe at large the places
of confirmacion concernyng counsel in diuerse causes: it is
not thought that either they should al be vsed in numbre as
they are, or in ordre as they stande: but that any one may vse
theim and ordre theim as he shall thynke best, accordyng as
the tyme, place, and person, shal most of al require.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of an Oration iudicial.
                     THE whole burdeine of weightie matters, and the
earnest trial of al controuersies, rest onely vpon iudgement.
Therfore when matters concernyng lande,
gooddes, or life, or any suche thyng of lyke weight
are called in Question, we must euer haue recourse to this
kynde of Oration, and after iust examinyng of our causes by
the places therof: loke for iudgement accordyng to the law.
                  
                  
                     ¶Oration Iudicial what it is.
                     ORation Iudiciall is, an earnest debatyng in open
assemblie of some weightie matter before a iudge,
where the complainaunt commenseth his action, &
the defendaunt thereupon aunswereth at his peril
to al suche thynges as are laied to his charge.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Of the foundacion, or rather principall paincte in euery debated
matter, called of the Rhe
                           •
                        oricians the
State, or constitucion of the Cause.
                     NOT onely is it nedefull in causes of iudgement to
considre the scope whereunto wee must leauell our
reasons, & directe our inuencion: but also we ought
in euery cause to haue a respect vnto some one especial
poincte, and chief article: that the rather the whole drift
of our doynges may seeme to agree with our firste deuised
purpose. For, by this meanes our iudgement shalbe framed
to speake with discretion, and the ignoraunt shall learne to
perceiue with profite, whatsoeuer is said for his enstructiō.
But they that take vpon theim to talke in open audience, &
make not their accompte before, what thei wil speake after:
shal neither be well liked for their inuenciō, nor allowed for
their witte, nor estemed for their learnyng. For, what other
thyng do they, that boult out their wordes in suche sorte, &
without al aduisement vtter out matter: but showe themselues
to plaie as young boyes, or scarre crowes do, whiche
showte in the open and plaine feldes at all auentures hittie
missie.Definition of a thyng must first be knowē ere we speake o
                              ••
                            mynd at large. The learned therfore and suche as loue to beco
                           •
                        mpted
Clerkes of vnderstandyng, and men of good circumspection
and iudgement: doe warely scanne what they chefely
mynd to speake, and by definition seke what that is whereunto
they purpose to directe their whole doynges. For, by
suche aduised warenesse, and good iye castyng: they shall alwaies
be able both to knowe what to say, & to speake what
they ought. As for example if I shal haue occasion to speake
in open audience of the obediēce due to our souereigne kyng
I ought first to learne what is obedience, and after knowelege
attained, to direct my reasons to the onely proue of this
purpose, and wholly to seke confirmacion of the same, & not
turne my tale to talke of Robbyn Hoode, & to showe what
a goodly archer was he, or to speake wounders of the man
in the Mone,Rouyng with 
                              〈◊〉
                            reason. suche as are most nedelesse & farthest from the
purpose. For then, the hearer lookyng to be taught his obedience,
& hearing in the meane season mad tales of archerie,
and great meruailes of the man in the Mone: beyng half astonied

at his so great straing wil perha
                           •
                        pes say to himself:
Now, whether the deuill wilt thou, come in man againe for
very shame, & tel me no bytailes, suche as are to no purpose
but show me that whiche thou diddest promise both to t
                           •
                        ache
& perswade at thy first entrie. Assuredly suche fonde felowes
there haue been, yea euē emong Preachers, that talking
of faith, thei haue fetcht their ful race from the .xij. signes
in the Zodiake. An other talking of the general resurrection
hath made a large matter of our blessed Lady, praisyng
her to be so ientle, so courtise, & so kynd, that it were better
a thousandfould to make sute to her alone thē to Christ her
sonne. And what needed (I pray you) any suche rehersal beyng
both vngodly, & nothyng at al to the purpose? for, what
maketh the praise of our lady to the confirmaciō of the general
dowme? Would not a man thinke him mad that hauyng
an earnest errand from London to Douer, would take it the
next way to ride first into Northfolke, next into Essex, & last
into Kent? And yet assuredly many an vnlearned & wittelesse
mā hath straied in his talke much farther a great deale,
yea truely as farre, as hence to Rome gates. Therfore wise
are thei that folow Plinies aduise,Plinies counsel for handeling of caus
                              ••
                           . who would that al men
both in writing & speakyng at large vpon any matter, should
euer haue an iye to the chief title & principal ground of their
whole entent, neuer swaruing frō their purpose, but rather
bringyng al thinges together to cōfirme their cause so much
as they can possible. Yea, the wise & experte men wil aske of
thēselfes, how hangeth this to the purpose? to what end do
I speake it? what maketh this for cōfirmacion of my cause?
& so by oft questionyng either chide their owne fol
                           •
                        e, if they
speake amisse▪ or els be assured thei speake to good purpose.
                     A State therfore generally is the chief grounde of a matter,A State generally what it is.
and the pryncipal poincte whereunto both he that speaketh
shoulde referre his whole wit, & thei that heare should
chefely marke. A Preacher taketh in hande to showe what
praier is, and how nedeful for man, to cal vpon God: Now,
he shoulde euer remembre this his matter, applieng his reasons
wholy and fully to this end that the hearers may both
knowe the nature of praier, and the nedefulnesse of praier.

The whiche when he hath doen, his promise is fulfilled, his
time wel bestowed, and the hearers wel iustructed.
                  
                  
                     ¶A State, or constitution what it is in
matters of Iudgement.
                     IN al other causes the state is gathered without cō
                        tention,
and seuerally handled vpon good aduisement
as he shal thynke best that professeth to speake. But
in matters criminall, where iudgement is required:
there are two persons at the least, whiche must through contrarietie,
stande and reste vpon some issue. As for example:
A seruyng man is apprehended by a lawyer for felonie vpon
suspicion. The lawier saith to the seruyng man: Thou hast
done this robbery. Nay, (saith he) I haue not doen it. Upon
this conflicte & matchyng together, ariseth this State, whether
this seruing man hath done this robbery, or no? Upon
whiche poincte the lawyer must stande, and seeke to proue it
to the vttermost of his power.
                     A State therfore in matters of iudgement is that thyng,State in Iudgement what it is.
whiche doeth arise vpon the first demaunde and denial made
betwixt men, whereof the one part is the accuser, and the other
part the person, or persons accused. It is called a State
because we doe stande and reste vpon some one poincte,State, why it is so called. the
whiche must wholly and onely be proued of the one side, and
denied of the other. I cannot better terme it in Englishe
than by the name of an issue, the whiche not onely ariseth vpon
muche debatyng and long trauerse vsed, whereupon all
matters ar said to com to an issue: but also elswhere an issue
is said to be then and so often as bothe parties stande vpon
one poinct, the whiche doth aswel happen at the first begynnyng
before any probacions are vsed, as it doth at the latter
endyng after the matter hath at large been discussed.
                  
                  
                     ¶The diuision of States, or issues.
                     NOW that we knowe what an Issue is, it is nexte
most nedeful to showe how many thei are in numbre.
The wisest and best learned haue agreed vpon
thre onely, and no lesse, the whiche are these folowyng.
                     
                        
                        The state.
                        
                           
                              i. Coniecturall.
                              ij. Legall.
                              iij. Iuridiciall.
                           
                        
                     
                     AND for the more playne vnderstandynge of these
darcke wordes, these three questions folowinge, expounde
their meaninge altogether.
                     
                        i. Whether the thinge bee, or no.
                        ij. What it is.
                        iij. What maner of thinge it is.
                     
                     IN the fyrst we consider vpon rehearsal of a matter
whether anye suche thinge bee, or no. As if one
shoulde be accused of Murther, good it were to
knowe, whether anye murther were committed at
all, or on, if it be not perfectlye knowne before: and after to
go further, and examine whether suche a man that is accused,
haue done the dede or no.
                     In the seconde place, we doubte not vpon the thinge
done, but we stande in doubte what to call it. Sometimes
a man is accused of felo
                           •
                        ye, and yet he proueth his offence
to be but a trespace, wherupon he escapeth the daunger of
deathe. An other beynge accused for killynge a man, confesseth
his faulte to be manslaughter, and denieth it vtterlye
to be any murder, wherupō he maketh frendes to purchase
his Pardon. Nowe the lawyers by their learninge muste
iudge the doubte of this debate, and tell what name he deserueth
to haue that hath thus offended.
                     In the thyrde place, not onely the dede is confessed, but
the maner of doynge is defended. As if one were accused for
killynge a man, to confesse the deede, and also to stande in it
that he myght iustely so do, because he did it in his owne defence:
wherupon ariseth this Question, whether his doing
be ryght or wrong. And to make these matters more plaine,
I will adde an example for euery state, seuerally.
                     
                        Of the state Coniecturall.
                        
                           The Assertion.
                        Thou hast killed this manne.
                        The Aunswere.
                        I haue not killed him.
                        The State or Issue.
                     
                     Whether he hath killed this man or no. Thus we see vpon
the auouchinge and deniall, the matter standeth vpon
an issue.
                     
                        Of the state Legall.
                        Assertion.
                        Thou hast committed treason in this facte.
                        Aunswere.
                        I denye it to be treason.
                        State or issue.
                     
                     Whether his offence done maye be called treason or no.
Here is denied that any suche thinge is in the dede done, as
is by word reported, and saide to bee.
                     
                        Of the state Iuridiciall.
                        Assertion.
                        Thou hast kylled this manne.
                        Aunswere.
                     
                     I graunte it, but I haue doone it lawfullye, because I
killed him in mine owne defence.
                     State or issue.
                     Whether a man may kill one in his owne defence, or no,
and whether this man did so, or no.
                  
                  
                     The Oration coniectural, what it is.
                     THe Oration coniectural is, when matters be examined
and tryed out by suspicions gathered, and
some likelihode of thinge appearinge. A Souldiour
is accused for killinge a Farmar. The Souldioure
denieth it vtterly, & sayth he did not kyll him. Hereupon
riseth the question, whether the Souldioure killed the
Farmar or no, who is well knowen to be slayne. Nowe to
proue this question, we muste haue suche places of confirmation,
as hereafter do folowe.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Places of confirmation, to proue thinges by coniecture.
                     
                        
                        i. Will, to do euill.
                        ij. Power, to do euil.
                     
                     IN the will muste be considered the qualitye of the 
man, whether he were like to do suche a dede or no,
and what shoulde moue him to attempte suche an
enterpryse, whether he did the murther vpon anye
displeasure before conceyued, or of a sodayne anger, or els
for that he loked by his death to receyue some commoditie,
either lande, or office, money, or money 
                           〈◊〉
                        , or anye other
gainefull thinge.
                     Some are knowen to want no will to kill a manne, because 
they haue bene fleshe theretofore, passing as little vpō
the deathe of a man, as a Bo
                           •
                        her dothe passe for killinge of
an Ore, beynge heretofore either accused before a Iudge of
manslaughter, or els quitte by some general pardon. Now,
when the names of such menne are knowen, they make wise
men euer after to haue them in suspection.
                     The countrey where the man was borne declares sometime 
his natural inclination, as if he wer borne or brought
vp emong the Tindale, and Riddesdale menne, he may the
soner be suspected.
                     Of what trade he is, by what occupation he liueth.
                     
                     Whether he be a gamester, an alchouse haunter, or a panion 
emong Ruffians.
                     Of what wealthe he is, and how he came by that whiche 
he hath, if he haue anye.
                     What apparell he weareth, and whether he loueth to go 
gaye, or no.
                     Of what nature he is, whether he be hastye, headye, or 
readye to pike quarels.
                     What shiftes he hath made from time to tyme.
                     
                     What moued him to do suche an haynous dede.
                     
                  
                  
                     Places of Confirmation to proue whether he had
power to do suche a dede, or no.
                     
                        
                         The grounde where the man was flaine, whether it was
in the hygh waye, in a woode, or betwixt two hylles, or els
where, nighe to an hedge or secrete place.
                     
                         The tyme, whether it was earlye in the mornynge, or late
at nyght.
                     
                         Whether he was there about that time or no.
                     
                         Whether he ranne awaye after the deede done, or had anye
bloude aboute him, or trembled, or stakerde, or was
contrarie in tellyng of his tale, and how he kept his countenaunce.
                     
                         Hope to kepe his dede secrete, bi reason of the place, time,
and secrete maner of doynge.
                     
                         Witnesses examined of his beynge, either in this or that
place.
                     
                         By comparinge of the stxengthe of the murtherer wyth
the other mans weakenes, armoure with nakednes, & stoutnes
with simplicitie.
                     
                         His Confession.
                  
                  
                     An example of an Oration Iudiciall, to proue by Contectures
the knowledge of a notable and mooste haynous
offence, committed by a Souldiour
                     AS Nature hath euer abhorred murder, and God in
all ages most terriblye hath plagued bloudsheading:
so I truste your wisedomes (mooste worthye Iudges)
will spedelye seke the execution of this mooste
hatefull synne. And where as God reuealeth to the syght of
menne the knowledge of such offences by diuers likelihodes,
and probable coniectures: I doubte not but you beyng called
of God to heare suche causes, wyll doe herein as reason
shall require, and as this detestable offence shall moue
you v
                           •
                        on rehearsall of the matter. The Manne that is
well knowen to be slayne, was a worthye Farmar, a good
housekeper, a welthye husbandemanne, one that traueyled
muche in this worlde, me
                           •
                        nynge vprightlye in all hys doinges,
and therfore beloued emonge all men, and lamented
of manye when his deathe was knowen. This Souldioure

beynge desperate in his doynges, and liuyng by spoyle
all his lyfe tyme, came newlie from the warres, whose hand
                           •
                        s
hath bene latelye bathed in bloude, and nowe he kepeth
this countrey (where this farmar was slaine) and hath ben
here for the space of one whole moneth together, and by all
likelihodes he hath slaine this honest farmer. For, such menflesht
vilaynes, make small accompte for kyllinge anye one,
and do it they will withoute anye mercye, when they m
                           •
                        ye
see their time. Yea, this wretch is bruted for his beastly demeanoure,
and knowen of longe time to be a stronge thiefe.
Nether had he escaped the daunger of the law, if the kinges
free pardon had not preuented the execution. His name declares
his noughtye nature, and his wycked liuynge hathe
made him famous. For, who is he that hearynge of N. (the
notable offenders name myght here be rehearsed) doth not
thynke by and by, that he were lyke to do suche a dede? Neither
is he onelye knowen vniuersallye to be nought, but his
soyle also (where he was borne) geueth him to be an euill
man: consideringe he was bredde and brought vp emong a
denne of theues, emonge the men of Tindale and Ryddesdale,
where pillage is good purchase, and murderynge is
counted manhode. Occupation hath he none, nor yet any other
honeste meanes, whereby to maintayne him selfe: & yet
he liueth mooste sumptuouslye. No greater gamester in a
whole countrey, no such riotour, a notable whoremonger,
a lewderoister emong Ruffiās, an vnreasonable waister, to
day ful of money, wtin a seuēnight after not worth a grote.
There is no man that seethe him, but will take him for his
apparell to be a gentilman. He hath his chaunge of sutes,
yea, he spareth not to go in his silkes and veluet. A greate
quareller, and fraie maker, glad when he may be at d
                           •
                        fiaūce
with one or other, he hath made such shyftes for money ere
now, that I maruaile how he hath liued till this daye. And
now beyng at a low ebbe, & lothe to seme base in his estate,
thought to aduenture vpon this farmar, and either to winne
the saddle, or els to lose the horse. And thus beynge so
farre forwarde, wantinge no will to attempte this wicked
deede, he sought by all meanes possible, conuenient oportunitye

to compasse his desire. And waytinge vnder a woode
side, nighe vnto the hyghe waye, aboute sixe of the clocke at
night, he sette vpon this farmer, at what time he was comming
homewarde. For, it appeareth not onelye by his owne
confession, that he was there aboute the selfe same time,
where this man was slayne: but also there be men that saw
him ride in greate haste aboute the selfe same time. And because
GOD would haue thys murder to be knowen, loke
I praye you what bloude he carieth aboute hym, to beare
witnesse agaynste hym of hys moost wicked deede. Againe,
hys owne confession dothe playnelye goe againste hym, for
he is in so manye tales, that he can not tell what to saye.
                     And often his coloure chaungeth, his bodye shaketh, and
hys tongue foultereth wythin hys mouthe. And suche men
as he bryngeth in to beare witnesse wyth hym, that he was
at suche a place at the selfe same houre, when the Farmar
was slayne: they wyll not be sworne for the verye houre,
but they saye, he was at suche a place, wythin two houres
after. Now Lord, dothe not this matter seeme most playne
vnto al mē, especially seing this dede was done such a time,
and in suche a place, that if the deuyl had not bene his good
Lorde, thys matter hadde neuer come to lyghte. And who
wyll not saye that this Caytife hadde little cause to feare,
but rather power inoughe to doe his wycked feacte, seynge
he is so sturdye and so stronge, and the other so weake and
vnweldy: yea, seyng this vilaine was armed, and the other
man naked. Doubte yon not (worthye Iudges) seynge such
notes of his former lyfe to declare his inwarde nature, and
perceiuing suche coniectures lawfully gathered vpon iuste
suspicion: but that this wretched Souldioure hath slayne
thys worthye Farmar. And therfore I appeale for iustice
vnto your wisdomes for the deathe of thys innocente man,
whose bloude before God asketh iuste auengement. I doubt
not but you remember the wordes of Salomon, who saith.
It is as greate a synne to forgeue the wicked, as it is euill
to condempne the innocente: and as I call vnfaynedlye for
ryghtfull Iudgemente, so I hope assuredlye for iuste execucion.
                     
                        The Person accused beynge innocente of the cryme that
is layed to his charge, may vse the selfe same places for his
owne defence, the whyche hys accuse
                           •
                         vsed to proue hym

                           •
                        yltye.
                  
                  
                     The interpretation of a lawe, otherwise called the State legall.
                     IN boultynge out the true meaninge of a lawe, we
must vse to search out the nature of the same, by de
fining sone one worde, or comparing one law wyth
an other, iudging vpon good triall, what is right,
and what is wronge.
                     The partes.
                     
                        i. Definition.
                        ii. Contrarye lawes.
                        iii. Lawes made, & thende of the law maker
                        iiii. Ambiguitye, or doubtfulnes.
                        v. Probation by thinges like.
                        vi. Chalengynge or refusinge.
                     
                  
                  
                     Definition what it is.
                     THen we vse to define a matter, when wee can not
agree vpon the nature of some word, the which we
learne to know by askyng the question what it is.
As for example. Where one is apprehended for killing
a man, we laye murder to his charge: wherupon the accused
person when he graūteth the killing, and yet denieth
it to be murder: we must straight after haue recourse to the
definition, and aske, what is murder, by defininge whereof,
and comparing the nature of the word, with his dede done:
we shall sone know whether he committed murder or manslaughter.
                  
                  
                     Contrarye lawes.
                     IT often happeneth that lawes seme to haue a certaine
repugnancie, wherof emōg many riseth much
cōtenciō, wher as if both ye lawes wer wel weied &
cōsidered according to their circūstances, thei wold

appeare nothing contrari in matter, though in wordes they
seme to dissent. Christ geueth warning, & chargeth his disciples
in the .x. of Math. that they preach not the glad tidinges
of his cōming into the world to the Gentils, but to the
Iewes only, vnto whom he was sent by his father. And yet
after his resurrection we do read in the last of Mat. that he
commaunded his disciples to go into all the whole world,
and preach the glad tidinges of his passion, & raunsome, paied
for al creatures liuing. Now though these .ii lawes seme
contrary, yet it is nothing so. For if the Iewes would haue
receiued Christ, & acknowleged him their sauioure, vndoutedly
they had bene the onelye children of God, vnto whom
the promise and couenaunt was made from the beginninge.
But bicause they refused their Sauiour, and crucified the
Lord of glory: Christ made the lawe generall, and called all
men to life that woulde repent, promisinge saluation to all
suche as beleued and were baptised. So that the particuler
law, beyng nowe abrogated, muste 
                           ••
                        ades geue place to the
superioure.
                  
                  
                     Foure lessons to be obserued, where contrarye lawes are called in question.
                     
                        i. The inferioure law must geue place to the superiour.
                        ii. The lawe generall muste yelde to the speciall.
                        iii. Mans lawe, to Gods lawe.
                        iiii. An olde lawe, to a newe lawe.
                     
                     There be Lawes vtterde by Christes owne mouthe, the
whiche if they be taken accordinge as they are spoken, seme
to conteyne great absurditie in them. And therfore the mind
of the lawe maker muste rather be obserued, then the bare
wordes taken onely, as they are spoken. Christ sayth in the
v. of Mathew.Math. v. If thy right eye be an offence vnto thee, plucke
him out, and caste him awaye from thee. If one geue the
a blowe of thy ryghte cheke, turne to him agayne thy lefte

cheke. There be some Eunuches, that haue gelded thēselfes
for the kyngdome of heauen.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         Go, and sell all that thou hast,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
and geue it to the poore. He that doeth not take vp his crosse
and folowe me, is not worthy of me. In all whiche sentences
there is no suche meanyng, as the bare wordes vttered seme
to yelde. Pluckyng out of the iye, declares an auoydyng of
all euill occasions: receiuyng a blowe vpon the lefte cheke,
cōmendes vnto vs, modestie and pacience in aduersitie. Geldyng,
signifieth a subduyng of affeccions, & tamyng the foule
luste of pleasure, vnto the will of reason. Go and sell all: declares
we should be liberal, and glad to part with our gooddes
to the poore and neady. Bearyng the Crosse, be
                           •
                        o
                           •••
                        eth
sufferance of all sorowes, and miseries in this worlde. Now
to proue that the will of the lawe maker, is none other then
I haue saied: I maie vse the testimonies of other places in
the Scripture, and compare theim with these sentences, and
so, iudge by iuste examinacion, and diligent searche, the true
meanyng of the lawe maker.
                  
                  
                     ¶Ambiguitee.
                     SOmetymes a doubt is made, vpon some woorde or
sentēce, when it signifieth diuerse thynges, or maie
diuersly be taken, wherupon full oft ariseth muche
contencion. The lawyers lacke no cases,Lawyers. to fil this
parte full of examples. For, rather then faile, thei will make
doubtes oftē tymes, where no doubt should be at all. Is his
Lease long enough (ꝙ one): yea sir, it is very long, saied a
poore husbande man. Then (ꝙ he) let me alone with it, I wil
finde a hole in it, I warrant thee. In all this talke, I excepte
alwaies the good lawyers, and I maie well spare theim, for
thei are but a fewe.
                  
                  
                     ¶Probacion by thynges like.
                     WHen there is no certain lawe by expresse wordes
vttered for some heinous offender, we maie iudge
the offence worthy deathe, by rehersall of some other
Lawe, that soundeth muche that waie. As
thus. The ciuil lawe appoyncteth yt he shalbe put in a sacke,
and cast in the Sea, that killeth his father: well, then he that
killeth his mother, should by all reason, in like sort be ordered.

It is lawfull to haue a Magistrate, therefore it is lawfull
to plead matters before an officer. And thus, though the
last cānot be proued by expresse wordes, yet thesame is foūd
lawfull, by rehersall of the first.
                  
                  
                     ¶Chalengyng, or refusyng.
                     WE vse this order, when wee remoue our sewtes,
from one Courte to another, as if a manne should
appele from the Common place, to the Chauncerie.
Or if one should bee called by a wrong name,
not to answere vnto it. Or if one should refuse to answere
in the spirituall court, and appele to the lorde Chauncellor.
                  
                  
                     ¶The Oracion of right or wrong, called otherwise the state Iuridiciall.
                     AFter a deede is well knowen to be doen, by some out
persone, we go to the next, and searche whether it be
right, or wrong. And that is, when the maner of doyng
is examined, and the matter tried through reasonyng,
and muche debatyng, whether it be wrongfully doen
or otherwise.
                  
                  
                     ¶The diuision.
                     THis state of right or wrong, is twoo waies diuided,
wherof the one is, when the matter by the awne nature,
is defended to bee righte, without any further
sekyng, called of the Rhetoriciās, the state absolute.
The other (vsyng litle force, or strengthe to maintein the matter)
is, when outward help is sought, and bywaies vsed
to pur
                           •
                        hase fauour, called otherwise the state assumptiue.
                  
                  
                     ¶Places of confirmacion for the first kynd, are seuen.
                     
                        j. Nature if self.
                        ij. Goddes lawe, and mannes lawe.
                        iij. Custome.
                        iiij. Aequitie.
                        v. True dealyng.
                        vj. Auncient examples.
                        vij. Couenauntes and deedes autentique.
                     
                     
                        TUllie in his moste worthy Oracion, made in behalfe
of Milo, declareth that Milo slewe Clodius moste
lawfully, whom Clodius sought to haue slain moste
wickedly. For (ꝙ Tullie) if nature haue graffed this
in man, if lawe haue confirmed it, if necessitie haue taught i
                           •
                        
if custome haue kept it, if aequitie haue mainteined it, if true
dealyng hath allowed it, if all common weales haue vsed it,
if deedes auncient haue sealed this vp, that euery creature
liuyng should fense it self, against outward violence: no mā can
thinke that Milo hath dooen wrong, in killyng of Clodius,
except you thinke, that when menne mete with theues,
either thei must be slain of theim, or els condempned of you.
                  
                  
                     ¶Places of confirmacion for the seconde kynde, are foure.
                     
                        Grauntyng of the faulte committed.
                        Blamyng euill companie for it.
                        Comparyng the fault, and declaryng that either
                        thei must haue doen that, or els 
                              〈◊〉
                            doen worse
                        Shiftyng it from vs, and shewyng that wee did
                        it vpon commaundement.
                     
                     COnfessyng of the faulte,Confessyng, what it is. is when the accused person
graunteth his crime, and craueth pardon thereupon,
leauyng to aske iustice, & leanyng wholy vnto mercie
                  
                  
                     ¶Confession of the faulte, vsed twoo maner of waies.
                     The first is,The diuision. when one excuseth hymself, that he did it not
willyngly, but vnwares, and by chaunce.
                     The second is, when he asketh pardone, for the fault doen
consideryng his seruice to the common weale, and his worthy
deedes heretofore dooen, promisyng amendement of his
former euill deede: the whiche wordes, would not be vsed before
a Indge, but before a kyng, or generall of an armie. For
the Iudges muste geue sentence, accordyng to the Lawe: the
Kyng maie forgeue, as beyng aucthour of the lawe, and hauyng
power in his hande, maie do as he shall thinke best.
                     Blamyng other for the faulte doen,Blamyng other, how 
                              〈◊〉
                            is saied. is when wee saie that
the accused persone, would neuer haue doen suche a deede, if
other against whō also, this accusacion is intended, had not

been euill men, and geuen iust cause, of suche a wicked dede.
                     Comparyng the fault is when we saie,Comparyng the faulte. that by flaiyng an
euill man, we haue doen a good dede, cuttyng awaie the corrupte
and rotten member, for preseruacion of the whole body.
Or thus: some sette a whole toune on fire, because their
enemies should haue none aduaūtage by it. The Saguntynes
beeyng tributarie to the Romaines,S
                              •
                           guntines. slewe their awne
children, burnte their goodes, and fired their bodies, because
thei would not be subiecte to that cruell Haniball, and lose
their allegiaunce, due to the Romaines.
                     Shiftyng it frō vs,Shiftyng the fault from vs is when we saie, that if other had not
set vs on, wee would neuer haue attempted suche
an enterprise. As often tymes the souldiour
saieth, his Capitaines biddyng, was
his enforcement: the seruaunt
thynketh his Maisters
commaundemente,
to bee a sufficient
defence
for his discharge.
                  
               
               The ende of the first Booke.
            
            
               
               ¶The seconde Booke.
               
                  NOw that I haue hetherto set furthe what
Rhetorique is, whereunto euery Orator is
moste bounde, what the causes bee, bothe in
their nature, and also by nomber, that comprehende
euery matter, & what places serue
to confirme euery cause: I thinke it is moste
mete after the knowlege of all these, to frame an Oraciō accordingly,
& to shewe at large, the partes of euery Oracion,
(but specially suche as are vsed in iudgement) that vnto euery
cause, apte partes maie euermore bee added. For euery
matter hath a diuerse beginnyng, neither al cōtrouersies, or
matters of weight should alwaies after one sort be rehersed
nor like reasons vsed, nor one kynd of mouyng affecciōs, occupied
before all men, & in euery matter. And therfore, wheras
I haue briefly spoken of thē before, I wil now largely declare
them, and shewe the vse of theim in euery matter, that

                     •
                  ometh in debate, & is nedeful, through reason to be discussed
               
                  
                     ¶An enteraunce, two waies diuided.
                     THe first is called a plain beginnyng, when
the hearer is made apte, to geue good care out of
hande, to that whiche shall folowe.A beginnyng, what it is.
                     
                     The second is a priuey twinyng, or close creping
in, to win fauor with muche circūstaunce, called insinuacionInsinuacion.
                     
                     For in all matters that man taketh in hande, this consideracion
ought first to be had, that we first diligētly expend the
cause, before wee go through with it, that wee maye bee
be assured, whether it be lawfull, or otherwise. And not onely
this, but also we must aduisedly marke the menne, before
whom wee speake, the men against whom we speake, and all
the circumstaunces, whiche belong vnto the matter. If the
matter bee honest, godly, and suche as of righte ought to bee
well liked, we maie vse an open beginnyng, and will the hearers
to reioyce, & so go through with our parte. If the cause
be lothsome, or suche as will not be well borne withall, but
nedeth muche helpe, and fauour of the hearers: it shalbe the
speakers parte, priuely to get fauour, and by humble talke,
to wynne their good willes. Firste, requiryng theim to geue

him the hearing, and next, not streightly to geue iudgement,
but with mercie to mitigate, all rigor of the Lawe. Or in a
cōplaint made, whiche the counsail shall greuously stomack,
to exaggerate it ye more, if we se iust cause to set it forward.
And whereas many often tymes, are suspect to speake thynges
of malice, or for hope of gain, or els for a set purpose, as
who should saie, this I can do: the wisest will euermore clere
themselfes, from all suche offences, and neuer geue any tokē
so muche as in them lieth, of any light suspicion.
                     In accusyng any persone, it is best to heape all his faultes
together, and whereas any thyng semeth to make for hym, to
extenuate thesame to the outermoste. In defendyng any persone,
it is wisedome to reherse all his vertues first and foremest,
and with asmuche arte as maie be, to wipe awaie suche
faultes, as were laied to his charge. And before all thynges,
this would be wel marked, that, whensoeuer we shal largely
talke of any matter, wee alwaies so inuent, and finde out
our first enteraunce in the cause, that thesame be for euer taken,
euen from the nature and bowelles therof, that al thynges,
whiche shall first be spoken, maie seme to agree with the
matter, and not made as a Shippe mannes hose, to serue for
euery legge. Now whereas any long talke is vsed, the beginnyng
thereof is either taken of the matter self, or els of the
persones, that are there present, or els of theim, against whō
the accion is entended. And because the winnyng or victorie,
resteth in three poynctes: Firste, in apt teachyng the hearers,
what the matter is, next in gettyng them to geue good eare,
and thirdly,
                           
                              ••
                           re thynges moste mere for euery Orator. in winnyng their fauour: Wee shall make theim
vnderstande the matter easely,To make the hearers to vnderstande the matter. if firste of all we begin to expounde
it plainly, and in brief woordes, settyng out the meanyng, make them harken to our saiynges. And by no meanes
better, shall the standers by, knowe what we saie, and cary awaie
that, whiche thei heare, then if at the firste, wee couche
together the whole course of our tale, in as smale roume as
we can, either by definyng the nature and substaunce of our
matter, or els by diuidyng it in an apte order, so that neither
the hearers bee troubled with confoundyng of matter, and
heapyng one thyng in anothers necke, nor yet their memorie

dulled with ouerthwarte rehersall, and disorderly tellyng
of our tale. Wee shall make the people attentiue,To make hearers attentiu
                              ••
                           
                           ▪
                         and glad to
heare vs, if wee will promise thē, to speake of weightie matters,
of wholsome doctrine, suche as thei haue heretofore wā
                        ted:
yea, if we promise to tell them thynges, cōcernyng either
their awne profite, or thaduauncement of their countrey, no
doubte wee shall haue theim diligent hearers. Or els if thei
like not to heare weightie affaires, wee maie promise theim
straunge newes, and perswade them, we wil make thē laugh
and thinke you not, that thei wil rather heare a foolishe tale
then a wise and wholesome counsail? Demosthenes therfore
seyng at a tyme,Demosthenes tale of the Asses shadowe. the fondnes of the people to be suche, that he
could not obtein of them, to heare hym speake his mynde, in
an earnest cause, concernyng the wealthe of his countrey: required
them to 
                           •
                        ary, and he would tell them a tale of Robin
Hode. Whereat thei all staied, & longed to knowe what that
should be. He began streight to tel them, of one that had sold
his Asse to another man, whereupon thei bothe went furthe
to the next Market toune, hauyng with, them thesaied Asse.
And the wether beyng somewhat hotte, the first awner, whiche
had now sold his Asse, went of that side the Asse, whiche
kept hym best from the heate. The other beyng now the awner,
and in full possession, would not suffer that, but required
hym to geue place, and suffer him to take the best commoditie,
of his awne Asse, that he could haue, wherat the other
answered and saied, naie by saincte Marie sir, you serue me
not so, I sold you the Asse, but I solde you not the shadowe
of the Asse, & therfore pike you hence. When the people hard
this, thei laughed apace, and likte it very well. Whereupon
Demosthenes hauyng wonne theim together, by this merie
toye, rebuked their folie, that were so slacke to heare good
thinges, and so redy to heare a tale of a Tubbe, and thus hauyng
them attentiue, preswaded with them to heare hym, in
matters of great importaūce, the whiche otherwise he could
neuer haue doen, if he had not taken this waie with hym.
                     We shall get the good willes of our hearers,To gett
                              •
                            the hearers good will. foure maner
of waies, either beginnyng to speake of our selfes, or els of
our aduersaries, or els of the people, and company present,

or last of all, if we begin of the matter it self, and so go thorowe
with it. We shall get fauour for our awne sakes, if we
shall modestly set furthe our bounden dueties, and declare
our seruice doen, without all suspicion of vauntyng, either
to the common weale, as in seruyng either in the warres abrode,
or els in bearyng some office at home, concernyng the
tranquilitie of our coūtrey: or in helpyng our frendes, kynsfolkes,
and poore neighbours, to declare our goodnes, doen
heretofore towardes them: and lastly, if wee shewe without
all o
                           •
                        tentacion, aswell our good willes towardes the iudges
there, as also pleasures doen for theim in tymes paste, to the
outermoste of our power. And if any thyng seme to lette our
cause, by any misreport, or euil behauior of our partes heretofore:
best it were in moste humble wise to seke fauour, and
sleightly to aduoyde all suche offences, laied to our charge.
                     We shall get fauoure, by speakyng of our aduersaries, if
we shall make suche reporte of theim, that the hearers shall
either hate to heare of them, or outerly enuy them, or els altogether
despise theim. We shall sone make our aduersaries
to be lothed, if we shewe and set furth, some naughtie deede
of theirs, and declare how cruelly, how vilie, and how maliciously
thei haue vsed other men heretofore.
                     We shall make theim to be enuied, if we reporte vnto the
Iudges, that thei beare theimselfes haulte, and stoute vpon
their wealthy frendes, and oppresse poore men by might, not
regardyng their honestie, but sekyng alwaies by hooke and
croke, to robbe poore men of their Fermes, Leases, and money.
And by the waie declare some one thyng, that thei haue
doen, whiche honest eares would scant abide to heare.
                     We shall make theim to bee sette naught by, if we declare
what luskes thei are, how vnthriftely thei liue, how thei do
nothyng from daie to daie, but eate, drinke, and slepe, rather
sekyng to liue like beastes, then myndyng to liue like men,
either in profityng their coūtrey, or in tenderyng their awne
commoditie, as by right thei ought to do.
                     We shall gette good will, by speakyng of the Iudges and
hearers: if we shall commende their worthy dooynges, and
praise their iust dealyng, and faithfull execucion of the law,

& tel them in what estimacion the whole country hath them
for their vpright iudgyng and determinyng of matters, and
therfore in this cause needes must it be that they must aunswere
their former doynges, and iudge so of this matter, as
all good men haue opinion they wil do.
                     We shal finde fauor by speakyng of the matter, if in handlyng
our owne cause, we commende it accordyngly, and dispraise
the attēpt of our aduersarie extenuatyng al his chief
purposes, so muche as shalbe necessarie.
                     Now resteth for me to speake of the other parte of Enteraunce
into an Oration,Insinuacion. whiche is called a close, or priuie
gettyng of fauour when the cause is daungerouse, and cannot
easely be heard without displeasure.
                     A priuy begynnyng, or crepyng in, otherwyse called Insinuation
must then, and not els be vsed, when the iudge is
greaued with vs, and our cause hated of the hearers.
                     The cause selfe oftentymes is not lyked for thre diuerse
causes▪ if either the matter selfe be vnhonest, and not meete
to be vtterd before an audience, or els if the iudge hymselfe
by aformer tale be perswaded to take part against vs, or last
if at that tyme we are forced to speake, when the iudge is
weried with hearyng of other. For the iudge hymself beyng
weried by hearyng, wil be muche more greeued if any thyng
be spoken either ouermuche, or els against his likyng. Yea,
who seeth not that a weried man will soone mis
                           ••
                        ke a right
good matter? Yf the matter be so hainouse that it cannot be
hearde without offence, (as if I shoulde take a mans parte,
who were generally hated) wysedome were to lette hym go
and take some other whom al men liked: or if the cause were
thought not honest, to take some other in stede therof which
were better lyked, til they were better prepared to heare the
other: so that euermore nothyng shoulde bee spoken at the
firste, but that whiche might please the iudge, and not to be
acknowen ones to thynke of that, whiche yet we minde most
of al to perswade. Therfore when the hearers are somwhat
calmed, we may entre by litle and litle into the matter, and
saie that those thynges whiche our aduersarie doth mislyke
in the person accused, we also do mislyke the same.
                     
                        And when the hearers are thus wonne, we may saie, that
all, whiche was saied, nothyng toucheth vs, and that wee
mynde to speake nothyng at al against our aduersaries, neither
this waie, nor that waie. Neither were it wysedome
openly to speake against theim, whiche are generally well
estemed and taken for honest menne. And yet it were not amisse
for the furtheraunce of our owne causes 
                           •
                        losely to
speake our fantasie, and so, streighte to aulter their hartes.
Yea & to tel the iudges the like in a like matter, that suche &
suche iudgement hath bene geuen: And therfore at this time
consyderyng the same case, and the same necessitie, lyke iudgement
is looked for. But if the aduersarie haue so tolde
his tale that the iudge is wholy bent to geue sentence with
hym, and that it is well knowne vnto what reasons the
iudge most leaued and was perswaded: we may first promise
to weaken that, whiche the aduersarie hath made moste
strong for hym selfe, and confute that parte whiche the
hearers didde most esteme, and best of all lyke. Or elles we
may take aduauntage of some part of our aduersaries tale,
and talke of that firste, whiche he spake last: or elles begynne
so, as though wee doubted what were best firste to
speake, or to what parte it were moste reason firste of all
to aunswere, wonderyng, and takyng GOD to wittenesse
at the straungenesse of his reporte, and confirmacion
of his cause. For when the standorsby perceiue that the
aunswerer (whome the aduersaries thought in their mind
was wholly abashed) feareth so litle the obiections of his
aduersarie, and is ready to aunswere Ad omnia quare,
with a bolde contenaunce: they wil thynke that they themselues
rather gaue rashe credite, and were ouerlighte in
beleuyng the firste tale: than that he whiche nowe aunswereth
in his owne cause, speaketh without grounde, or presumeth
vpon a stomacke to speake for hym selfe without
iust consideracion.
                     But if the tyme bee so spente, and the tale so long in
tellyng, that a menne b
                           •
                         almost weried to heare any more:
than we must make promise at▪ the first to be very shorte, and
to lappe vp our matter in fewe wordes.
                     
                        And if tyme may so serue it were good when men bee
weried to make them somewhat merie,Myrth makyng good at the begynning and to beginne with
some pleasaunt tale, or take an occasion to iest wittely vpon
some thyng then presently doen.
                     Or if the tyme wil not serue for pleasaunt tales,
it were good to tell some straunge thyng,Straung thinges some tyme nedeful to be tolde at the first. some terrible wonder
that they all may quake at the onely hearyng of the
same. For lyke as when a mannes stomacke is full and can
brooke no more meate, he may stirre h
                           •
                        s appetite either by
some Tarte sawce, or elles quicken it somewhat by some
sweate dishe: euen so when the audience is weried with
weightie affaires, some straunge wounders maye call vp
their spirites, or elles some merie tale may cheare their heauie
lookes.
                     And assuredly it is no small con
                           •
                        yng to moue the hartes
of menne either to mirthe, or saddenesse: for he that
hath suche skill, shal not lightely faile of his purpose whatsoeuer
matter he taketh in hande.
                     Thus haue I taught what an Enteraunce is, and
howe it shoulde be vsed. Notwithstandyng I thynke it not
amisse often to reherse this one poincte, that euermore the
begyn
                           •
                        ng be not ouermuche laboured, nor curiously mad
                           •
                        ,
but rather apte to the purpose,Enteraunces apt to the purpose. seemyng vpon present occasion,
euermore to take place, and so to be deuised, as though
we speake all together without any great studie, framyng
rather our tale to good reason, than our toungue to vaine
paintyng of the matter.
                     In all whiche discourse, whereas I haue framed all
the Lessons and euery Enteraunce properly to serue for
pleadyng at the Barre: yet assuredly many of theim ma
                           •
                        e
well helpe those that preache Goddes truthe, and exhorte
men in open assemblies to vpright dealyng.
                     And no doubte many of theim haue muche neede to
knowe this Arte, that the rather their tale maye hange
toguether, where as oftentymes they begynne as muche
from the matter, as it is betwixte Douer and Barwyke,
whereat some take pitie, and many for werines can skante

abyde their begynnyg, it is so long or they speake any thyng
to the purpose.
                           
                              •
                           nteraunces apt for Preache
                              •
                           s. Therefore the learned Clerkes of this our
tyme, haue thought it good that al Preachers shoulde take
their begynnyng vpon the occasion of suche matter as is
there written, declaryng why and wherfore and vpon what
consideracion suche wordes were in those daies so spoken,
that the reason geuen of suche talke then vtterde, might
serue wel to begynne there Sermon. Or els to gather some
seueral sentence at the firste, whiche brifely comprehendeth
the whole matter folowyng, or elles to begynne with some
apte similitude, example, or wittie saiyng. Or lastely to declare
what wente before, and so to showe that whiche foloweth
after. Yea sometimes to begynne lamentablie with
an vnfained bewailyng of sinne, and a terrible declaryng of
Goddes threates: Sometymes to take occasion of a matter
newly done, or of the company there present, so that alwaies
the begynnyng be aunswerable to the matter folowyng.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Narration.
                     AFter the preface & first Enteraunce, the matter must
bee opened, and euery thyng lyuely tolde, that the
hearers may fully perceaue what we go about▪ now
in reportyng an acte done, or vtteryng the state of a
controuersie,Na
                              •
                           ration. i. Brife. ii. Plaine. iii. Probable we must vse these lessons, whereof the firste is
to be shorte, the next to be plaine, and the thirde is, to speake
likely, and with reason, that the hearers may remember, vnderstande,
& beleue the rather, suche thynges as shalbe said.
                     And first whereas we sholud be shorte in tellyng the matter
as it lyeth,
                           
                              •
                           r
                              •
                           uitie howe 
                              〈◊〉
                            might be vsed. the best is to speake no more than needes we
muste, not rauyng it from the botome, or tellyng bytales
suche as rude people full ofte doe, nor yet touchyng euery
poinct, but tellyng the whole in a grosse summe. And where
as many matters shal neither harme vs, nor yet do vs good
beyng brought in, and reported by vs: it were well done not
to medle with them at al, nor yet twyse to tell one thyng, or
reporte that, whiche is odiouse to be tolde againe. Notwithstandyng
this one thyng woulde bee wel considered that in
seekyng to be short, we be not obscure. And therfore to make

matter plaine,Pla
                              ••
                           en
                              •
                           s how it might be vsed. that all may vnderstande it, the beste were
first and formest to tell euery thyng in order so muche as is
nedeful, obseruyng bothe the tyme, the place, the maner of
doyng, and the circumstaunces thereunto belongyng. Wherin
good heede woulde bee had that nothyng bee doubtfullie
spoken, whiche maie haue a double meanyng, nor yet any
thyng vtterde that may make asmuche against vs, as with
vs, but that al our woordes runne to confirme wholly our
matter. And suerly if the matter be not so plainely told that
al may vnderstande it, we shall doe litle good in the reste of
our report. For in other partes of ye Oration if we be somewhat
darke, it is the lesse harme, we may bee more plaine in
an other place. But if the Narration, or substaunce of the
tale bee not well perceyued, the whole Oration besydes is
darckened altogether. For to what ende should we go about
to proue that which the hearers know not what it is? Neither
can we haue any libertie to tel our tale again, after we
haue ones tolde it, but must streight go furthe and confirme
that whiche we haue said howsoeuer it is. Therfore the reportyng
of our tale may soone appere plaine, if we firste expresse
our mynde in plaine wordes, and not seeke these rope

                           •
                        ype termes, whiche betraie rather a foole, than commende
a wyse man: & again if we orderly obserue circumstaunces,
& tell one thyng after another from tyme to tyme, not tumblyng
one tale in an others necke tellyng halfe a tale, and so
leauyng it rawe, hackyng & hemmyng as though our wittes
and our senses were a woll gatheryng. Neither shoulde we
suffer our tongue to runne before our witte, but with much
warenesse sette forthe our matter, and speake our mynde euermore
with iudgement.
                     We shal make our saiynges appere lykely, and probable:Probalitie how it might be vsed.
Yf we speake directely as the cause requireth, if wee showe
the very purpose of al the deuise, & frame our inuencion accordyng
as we shal thynke them most willyng to allowe it,
that haue the hearyng of it.
                     The Narration reported in matters of iudgement shall
seeme to stande with reason,Narration 
                              〈◊〉
                            iudgement. if wee make our talke to agree
with the place, tyme, thyng, and persone, if we shall showe

that whatsoeuer we say, the same by al likelyhodes is true,
if our coniectures, tookens, reasons, & argumentes be suche
that neither in them there appere any fablyng, nor yet that
any thyng was spoken whiche might of right otherwyse be
taken, and that wee not onely speake this, but that diuers
other of good creditie will stande with vs in defense of the
same, all whiche reportyng may sone bee lyked, and the tale
so tolde, may be thougt very reasonable. Yea, we shall make
our doynges seme reasonable, if we frame our worke to natures
wil, and seke none other meanes, but suche onely, as
the honest and wyse haue euer vsed and allowed, bryngyng
in, and blamyng the euil alwaies for suche faultes chiefely,
wherunto thei most of al are like to be subiect▪ as to accuse a
spend al, of thefte: a whoremunger, of adulterie: a rash quareller,
of manslaughter: & so of other. Sometimes it is good
and profitable to be merie and pleasaunt in reportyng a matter,
against some maner of man and in some cause. For neither
against all men that offend, nor yet against all matters
shoulde the wittie alwaies vse iestyng. And nowe for those
that shall tel their mynde in the other kyndes of Oratorie,
as in the kynde Demonstratiue, Deliberatiue, in exhortyng
or perswadyng:Narration in praisyng and counsel geuyng. the learned haue thought meete, that they
must also cal the whole summe of their matter to one especial
poincte, that the rather the hearers may better perceiue
whereat they leauel al their reasons. As if a Clarke do take
in hande to declare Goddes hest, he will after his Enteraunce,Preachers what order they vse.
tell what thyng is chiefely purposed in that place,
and nexte after, showe other thynges annexed thereunto
whereby not onely the hearers may g
                           •
                        tte great learnyng,
and take muche profite of his doctrine, but he hym self may
knowe the better what to say, what order to vse, and when
to make an ende.
                     Some do vse after the literal sense to gather a misticall
vnderstandyng, and to expounde the saiynges spiritually,
makyng their Narration altogether of thynges heauenly.
Some rehersing a texte particularly spokē, applie thesame
generally vnto all states, enlargyng the Narration moste
Godly by comparyng wordes long agoe spoken, with thynges

and matters that are presently done. Notwithstanding
the auncient fathers because they did onely expounde the
Scriptures for the moste parte, made no artificiall Narration:
but vsed to folowe suche order as the plaine text gaue
theim. So that if euery sentence were plainely▪ opened to
the hearers, they went not muche farther, sauyng that
when any worde gaue them occasion to speake of some vice,
they woulde largely saie their mynde in that behaulfe: As
Chrisostome and Basile haue done, with other.
                     The ware markyng and heedie obseruacion of tyme,
place, and person may teache al menne (that be not past teachyng,)
howe to frame their Narration in all Controuersies
that are called in Question, and therfore when presente
occasion shall geue good instruction, what neede more
lessons? And especially seeyng nature teacheth what is comely,
and what is not comely, for all tymes.
                     Yea what tell I nowe of suche lessons, seeyng GOD
hath raised suche worthe Preachers in this our tyme, that
their Godly, and learned dooynges, may be a moste iuste
example for al other to folowe: aswell for their lyuyng, as
for their learnyng. I feare me the preceptes are more in nō
                        ber,
than wil be wel kepte or folowed this yeare.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Diuision.
                     AFter our tale is told, and the hearers haue wel learned
what wee meane, the nexte is to reporte wherein
the aduersarie and wee, cannot agree, and what it is
wherin we do agree. And then to part out suche principall
poinctes whereof we purpose fully to debate, and laie
theim out to be knowen: that the hearers may plainely see,
what we wil say, and perceiue at a worde, the substaunce of
our meanyng. Now Tullie would not haue a deuision to be
made, of, or aboue thre partes at the most, nor yet lesse than
thre neither, if nede so require. for if we haue thre chief groū
                        des
wherupon to rest,Diuision of thre partes at the most. appliyng al our argumentes therūto
we shal bothe haue matter enough to speake of, the hearers
shal with ease vnderstād our meanyng, & the whole Oratiō
shal sone be it at an end. Notwithstandyng this lesson must
not so curiouslie be kepte, as though it were synne to make

the diuision of fower, or fyue partes, but it was spoken
for this ende that the diuision shoulde be made of as fewe
as may be possible, that menne may the better carie it away
and the reporter with more ease maie remember what he
hath to saie. Nowe in praisyng, or dispraisyng, in perswadyng,
or disswadyng, diuisions muste also be vsed. As if one
woulde enueighe against those women that will not geue
their owne chidren sucke, he might vse this deuision. Where
as women commonly put their children furthe to nursyng,
I will first proue that it is bothe against the lawe of nature
and also against Goddes holie wil:
                           
                              •
                           vomen rebuked that nurse not their owne children. Againe I wil showe that
it is harmefull bothe for the childes bodie, and also for his
witte, lastly, I wil proue that the mother selfe falleth into
muche sickenesse thereby.
                     First, nature geueth milke to the woman for none other
ende, but that she shoulde bestowe it vpon her childe. And
we see beastes feede there youngones, and why shoulde not
women? GOD also commaundeth all women to bryng
vp their children.
                     Againe, the childrens bodies shalbe so affected, as the
milke is whiche they receyue. Nowe, if the Nurse be of an
euil complexion, or haue some hidde disease, the childe suckyng
of her brest muste needes take parte with her. And if
that be true whiche the learned doe saie, that the temperature
of the mynde folowes the constitucion of the bodie,
needes must it be that if the Nurse be of a naughtie nature,
the childe muste take thereafter. But be it, the Nurse be of
a good complexion, of an honest behauiour (whereas contrary
wyse Maydens that haue made a scape are commonly
called to bee Nurses) yet can it not bee but that the mothers
mylke shoulde be muche more naturall for the childe,
than the mylke of a straunger.
                     As by experience, let a man be long vsed to one kynde
of drynke, if the same man chaunge his ayre, and his drynke,
he is lyke to mislyke it. Lastely for the mothers, howe
are they troubled with sore brestes besydes other diseases
that happen throughe plentie of mylke▪ the whiche Phisicians
can tell, and women full ofte haue felte. Lykewyse in

speakyng of fastyng, I might vse this diuision. Firste, 
                           〈…〉
                        
godly to fast, because the spirite is more free and ap
                           •
                        er for any
good worke. Again it is wholesome, because thereby euill
humours are waisted, and many diseases either clerely put
awaie, or muche abated of their tira
                           •
                        nie. Lastly it is profitable,
because men spende lesse money, the lesse bankequetyng
that thei vse. Therfore, if men loue either to be wise, godly,
healthfull, or wealthy, let thē vse fastyng, & forbeare excesse.
                     Now vpon a diuision, there might also be made a subdiuision,
as where I saie, it is godly to fast, I might diuide go
                           •
                        
                        linesse,
into the hearyng of Goddes worde, into pra
                           •
                        yng 
                           ••
                        
                        uoutly,
and charitable dealyng with all the worlde.
                     Again, speakyng of healthe, I mighte saie that the whole
body, is not onely more Iustie with moderate fastyng, but al
so more apte for al assaies. The learned man studieth better
when he fasteth, then when he is full. The coūsailor heareth
causes with lesse pain beyng emptie, then he shalbe able after
a full gorge.
                     Again, whereas the fiue senses, bryng vs to the knowleg
                           •
                        
of many thynges: the more apte that euery one is, the mo
                           •
                        e
pleasure thei bryng euer with thē. The iyes se more clerely,
the eares heare more quickely, the tōgue rouleth more roūdly,
and tasteth thinges better, and the nose smelleth euill sauours
the soner.
                     Philosophie is diuided into the knowlege of thynges naturall,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
thynges morall, and into that arte, whiche by reason
findeth out the truthe, commonly called Logique. Nowe of
these three partes of Philosophie, I might make other thre
subdiuisions, and largely set them out. But these maie suffice
for this tyme.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Proposicions.
                     QUintilian willeth, that streight and immediatly after
the Narracion, there should also be vsed suche
sentences, as might bee full of pithe, and contein 
                           〈◊〉
                        
thē the substance of muche matter, the rather that
the hearers maie be stirred vpō the only report, of some sentencious
saiyng, or weightie text in the law. As in speakyng
largely against extorciō, one might after his reasons applied

to the purpose, bryng in a pithie and sentencious proposicion
as thus. Those handes are euill that scratche out the iyes:
and what other dooe thei, that by force robbe their Christian
brethrē? Wo be to that realme, where might outgoeth right
Or thus, whē rage doth rule, and reason doeth waite, what
good mā can hope to liue long in rest. Also an act of a realme
maie wel serue to make a proposicion. As thus. The lawe is
plain: that man shall dye as an offendour, whatsoeuer he bee
thatbreaketh vp another mannes house, and seketh by spoyle
to vndo his neighbour. Now here is no man
                           •
                         that doubteth,
but that thou hast doen this deede, therfore, what nedes any
more, but that thou muste suffer, accordyng to the lawe? In
diuidyng a matter, proposiciōs are vsed, and orderly applied
for the better setting furth of the cause. As if I should speke
of thankfulnesse, I might first shewe, what is thankfulnesse,Thankfulnes, what it is.
next how nedefull it is, and last, how commendable and profitable
it is vniuersally? Thankfulnesse is a kynde of remē
                        bryng
good will shewed, and an earnest desire to requi
                           •
                        e the
same. Without thankfulnesse, no man would do for another.
The brute beastes haue these properties, and therefore man
cannot want thē, without his greate rebuke. Some proposicions
are plain spoken, without any cause, or reason added
therunto. As thus. I haue charged this man with felony, as
you haue hard, but he denieth it: therfore iudge you it, I pray
you Sometymes a cause is added, after the allegyng of a proposiciō.
As thus, I haue accused this man of felonie, because
he tooke my pursse by the high waie side, and therfore I call
for iustice.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         Thus proposicions might bee gathered, nexte and
immediately after the rehersall of any cause, and beautifie
muche the matter, beyng either alleged with the cause annexed, or els beyng plainly spoken, without geuyng any reason
to it at all.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of confirmacion in matters of iudgement.
                     WHen we haue declared the chief poynctes, wherevnto
wee purpose to referre all our reasons, wee
muste heape matter and finde out argumentes, to
confirme thesame to the outermoste of our power,
makyng firste the strongest reasons that wee can, and nexte

after, gatheryng all probable causes together, that beeyng in
one heape, thei maie seme strong, and of greate weighte. And
whatsoeuer the aduersarie hath said against vs, to answere
thereunto, as tyme and place beste maie serue. That if his
reasons be light, and more good maie bee doen in confutyng
his, then in confirmyng our awne: it were best of all to sette
vpon hym, and putte awaie by arte, all that he hath fondely
saied without witte. For prouyng the matter, and searchyng
out the substaunce, or nature of the cause,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         the places of Logique
muste helpe to sette it forward. But when the persone
shalbe touched, and not the matter, we must seke els where,
and gather these places together.
                     
                        i. The name.
                        ii. The maner of liuyng.
                        iij. Of what house he is, of what countre and of what yeres.
                        iiij. The wealthe of the man.
                        v. His behauiour or daily enuryng with thynges.
                        vi. What nature he hath.
                        vij. Whereunto he is moste geuen.
                        viij. What he purposeth frō tyme to tyme.
                        ix. What he hath doen heretofore.
                        x. What hath befaulne vnto hym heretofore.
                        xi. What he hath confessed, or what he hath to saie for hymself.
                     
                     IN well examinyng of all these matters, muche maie
be said, & greate likelihodes maie be gathered, either
to or fro, the whiche places I vsed heretofore, when
I spake of matters in iudgement, against the accused
souldiour. Now in triyng the truth, by reasons gathered of
the matter: we must first marke what was doen at that time
by the suspected persone, when suche and suche offences wer
committed. Yea, what he did, before this acte was dooen. Again,
the tyme muste bee marked, the place, the maner of doyng,
and what hart he bare hym. As thoportunitie of doyng

and the power he had to do this deede. The whiche all sette
together, that either acquitte him, or finde him giltee. These
argumentes serue to confirme a matter in iudgement, for any
hainous offence. But in the other causes which are occupied,
either in praisyng, or dispraisyng, in perswadyng, or diswadyng,
the places of confirmacion, be suche as are before
rehersed, as when wee commende a thyng, to proue it thus.

                           
                              Honest
                              to be doen.
                           
                           
                              Profitable.
                           
                           
                              Easie.
                           
                           
                              Necessarie.
                           
                        
                     
                     And so of other in like maner, or els to vse in stede of
these, the places of Logique. Therefore, when we go
aboute to confirme any cause, wee maie gather these
groundes aboue rehersed, and euen as the case requireth, so
frame our Reasones. In confutyngConfutacion. of causes, the like
maie be had, as we vsed to proue: if we take the contrarie of
thesame. For as thynges are alleged, so thei maie be wrested,
and as houses are buylded, so thei maie bee ouerthrowen.
What though many coniectures be gathered, & diuerse matters
framed, to ouerthrowe the defendaunt: yet witte maie
finde out bywaies to escape, and suche shiftes maie be made
either in auoydyng the daunger, by plain denial, or els by obieccions, and reboundyng again of reasons made, that small
harme shall turue to the accused persone, though the presū
                        ptions
of his offence be greate, and he thought by good reason
to be faultie.Placed of Log
                              ••
                           ue moste nedefull. The places of Logique, as I saied, cannot
be spared, for the confirmacion of any cause. For, who is he,
that in confirmyng a matter, wil not know the nature of it,
the cause of it, theffect of it, what is agreyng therunto, what
likenesse there is betwixt that, and other thinges, what exā
                        ples
maie bee vsed, what is contrary, and what can be saied
aginst it. Therefore, I wishe that euery manne should desire
and seke to haue his Logique perfect, before he looke to profite
in Rhetorique, consideryng the grounde and confirmaciō
of causes, is for the moste part gathered out of Logique.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Of conclusion.
                     A Conclusion is the handsome lappyng vp together,Conclusion, what it is.
and brief heapyng of all that, whiche was saied before,
stirryng the hearers by large vtteraunce, and
plentifull gatheryng of good matter, either the one
waie, or the other.
                     There are twoo partes of a conclusion,Conclusion, of twoo sortes. the one resteth in
gatheryng together briefly, all suche argumentes as wer before
rehersed, reportyng the sōme of them, in as fewe wordes
as can be, and yet after suche a sorte, that muche varietie be
vsed▪ bothe when the rehersall is made, as also after the matter
is fully reported. For, if the repeticion should bee naked,
and onely set furthe in plain woordes, without any chaunge
of speache, or shift or Rhetorique: neither should the hearers
take pleasure, nor yet the matter take effect. Therfore, when
the Oratour shall touche any place, whiche maie geue iuste
cause to make an exclamacion, & stirre the hearers to be sory
to bee glad, or to be offended: it is necessary to vse arte to the
outermoste. Or when he shall come to the repeatyng of an
heinous acte, and the maner thereof: he maie set the Iudges
on fire, and heate them earnestly against the wicked offendor
Thus in repeatyng, arte maie bee vsed, and nexte with the
onely rehersall, matters maie bee handesomely gathered vp
together.
                     The other part of a conclusion resteth, either in augmentyng
and vehemently enlargyng that, whiche before was in
fewe wordes spoken, to set the Iudge or hearers in a heate:
or els to mitigate and asswage displeasure conceiued, with
muche lamentyng of the matter, and mouyng theim thereby
the rather to shewe mercie. Amplificacion is of twoo sortes,
whereof I will speake more at large, in the nexte Chapiter.
The one resteth in wordes, the other in matter. Suche wordes
muste bee vsed, as be of greate weight, wherein either is
some Metaphore, or els some large vnderstandyng is conteined.
Yea, wordes that fill the mouthe, and haue a sound with
them, set furthe a matter very well. And sometymes wordes
twise spoken, make the matter appere greater.
                     Again, when we firste speake our mynde in lowe wordes,

& after vse weightier, the fault likewise semeth to be greater
As whē one had killed a ientleman, thus might another amplifie
his mynd. For one slaue to strike another, wer worthy
of punishement, but what deserueth that wretche, whiche
not onely striketh a manne, but striketh a ientlemanne, and
not onely striketh a ientleman, but cowardly killeth a ientlemanne,
not geuyng hym one wounde, but geuyng hym twentie.
To kill any manne in suche sorte, deserueth deathe, but
what saie you to him, that not onely killeth hym so, but also
hangeth hym moste spitefully vpon a tree. And yet not content
with that, but scourgeth hym, and mangeleth hym whē
he is dedde, and last of all, maketh a iest of his moste naughtie
deede, leauyng a writyng there, aboute the dedde mannes
necke. Now then seyng his crueltee is suche, that thouly killyng,
cannot content his deuilishe deede, and moste dedly malice:
I aske it for Gods loue, and in the waie of Iustice, that
this wicked Deuill, maie suffer worthy death, and bee punished
to the example of all other. Amplifiyng of the matter,
consisteth in heapyng, and enlargyng of those places, whiche
serue for confirmacion of a matter. As the definicion, th
                           •
                        
cause, the consequent, the contrary, the example, and suche
other.
                     Again, amplificacion maie be vsed, whē we make the law
to speake, the dedde persone to make his complaint, the con̄
                        trey
to crie out of suche a deede. As if some worthy manne
wer cast awaie, to make the countrey saie thus: If England
could speake, would she not make suche, & suche cōplaints?
if the walles of suche a citee or toune, had a tongue, would
thei not talke thus and thus? And to bee shorte, all suche
thynges should be vsed, to make the cause seme greate, whiche
concerne God, the commō weale, or the lawe of nature.
For if any of these three bee hindered, we haue a large fielde
to walke in. In praisyng, or dispraisyng, wee muste exaggerate
those places towardes the ende, whiche make menne
wonder at the straungenesse of any thyng. In perswadyng,
or disswadyng, the rehersall of commoditees, and heapyng
of examples together, encrease muche the matter. It were
a greate labour to tell all the commoditees, and all the properties,

whiche belong vnto the conclusion. For suche arte
maie bee vsed in this behalfe, that though the cause bee very
euill, yet a wittie manne maie gette the ouerhande, if he bee
cunnyng in his facultee.
                     The AtheniansAthenians for bad conclusiōs therfore did streightly forbid by a lawe, to
vse any conclusion of the cause, or any enterance of the matter
to wynne fauour. Cicero did herein so excell, that lightly
he gotte the victorie in all matters, that euer he tooke in
hande. Therefore as iust
                           •
                         praise ariseth by this parte, so I
doubte not, but the wittiest will take moste paines in this
behalf, and the honest, for euer will vse the defence of moste
honest matters. Weapons maie bee abused for murder, and
yet weapons are onely ordeined for saufgard.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of the figure amplificacio
                           •
                        .
                     EMong all the figures of Rhetorique, there is no
one that so muche helpeth forwarde an Oracion,
and beautifieth thesame with suche delitefull ornamentes,
as dooeth amplificacion.
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         For if either wee
purpose to make our tale appere vehemente, to seme pleasaunt,
or to be well stored with muche copie: nedes must it be
that here we seke helpe, where helpe chiefly is to be had, and
not els where. And nowe because none shall better bee able,
to amplifie any matter then those, whiche beste can praise, or
moste dispraise any thyng here vpon yearth, I thinke it nedefull,
firste of all to gather suche thynges together, whiche
helpe best this waie. Therefore in praisyng, or dispraisyng,
we muste bee well stored euer with suche good sentences, as
are oftē vsed in this our life, the whiche through arte beyng
encreased, helpe muche to perswasion. As for example, where
it is saied (ientle behauioure wynneth good will, and clerely
quensheth hatered) I mighte in commendyng a noble
ientlemanne for his lowlinesse, declare at large howe commendable,
and howe profitable a thyng, ientle
                           •
                        behauioure
is, and of the other side, how hatefull and howe harmefull,
a proude disdainfull manne is, and howe beastly a nature he
hath, that beeyng but a manne, thinketh hymself better then
any other manne is, and also ouer good to haue a matche

or felowe in this life. As thus, if lowelinesseLowlinesse. and Charitee
maintayne life, what a beaste is he, that throughe hatered
will purchace deathe? If God warneth vs to loue one another,
and learne of him to be ientle, because he was iētle and
humble in harte: howe cruell are thei, that dare withstande
his commaundement? If the subiect rebell against his kyng,
we crie with one voyce, hang hym, hang hym, and shall wee
not thynke hym worthy the vilest death of all, that beeyng a
creature, contempneth his creatour, beyng a mortall manne
neglecteth his heauenly maker, beyng a vile moulde of claie,
setteth lighte by so mightie a God, and euer liuyng Kyng?
Beastes and birdes without reason, loue one another, thei
shroude, and thei flocke together, and shall men endued with
suche giftes, hate his euen christian, and eschewe companie?
When Shepe dooe straie, or cattell doo striue one against another,
there are Dogges ready to call them in, yea, thei wil
bite them (as it hath been full often seen) if twoo fight together:
and shall man wante reason, to barke against his 
                           •
                        ewde
affeccions, or at the least shal he haue none to checke hym for
his faultes, and force him to forgeue? Likewise if you would
rebuke one that geueth eare to backbitersBackbityng. and slaunderers,
ye muste declare what a greate mischief an euill tongue is,
what a poysone it is, yea, what a murder, to take a mannes
good name from hym. We compte hym worthy death, that
poysoneth a mannes body, and shal not he suffer the like pain
that poysoneth a mannes honestie, and seketh to obscure and
darken his estimacion? Menne bee well accepted emong the
wise, not for their bodies, but for their vertues. Now take a
waie the thyng, whereby menne are commended: and what
are menne, other then brute beastes? For beastes do nothyng
against nature, but he that goeth against honestie, thesame
manne fighteth against nature, whiche would that all menne
should liue well. When a manne is killed secretly, wee aske
Iudgement for the offendour, and shall thei escape without
Iudgement, that couertly murder a mannes soule? That
separate hym from GOD, that Iudge hym to helle, whose
life hath euer been moste heauenly? When oure pursse is
piked, we make strieght searche for it agayne, and emprisone

the offendoure, and shall we not seke recouerye of our good
name, when euyll tongues haue stayned it? If our fame be
of more price, then is either golde or gro
                           •
                        es, what meane we
to be so carelesse in kepynge the one, and so carefull in kepynge
the other? Fonde is his purpose that beinge in the
rayne, casteth his garmente in a Bushe, and standeth naked
him selfe, for sauynge the glosse of his gaye coate. And
yet what other thing do they that esteme the losse of money,
for greate lacke: and counte not the losse of their honestie
for anye wante at all? Thus we see, that from vertues and
vyces, suche amplifications maye be made, and no doubt he
that can prayse or dispraise anye thinge plentifullye, is able
moste copiouslye to exaggerate anye matter.
                     Agayne,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         sentences gathered and heaped together commende
muche the matter. As if one shoulde saye: Reuengemente
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
belongeth to God alone, and therby exhorte menne
to pacience: He myghte brynge in these sentences with him,
and geue greate cause of muche matter. No man is hurte
but of him selfe, that is to saye: aduersitie or wronge sufferinge
is no harme to him that hathe a constaunt h
                           •
                        rte, and
liues vpright in all his doynges.
                     He is more harmed that dothe wronge, then he that hath
suffereth wronge.
                     He is the stowter that contemneth, then he is that committeth
wronge.
                     Yea, he gayneth not a little, that had rather suffer much
losse, then trye his ryght by contention.
                     Gaine gotte by fraude, is harme and no gaine.
                     There is no greater victorye, then for manne to rule hys
affections.
                     It is a greater matter to ouercome anger, then to winne
a fortresse or a tower.
                     There is no greater token of a noble harte, then to contemne
wronge.
                     He that requiteth euill for euill: throughe hatred of an
euil manne, is made euyll hym selfe, and therfore worthy to
be hated.
                     He that contemneth his enemye in battayle, is counted

a goodman of warre, and a wise.
                     He that requiteth good for euill, is an aungell of God.
                     He that mindeth reuengemente, is at the next doore to
manslaughter.
                     God is moued wyth nothynge soner to forgeue vs our
                           •
                        
offences, then if we for his sake fo
                           •
                        geue one another.
                     The requitinge of iniuries hath no ende.
                     Strife is best ended throughe Pacience
                     Anger is a madnesse, differing from it in this point only,
that anger is shorte, and tarieth not longe, madnesse abideth
still.
                     It is folye to suffer the fome of a horse, or the striking of
his fote, and not abyde anye thynge that a foole dothe, or a
noughtye disposed felowe speaketh.
                     No man trusteth a dronkard: And yet seyng the dronkēnes
of rage, and madnesse of anger, are much more daungerous
then surfetinge with wyne: he dothe foly shely that trusteth
his owne wytte anye thynge, when he is in a rage. Good
dedes shoulde all waies be remembred, wronge doing shoulde
sone be forgeuen, and sone be forgotten.
                     Againe for liberalitye,Liberality cō
                           mended wyth heapes of sentences. these sentences might serue. It is
the propertie of a God to helpe man. He hathe receyued a
good turne by geuynge, that hath bestowed his liberalitye
vpon a worthye man.
                     He geueth twise, that geueth sone and chearefully.
                     God loueth the gladde geuer.
                     It is a poyncte of liberalitie, sometymes to lose a good
turne.
                     He that geueth to hym that wyll euyll vse it, geueth no
good thing, but an euil thing.
                     Nothyng is more safelye layed vp, then is that whiche is
bestowed vpon good folke.
                     Be not afrayed to sowe good fruite.
                     Nothinge is better geuen to Christe, then is that whiche
is geuen to the pore.
                     No one man is borne for him selfe.
                     He is vnworthye to haue, that hath onelye for him selfe.
                     
                        The thirde kinde of Amplifiynge is when wee gather
suche sentences as are communelye spoken, or elles vse to
speake of suche thynges as are notable in thys lyfe. Of
the first these maye be examples. In lamenting the miserye
of wardeshyppes,Prouerbes alleged, helpe Amplificatiō. I might saie it is not for noughte so communely
said: I wil handle you like a warde. She is a steppe
mother to me: that is to saye, she is not a naturall mother:
who is worsse shodde then the shomakers wife? that is to
saye: gentilmens children full ofte are kepte but meanelye.
Trotte sire, and trotte damme, how should the fole amble,
that is, when bothe father and mother were noughte, it is
not like that the childe wil proue good, without an especial
grace of God.
                     Likeryshe of tongue, lighte of taile: that is, he or she that
will fare dainetelye, will ofte liue full wantonlye. Sone
rype, sone rotten. Honoure chaungeth maners. Enoughe is
as good as a feaste. It is an euill coke that can not li
                           •
                        ke his
owne fingers. I will soner truste mine eye, then myne eare.
But what nede I heape all these together, seynge Heywodes
Prouerbes are in prynte, where plentye are to be hadde:
whose paynes in that behalfe, are worthye immortall
prayse.
                     Thinges notableThynges notable or straunge, helpe forward Amplification. in this life are those, the which chaunce
to fewe. As this: To see a man of an hundred yeres of age.
A yonge chylde as sober as a man of fiftye yeres. A woman
that hath hadde .xxiiij. chyldren. A man once worthe three or
foure thousande pownde, now not worthe a grote. A yong
man fayrer then anye woman. A woman that hath had seuē
or eyght husbandes. A man able to draw a yarde in his bow
besides the feathers. A man merye nowe, and deade wythin
halfe an houre after. There is none of all these, but serue
muche to make oure talke appeare vehemente, and encrease
the weight of communication. As for example, If one woulde
perswade an olde man to contemne the vanities of thys
worlde, he might vse the examples of sodayne death, & shew
that childrē haue dyed in their mothers lappe, some in their
cradell, some stryplinges, some elder, & that not one emonge
a thousande commeth to thre score yeres.
                     
                        Or be it that some lyue an hundred yeares, beyonde the
which not one in this last age passeth, what is there in this
lyfe, for the whiche anye manne shoulde desire to liue longe,
seynge that olde age bringeth this onelye commoditye wyth
it, that by longe liuinge, we see many thinges, that we woulde
not see, and that manye a manne hath shortened his life,
for wearines of this wretched worlde▪ Or what thoughe
some pleasures are to be hadde in this life, what are they al
to the pleasures of the lyfe to come? Lykewise in speakinge
of euill happe, I myght brynge him in that was once worthe
three thousande pounde, and is not nowe worthe three
grotes, and perswade menne either to set lyghte by riches,
or elles to comforte theim, and perswade theim not to take
thought, seyng great harmes haue happened to other heretofore,
and time maye come when God will sende better.
These sentences aboue rehearsed, being largely amplified,
encrease much any suche kinde of matter.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        vhat is amplification.
                     AMplification is a figure in Rhetorique, which cō
                        sisteth
mooste in Augmentynge and diminishynge of
anye matter, and that diuers wayes.
                  
                  
                     The deuision of Amplification.
                     AL Amplification and diminishynge eyther is tak
                           •
                        n
oute of the substaunce in thinges, or els of wordes.
Oute of the substaunce and matter, affections are
deriued: oute of wordes, suche kindes of amplification,
as I wyl nowe shewe, and partly haue shewed before,
when I spake of the Conclusion, or lappynge vp of anye
matter.
                     The firste kinde of Amplification is, when by chaunging
a woorde, in augmentynge we vse a greater, but in diminishynge,
we vse a lesse. Of the firste, this may be an example. When I see one sore beaten, to saye he is slayne: to call
a naughtye felowe, thiefe, or hangemanne, when he is not

knowen to be anye suche. To call a womanne that hathe
made a scape, a commune harlot: to call an Alehouse haunter,
a dronkarde: to call one that is troubl
                           •
                        d with choler,
and often angrye, a madde manne: to call a pleasaunte gentilman,
a raylynge iester: to call a couetous man, a deuill.
                     Of the latter, these examples shalbe: when one hath sore
beaten his felowe, for the same manne to saye that he hathe
scant touched him: When one hath sore wounded another,
to saye that he hurt him but a little: when one is sore sicke,
to be saide he is a little crased.Diminution In lyke maner also, when
we geue vices, the names of vertue, as when I cal him that
is a cruell or mercilesse man, somewhat soore in iudgement.
When I call a naturall foole, a playne symple man: when
I call a notable flatterer, a fayre spoken man: a glutton, a
good felowe at hys table: a spende all, a liberall gentilman:
a snudge, or pynche penye, a good husbande, a thriftye man.
                     Nowe in all these kindes, where woordes are amplified,
they seme muche greater, if by corretionCorrection. the sentence be vtterde,
and greater wordes compared with them, for whome
they are vtterde. In the whiche kynde of speache, we shal
seme as thoughe we wente vp by stayres, not onelye to the
toppe of a thinge, but also aboue the toppe. There is an example
hereof in the seuēth action that Tullie made against
Uerres. It is an offence to bynde a Citezen of Rome with
chaynes, it is an haynous deede to whyppe him: it is worse
then manslaughter to kyll him: what shall I call it to hang
hym vp vpon a gibet? If one woulde commende the aucthoritye
whiche he alledgeth, he myght saye thus. These wordes
are no fables vtterde emonge men, but an assured truth
lefte vnto vs by wrytynge, and yet not by anye commune
writynge, but by suche as all the worlde hathe confirmed
and agreed vpon, that it is autentique, and canonicall: neyther
are they the wordes of one, that is of the commen sort,
but they are the wordes of a doctour in the church of God,
and yet not the woordes of a deuine, or doctoure of the commune
sorte, but of an Apostle: and yet not of one that is the
worste, but of Paule, that is the best of al other: and yet not
Paules, but rather the wordes of the holye ghost, speakyng

by the mouthe of Paule. He that loueth to enlarge by this
kinde, must marcke well the circumstaunces of thinges, and
heapynge them altogether, he shall with ease espye how one
thinge riseth aboue an other. And because the vse hereof extendeth
largelye, I w
                           •
                        ll largelye vse examples. As thus.
If a gentleman and officer of the kinges, beynge ouercharged
at Supper with ouermuche dry
                           •
                        ke, and surfetyng with
gorge vpon gorge, should vomite the next daye in the Parliamente
house: I myght enueyghe thus: O shameful dede,
not onelye in sighte to be lothed, but also odious of all men
to be hearde. If thou haddest done this dede at thyne owne
house beynge at Supper wyth thy wyfe and children, who
would not haue thought it a filthy dede? but now for the to
do it in the Parliamente house, emong so manye gentilmē,
& such, yea, the best in al England: beyng bothe an officer of
the kynges, and a man of muche aucthoritye, and there to
caste oute gobbets (where belchinge were thoughte greate
shame) yea, and suche gobbets as none coulde abyde the
smell, and to fyll the whole house wyth euill sauoure, and
thy whole bosome with muche filthines, what an abhominable
shame is it aboue all other? It had bene a fowle dede
of it selfe to vomite where no suche gentilmen were: yea,
where no gentilmen were: yea, wher no Englysh men were:
yea, wher no men were: yea, wher no cōpany were at al: or
it had ben euil, if he had borne no maner of office, or had ben
no publique officer, or had not bene the kinges officer: but
being not onely an officer, but a publike officer, and that the
kynges officer: yea, & suche a kinges, & doyng such a dede: I
cā not tel in y• world what to say to him. Diuers examples
mayebe inuented like vnto this. As thus, againste an heade
officer in a noble mans house, I myght enueigh thus. Now
Lorde, what a man is he, he was not ashamed beyng a gentilman,
yea, a man of good yeres, and much aucthoritie, and
the heade Officer in a Dukes house, to playe at dyce in an
al
                           •
                        house wyth boyes, bawdes, and verlets. It had bene a
a greate faulte to playe at so vile a game, emonge suche vile
persons, beynge no gentilman, beynge no officer, beyng not
of suche yeres: But beynge bothe a man of fayre landes, of

an auncient house, of great aucthoritie, an officer to a duke,
yea, and to suche a Duke, and a man of such yeres, that his
white heeres shoulde warne him to auoyde all suche foly
                           •
                        ,
to play at suche a game, with suche roysters, a
                           •
                        d such verlets,
y
                           •
                        a, and that in such a house as none come thither but
theues, bawdes, and Ruffians: nowe before God I can not
speake shame enoughe of him. There is an other kynde of
Amplification when vnto the hyghest, there is added some
thinge higher then it is. As thus. There is not a better
preacher emonge theim all, excepte Hughe Latimer, the father
of all preachers. Th
                           •
                        re is no better Latine man within
England, excepte Gualter Haddon the lawe
                           •
                        .
                     Againe, we amplifye a matter not ascendyng by degrees,
but speakinge that thinge onely, than the whiche no greater
thinge can be spoken. As thus. Thou haste killed thyne
owne mother, what shall I saye more, thou hast kylled 
                           •
                        hine
owne mother. Thou hast deceaued thy soueraine Lord and
kinge, what shall I saye more, thou hast deceiued thy soueraine
Lorde and kinge.
                     Sometymes wee amplifie by comparynge, and take oure
grounde vpon the weakest and least, the whiche if they seme
greate, then muste that neades appeare gr
                           •
                        ate, whyche wee
woulde amplifie and encrease. As Tullie againste Catiline.
My seruauntes in good south, if they feared me in such sort,
as all the Citezens do feare thee: I would thinke it best for
me to forsake my house. Thus by vsing the lesse first, this sē
                        tence
is encreased, fewe seruauntes are cōpared with all the
citezens, bondmen are compared with free men: Tullie the
master, is compared with Catiline the traytour, which was
neither lord nor ruler ouer the Citezens: and Tullies house
is compared with the Citye.
                     By comparing of examples, we vse also to encrease oure
matter. As thus. Did the Maior of London thrust throughe
Iacke Straw beinge but a verlet rebell, and onely disquietinge
the Citye: and shall the kynge suffe
                           •
                         Capi
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        ne
Kete to liue in Englandes grounde, and 
                           ••
                        ioye the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
of his realme, beinge a most tyrannou
                           •
                         tray
                           •
                        oure, a
                           •
                        d such
a rebell as sought to ouerthrow the whole Re
                           ••
                        m
                           •
                        ?
                     
                        Here is Iacke Strawe compared with Capitaine Ket
                           •
                        
the Citye of London, with the whole Realme, the Maio
                           •
                        
with the kinge. So that if he which is a priuate person, and
hathe no power of deathe, myghte punyshe wyth deathe the
disquietynge of a Citye: the kynge him selfe hauynge all power
in his hande, maye iustelye punishe hym that seketh to
ouerthrowe his whole realme.
                     The places of Logique helpe ofte for Amplification. As,
where men haue a wronge opinion, and thynke theft a greater
faulte then slaunder, one myght proue the contrarye aswell
by circumstaunces, as by argumentes. And first he might
shewe that slaunder is thefte, and that euerye slaundererSlaunder, a greater off
                              •
                           
                           ̄ce then theft
                              •
                           
                        
is a thiefe. For as well the slaunderer as the thiefe, doe
take away an other mannes possession againste the owners
will. After that he might shewe that a slaunderer is worse
then anye thiefe, because a good name is better then all
the goodes in the worlde: and that the losse of money maye
be recouered, but the losse of a mannes good name, can not
be called backe againe, and a thefe maye restore that agayne
whiche he hath taken awaye, but a slaunderer can not geue
a man his good name againe, whiche he hath taken frō him.
Agayne, he that stealeth goodes or cattell, robbes onely but
one man, but an euill tongued man infecteth all their mindes:
vnto whose eares this reporte shall come.
                     Besides this, there are lawes & remedies to subdue theues:
but there is no lawe agaynste an euyll tongue. Agayne,
all suche haynous Offences are euer the more greuouslye
punished, the more closlie, and more craftelye they are committed. As it is thought a greater faulte to kyll one with
poyson, then to kyll him with the swerde, and a more haynous
offence to cōmit murder, then to cōmit māslaughter:
we maye gather an argument also from the instrumente or
maner of doyng. As a thefe hath done this offence wyth hys
hande, a slaunderer hath done it with his tongue. Agayne,
by the iudgement of al menne, enchauncement is a notable
euill: But they that infecte a prynce or a kinge wyth wycked
counsayle, are not they more wycked enchaunters, considerynge
they doe as muche as if one shoulde Poyson a

conduite head, or a Riuer from whence al men featche their
water. And yet they do more, for it is a greater fault to poison
the mynde, than the bodie. Thus by the places and circumstaunces,
great matter might be made.
                     By contrraries set together, thynges oftentymes appere
greater. As if one shoulde set Lukes Ueluet against
Geane veluet, the Lukes wil appere better, and the Geane
wil seeme worser. Or sette a faire woman against a foule,
and she shal seeme muche the fairer, and the other muche the
fouler. Accordyng whereunto there is a saiyng in Logique▪
                        Contraria inter se opposita magis elucescunt. That is to
say, Contraries beyng set, the one against the other, appere
more euident. Therefore if any one be disposed to set fur
                           •
                        he
chastitie, he may bryng in, of the contrari
                           •
                         parte, whordome,
and show what a fouly offence it is to liue so vnclenly, and
then the deformitie of whoredome shall muche sette forthe
chastitie: or if one be disposed to perswade his felow to learnyng
and knowlege, he may showe of the contrarie what a
naked wretche, man is, yea how muche a man is no man, and
the life no lyfe, when learnyng o
                           •
                        es wāteth. The lyke helpe
we may haue by comparyng lyke examples together either
of creatures liuyng, or of thynges not liuyng: As in speakyng
of constauncie, to showe the Sonne who euer kepeth
one course: in speakyng of incōstaunce to showe the Moo
                           •
                        e
whiche keepeth no certaine course. Againe, in younge
StorkesStorkes. wee may take an example of loue towardes their
damme, for when she is olde, and not able for her crooked
bil to picke meat, the youngones fede her. In young Uipers
                           
                              •
                           ipers.
there is a contrary example (for as Plinie saieth) they eate
out their dammes wombe, and so come forthe. In Hennes
there is a care to bryng vp their chickens, is Egles the contrarie,
whiche caste out their egges if thei haue any mo then
thre: and al because they woulde not be troubled with bryngyng vp of many.
                     There is also a notable kynde of amplification when we
would extenuate and make lesse, great faultes, which before
we did largely encrease: to thende that other faultes might
seeme the greatest aboue all other. As if one had robbed his

maister, thrust his felow through the arme, accōpaned with
harlottes, kepte the tauerne till he had been as dronke as a
ratte: to say after a large inuectiue against al these offences.
You haue heard a whole court roule of ribauldrie and yet al
these are but fle bitynges in respect and comparison of that
which I shal now show you. Who doth not loke for a maru
                           •
                        ilouse
great matter & a most hainouse offence, when those
faultes that are thought moste greuouse are counted but fle
bitynges in respect and comparison of that whiche he myndeth
to reherse? In like maner, one might exhort ye people to
godlinesse, and whereas he hath set forthe al the commodities
that folowe the same, as in showyng a quiet conscience
not gilty of any great faulte, the libertie of spirite, the peace
whiche we haue with GOD, the felowship with al the electe,
for the seruant of Sathan, to be the sonne of GOD
the comforte of the soule, the greatenesse wherof no man is
able to conceiue: to say at lengthe, and what can be greater,
what can be more excellent, or more blesseful? & yet al these
are smal matters if thei be cōpared with the blessed enheritaunce
of the euerliuing God prepared for al those that liue
Godlie here vpon earthe, fastenyng there whole trust vpon
Christe aboue, whiche bothe is able, and will saue all those
that ca
                           •
                         vnto him with faith. We do encrease our cause by
reasonyng the matter and casting our accompt, when either
by thynges that folow, or by thynges that go before, or elles
by suche thynges as are annexed with the matter, wee geue
sentence how great the thyng is. By thynges goyng before
I iudge when I see an 
                           •
                        nuiouse, or hasty man fight wi
                           •
                        h an
other as hastie, that there is lyke to be bloudshed. As who
should saie, can enuiouse, or hastie men matche together, but
that they must needes trie the matter with bloudshedyng?
Assuredly it can not be otherwyse but that bloude must appease
their rage. Likewyse seeyng two wyse men earnestly
talkyng together, I cannot otherwyse iudge but that their
talke must nedes be wittie, and concerne some weightie matter.
For to what ende shoulde wyse men ioyne, or wherefore
shoulde they laie their heades together, if it were not for
some earnest cause? wh
                           •
                        t a shame i
                           •
                         it for a strong man, of

muche health & great manhode, to be ouercome with a cuppe
of drynke. Frō thynges ioyned with the cause, thus. A woman
hauyng her housbande emprisoned, and in daunger of
death, soubdenly steppe before the Kyng and craued his pardon.
Bold was that womā whiche durst aduenture to knele
before a Kyng, whose housband had so greuously offended.
Though wo
                           •
                        en by nature are fearful, yet in her appered a
manly stomake, and a good bolde harte, yea euen in great
                           •
                        st
daunger. By thynges that folowe, thus, al England lament
the death of Duke Henrie and Duke Charles twoo noble
brethren of the house of Suffolke. Then may we wel iudge
that these two ientlemen were wonderfully beloued, when
they both were so lamented.
                     There is a kynde of Amplifiyng, when in speakyng of .ii.
that fought together, wee praise hym muche that had the
worse, because we would the other to haue more praise. Cō
                        sideryng
for a man to beate a boye, it were no praise, but for
a talle man to matche with an other, that were as talle as
hym selfe: that were somwhat worthe. Therfore I woulde
haue the Scottes wel praised, whome the Englishmen haue
so often vanquished. He that praiseth muche 
                           •
                        he stronghold
of Boleine, must nedes thereby praise kyng Henry the .viij.
of England, who by martial power, wonne it, and kepte it
al his lyfe tyme. Or thus. Suche a one kepes a marueilouse
good house, for the worst boie in his house drynkes one and
thesame drynke with his master, and al one bread, yea euery
one hath his meate in siluer, chamber vessels, and all are of
siluer. We iudge by apparel, by armour, or by harnesse what
a man is of stature, or biggenes. We iudge by occasion, the
goodnes of men, as when they might haue doen harme, thei
would not, when they might haue slaine, thei sought rather
to saue. Frō the place where one is, encrease may be gatherd
As thus. Beyng euen in the Court, he was neuer moued to
gāmyng, beyng at Rome, he hated harlottes, where thereis
by report so great plentie as there are starres in the elemēt.
                     From the tyme thus, he must needes be well learned in
the lawes of our Realme that hath been a student this thirtie
wynter.
                     
                        From the age: assuredly, he is lyke to be good, for beeyng
but a childe he was euer most godlie.
                     From the state of lyfe: no doubt but he is honest, for beyng
but a seruaunt he lyued so vprightely, as none coulde
iustly blame his lyfe.
                     From the hardenesse of a thyng. That whiche is almost
onely proper to Aungels must nedes be harde for man: therefore
chastitie is a rare gifte, and harde for man to kepe.
                     From the straungenesse of a thyng. Eloquēce must nedes
bee a wonderful thyng, when so fewe haue attained it.
                     Lykewyse notable aduentures doen by a fewe, are more
praise worthy than suche as haue been done by a great nombe.
Therfore the battail of Muskelborow against the Scottes
where so fewe Englishmen were slaine, and so many
Scottes dispatched: must nedes be more praise worthie, than
if the nomber of Englishmen had been greater.
                     Uehemencie of woordes full often helpe the matter forwarde,
when more is gatherde by cogitacion, than if the
thyng had been spoken in plaine woordes. When wee heare
one say suche a mā swelled seyng a thyng against his mynd,
we gather that he was then, more than half angrie. Againe,
when wee heare one saie, suche a woman spittes fier, we gather
streight that she is a Deuill. The Preacher thunderde
in the Pulpite, belyke then he was metely hoote. But concernyng
all suche speaches, the knowlege of a Metaphore,
shall bryng men to muche knowlege, (whereof I wil speake
hereafter emong the figures) and therefore I surcease to
speake of it in this place.
                     We encrease our cause by heapyng of wordes & sentences
together, couchyng many reasons into one corner which
before were scaterde abrode, to thentent that our talke might
appere more vehement. As when by many coniectures and
great presumptions we gather that one is an offendor, heapyng
them al into one plumpe, whiche before were sparpled
abrode, and therefore did but litle good.Amplification by coniectures As thus: To proue
by cōiectures a murder committed, I might thus say against
a suspected person. My Lordes do not weye my wordes and
sentences seuerally, but consider them all altogether. If

the accused persone here shall receiue profite by this other
mans deathe, if his lyfe heretofore hath euer been euill, his
nature couetouse, his wealthe most slendre, and that this
dead mans gooddes could turne to no mans auaile so muche
as vnto this accused person, and that no man could so easely
dispatche him, and that this man could by no better meanes
compasse his desier, and that nothyng hath been vnatt
                           •
                        mpted
whiche might further his naughtie purpose, & nothyng
doen th
                           •
                        t was thought needelesse, and seeyng a meete place
was chefely sought for, and occasion serued very wel, & the
tyme was most apt for suche an attempte and many meanes
heretofore deuised to compasse this offence, and greate hope
bothe to kepe it close, and also to dispatche it, and besydes
that, seeyng this man was seen alone a litle before in the
same place, where this other man was slaine, and that this
mans voice whiche did slaye hym was hard a litle before in
the same place where this other man was slaine, and seyng
it is well knowne that this man came home late the same
night, and the nexte daie after beyng examined, did answere
confusedlie, fearefullie, and as though he were amased, and
seeyng al these thynges are partely showed by wittenesses,
partely by good reason, partely by his owne confession, and
partely by the reporte that comonly goeth of hym, whiche
by lyke is not spoken without some ground: It shalbe your
partes worthie iudges wayng al these thynges together to
geue certaine iudgement of hym for this offence, and not to
thynke it a matter of suspicion. For it might haue been that
thre of foure of these coniectures beyng proued, might geue
but onely a cause of suspicion, but whereas all these together
are plainely proued by hym, it can not be otherwise but
that he hath offended.
                     It is an excellent kynd of Amplifiyng when thynges encreased,
and thynges diminished are both set together, that
the one may the rather beautifie the other. As if, when
Gods goodnesse towardes vs wee largely amplified, we did
streight extenuate our vnthanfulnesse towardes him again.
As thus: Seeyng God hath made man a creature vnto his
owne likenesse, seeyng he hath geuen hym lyfe, and the spirite

of vnderstandyng, endewyng hym with h
                           •
                        s manifolde
graces, and redemyng hym not with vile money, but with
his owne preciouse bodie, sufferyng deathe, and blodesheddyng
vpon the Crosse, the rather that man might lyue for
euer: what an vnthankefull parte is it, yea what an hainouse
thyng is it for man so ofte to offende, so ofte to wallowe
in suche his wickednesse, and euermore for Goddes
louyng kyndnesse, to showe hym selfe of all other creatures
most vnkynde?
                     Lykewyse contraries beyng rehersed and the euil immediatly
vtterde after the good, make muche for encrease. As
many men now a daies for sobrietie, folowe gluttonie, for
chastitie, take leachery, for truthe, lyke falsehode, for gentlenesse,
seeke crueltie, for iustice, vse wrong dealyng, for heauen, hell, for God, the Deuill: to whome they will without
peraduenture, it Goddes grace be not greater.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of mouyng affections.
                     BEcause the beautie of Amplifiyng, standeth most in
apte mouyng of affections:Affections mouyng. It is needefull to speake
somewhat in this behaulfe, that the better it may
be knowne what they are, and howe they maie bee
vsed. Affections therefore (called Passions) are none other
thyng, but a stirryng, or forcyng of the mynde, either to desier,
or elles to detest, and lothe any thyng, more vehemently
then by nature we are commonly wonte to doe. We desier
those thynges, we loue them, and lyke them earnestly, that
appere in our iudgement to be goodlie, we hate and abhorre
those thynges, that seeme naughte, vngodlie, or harmefull
vnto vs. Neither onely are wee moued with those thynges
which we thinke either hurtful, or profitable for our selues,
but also we reioyce, we sorie, or we pitie an other mannes
happe.
                     And euermore there are twoo thynges whiche moue vs,
either this waie, or that waie. The matter selfe whiche doth
happen, or is lyke to happen: and the person also whome the
matter dothe concerne. As for example: If a wicked wretche
haue his desertes, we are al glad to heare it, but if an innocent

shoulde be cast away, we thynke muche of it, and in stomake
repine against wrong iudgement. If an euil man finde
muche fauour, we enuie his good happe, yea it greeu
                           •
                        th vs,
th
                           •
                        t any suche shoulde haue suche fauour showed: And not
on
                           •
                        ly doe we hate the euil, that are come to any wealth, but
also we enuie commonly all suche as come to any preferrement,
especially if either they haue been as poore men as
we are, or elles came of a meaner house than we haue done.
No one man woulde haue any to be better than hym selfe,
and euery one enhableth his owne goodnes to deserue lyke
dignitie with the best. And whereas some haue go
                           •
                        te before,
startyng so
                           •
                        bdeinly from an inche to an elle, we spare not
to saie that flattery made theim speede, and though they
haue muche gooddes, yet are they cleare voide of all goodnes,
and therefore muche good may it do theim, we woulde
not come by gooddes in suche sorte to wynne al the worlde▪
for the Deuill and they (saie wee) shall parte stakes with
theim one daie. And thus wee can neuer bee content to geue
our neighbour a good woorde. Yea though they haue serued
right well, and deserued a greate rewarde, wee muste
needes finde some faulte with theim to lessen their praises,
and saye that though their desertes bee great, yet their natures
are nought: none so proude, though fewe bee so hardy:
none so enuiouse, though fewe so faithfull: none so couetouse,
though fewe so liberall: none so gluttonouse,
though fewe kepe suche an house. And thus, thoughe wee
graunt them one thyng, yet we will take another thyng as
fast againe from them.
                     Suche a man is an excellent felowe (saieth one) he can
speake the tongues wel,
                           
                              •
                           vith praisyng: dispraisyng vsed. he plaies of instrumentes few men
better, he fey
                           •
                        eth to the Lute marueilouse swetely, he endites
excellently: but for all this (the more is the pitie) he
hath his faultes, he will bee dron
                           ••
                        e ones a daie, he loues
women well, he will spende Goddes coope if he had it, he
will not tarye longe in one place, and he is somewhat
large of his tongue. That if these faultes were not,
surely he were an excellent fellowe. Euen as one shoulde
saie: If it were not for liyng and stealyng, there were not

an honester man than suche a one is that perchaunce hath
some one good qualitie to set hym forwarde. These 
                           •
                        uttes
bee to brode, and these barres be ouer bigge, for looke what
is geuen to one by commendyng, the same is streight taken
away by buttyng. Therfore suche are not to be lyked that
geue a man a shoulder of mutton, and breake his heade with
the spitte when thei haue doen. And yet this is many a mās
nature, especially where enuie hath any grounded dwellyng
place, whose propertie is alwaies to speake nothyng of other
without reproche and slaunder.
                     In mouyng affections, and stirryng the iudges to be greued,
the weight of the matter must be so set forth, as though
they saw it plaine before their 
                           •
                        yes, the report must be suche
and the offence made so hainouse, that the like hath not been
seene heretofore, and al the circūstaunces must thus be heaped
together:Descriptio
                              •
                            of an euil & wicke offence doen. The naughtines of his nature that did the
dead, the cruel orderyng, the wicked dealyng and maliciouse
handelyng, the tyme, the place, the maner of his doyng, and
the wickednesse of his wil to haue doen more. The man that
susteined the wrong, how litle he deserued, how wel he was
estemed emong his neighbours, home small cause he gaue
hym, how great lacke men haue of hym. Now, if this be not
reformed, no good man shal lyue saufe, the wicked wil ouerflowe
al the world, & best it were for sauegard to be nought
also, and to take parte with them, for no good man shal goe
quiet for them, if there be not spedie redresse found, and this
faulte punished to thexample of al other.
                     Quintiliane coucheth together in these few wordes the
ful heape of suche an heauouse matter, by gatheryng it vp
after this sorte.
                     
                        i. What is doen.
                        ij. By whome.
                        iij. Against whome.
                        iiij. Upon what mynde.
                        v. At what tyme.
                        vi. In what place.
                        vij. After what sorte.
                        viij. How muche he would haue doen.
                     
                     
                        IF one b
                           •
                        e beaten blac
                           •
                        e and blewe,what is d
                              •
                           en. wee take it greuously:
but if one be slain▪ we are muche more troubled.
Again, if a slaue or ruffine shall do suche a dede
we are displeased,By whom. but if an officer, a preacher, or an
hed i
                           •
                        ntleman, should vse any slauerie, wee are muche more
agreued. Yea, or if a very notable euill man, commit suche
an horrible offence, we thynke hym worthy to haue the lesse
fauor. If a sturdy felowe be stroken,Against who
                              •
                           
                         we are not so muche disquieted,
as if a child, a woman, an aged man, a good man, or
a chief officer, should be euil vsed. If the offence be committed
vpon
                           
                              •
                           pon what mynde. a prepensed mynde, and wilfully, wee make muche
more a do, then if it were doen by chaūce medly.At what 
                              〈◊〉
                           . If it be doen vpon an holy daie, or els vpon 
                           •
                        he daie of Assise, or vpon the
daie of a kynges coronacion, or about suche a sol
                           •
                        mpne tyme
or if it bee dooen in the nighte, rather then at Noone daies,
we make the matter greater, then if it had b
                           •
                        en dooen at another
tyme.In what place In the course if one strike a man, it is 
                           •
                        hought
greater, then if he should strike hym in the op
                           •
                        n streate. The
maner of dooyng also, doeth muche moue the pacience of mē
as if one should cowardly kill one,After what sorte. and strike hym sodainly▪
he were worthy greater blame, then if he should manfully set
vpon hym: or if one kill his felowe secre
                           •
                        ly with a gunne▪ he
wer worthy more h
                           •
                        tred, then if he killed hym with a sword
or if he wounded hym sore, or cruelly mangeled hym, we crie
out muche more, then if he had barely killed hym. And las
                           •
                         of
al, if his will had been to haue doen muche more then he did:How muche he would.
we encrease our anger against his rage muche more, then euer
we would els haue doen.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of mouyng pitee.
                     Nowe in mouyng pitie, and stirryng menne to mercie, the
wrong doen must first be plainly told: or if the Iudges haue
susteined the l
                           ••
                        e excremit
                           •
                        e, the best wer to will them to remēbre
their awn state, how thei haue been abused in like maner,
what wronges thei haue suffered by wicked doers: that
by hearyng their awne, thei maie y• better hearken to others.
                     Again, whereas all other miseries, that befall vnto man,
are greuous to the 
                           •
                        are, there is nothing more he
                           •
                        nous, then
to heare that the most honest men, are son
                           •
                        st ouerthrowe
                           •
                         by

thē that are moste wicked, and vertue put to flight, through
the onely might of vice. That if the like hath not happened,
vnto the hearers of this cause, yet it wer mere to shewe thē
that the like maie happē, and so require them to geue iudgement
in this cause, as thei would doo in their awne, and rem
                           •
                        mber
that harme may chaunce to euery one, that perhappes
chaunceth to any one. And no doubt euery man remembryng
hymself, and his awne case, will loke well about hym,
and geue iudgement, accordyng to right.
                     Neither can any good be doen at all, when we haue saied
all that euer we can, excepte we bryng thesame affeccions in
our awne harte, the whiche wee would the Iudges should
beare towardes our awne matter.He that will stirre affecciōs to other▪ muste first be moued hymself. For how can he be greued,
with the report of any heinous acte, either in stomackyng the
naughtinesse of the deede, or in bewailyng the miserable misfortune
of the thyng, or in fearyng muche, the like euill hereafter:
excepte the Oratour hymself vtter suche passions outwardly,
and from his harte fetche his complaintes, in suche
sort, that the matter maie appere, bothe more greuous to the
eare, & therwith so heinous, that it requires earnestly aspedy
reformacion? There is no substaunce of it self, that wil take
fire, excepte ye put fire to it. Likewise no mannes nature is
so apt, streight to be heated,Heate, causeth heate. except the Orator himself, be on
fire, and bryng his heate with hym. It is a common saiyng,
nothyng kyndeleth soner then fire. And therefore a fierie stomack,

                           •
                        auseth euermore a fierie tongue. And he that is heated
with zeale and godlinesse, shall set other on fire with like affe
                           •
                        cion.
No one man can better enuiegh against vice, then he
can do▪ whiche hateth vice with al his harte. Again, nothyng
moyste
                           •
                        h soner then water.A wepyng iye 
                              •
                           r
                              •
                           uoketh m
                              •
                           ysture. Therefore a wepyng iye causeth
muche moysture, and prouoketh teares. Neither is it any
meruaile: for suche men bothe in their countenaūce, tongue,
iyes, gesture, and in all their body els, declare an outwarde
grief, and with wordes so vehemently and vnfeinedly, settes
it forward, that thei will force a man to be sory with them,
and take part with the
                           •
                        r teares, euen against his will, 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        
                        withstandyng,
when suche affe
                           •
                        ciō
                        
                           •
                         are moued, it wer good

                           •
                        ot to stande long in thē. For though a vehement talke maie

moue teares, yet no arte can long hold theim. For as Cicero
doth saie, nothyng drieth soner, then teares, especially when
we lament another mans cause, & be sory wt him for his sake
                     But now that I haue taught men to be sory, I wil attēpt
again to make them mery, and shewe what learned men saie
concernyng laughter, in delityng the hearers whē tyme and
place shall best require.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of de
                           •
                        ityng the hearers, and stirryng them to laughter.
                     COnsideryng the dulnesse of mannes nature,Laughter m
                              •
                           uyng. that neither
it can be attentiue to heare, nor yet st
                           ••
                        red to like
or allowe, any tale long tolde, except it be ref
                           •
                        eshed, or
finde some swete delite: the learned haue by wit
                           •
                        e and
labor deuised muche varietee. Therefore sometymes in tellyng
a weightie matter, thei bryng in some heuy 
                           〈◊〉
                        , & moue
thē to be right sory, wherby the hearers are more attentiue.
But after when thei are weried, either with 
                           ••
                        diousnesse of
the matter, or heuines of the report: some pleasant matter is
inuēted both to quicken them again, & also to kepe th
                           •
                        im frō
sacietie. But surely fewe there be, that haue this gift in due
tyme to chere men. Neither can any do it, whom nature h
                           •
                        th
not framed, & geuen an aptnes therunto. Some mannes coū
                        tenaūce
will make pastyme, though he speake neuer a worde
Yea, a foolishe worde, vttered by an apte manne, or a gesture
straungely vsed by some pleasant body, set
                           •
                        es men ful oft vpon
a laughter. And whereas some thinke it a trifle, to haue
this gift, & so easy, that euery varlet or common iesture is able
to matche with the best: yet it appereth that thei, whiche
wittely can be pleasant, & when time serueth, can geue a mery
answere, or vse a nippyng taunte, shalbee able to abashe a
righte worthy man, & make hym at his wittes ende, through
the sodein quip & vnloked frsipe geuen. I haue knowen some
so hit of the thūbes, that thei could not tell in y• world whether
it were beste to fighte, chide, or to go their waie. And no
meruaile: for wher ye iest is aptly applied, the hearers laugh
immediatly, & who would glad
                           •
                        y be laughed to scorne? some
can pretely by a word spoken, take occasiō to be right mery.
Other can iest at iarge, & tel a round tale pleasantly, though
thei haue none occasion at that tyme geuen. But assuredly

that mirth is more worth, whiche is moued by a word newly
spoken, then if a long tale should pleasauntly be told. For
asmuche as bothe it cometh vnlooked for, and also declares a
quickenesse of witt
                           •
                        , worthy commendacion. There are fiue
thynges, whiche Tullie note
                           •
                        h, concernyng pleasaunt talke.
                     
                        i. What it is to delite the hearers.
                        ij. Whereof it cometh.
                        iij Whether an orator may moue laughter
                        iiij. How largely he maie go, and what measure he must vse.
                        v. What are the kyndes of sportyng, or mouyng to laughter.
                     
                     Now to tell you in plain woordes, what laughter is, how
it stirreth and occupieth the whole body, how it altereth the
countenance, and sodainly brasteth out, that we cannot kepe
it in: Let some mery man on Goddes name, take this matter
in hande. For it passeth my cunnyng, and I thynke euen thei
that can best moue laughter, would rather laugh merily whē
suche a question is put furthe, then geue answere earnestly,
what, and how laughter is in deede.
                     The occasion of laughter, and the meane that maketh vs
merie (whiche is the second obseruacion) is the fondnes, the
filth nes, the deformitee, and all suche euill behauior, as we
se to bee in other. For wee laugh alwaies at those thynges,
whiche either onely or chiefly touche handsomely, and wittely
some especiall fault, or fonde behauior in some one body,
or some one thing. Sometymes we iest as a mānes body that
is not well proporcioned, and laugh at his countenaunce, if
either it be not comely by nature or els he through foly, cannot
wel set it. For if his talke be fond, a mery man can want
no matter to hit hym home, ye maie be assured. Some iest is
made, when it toucheth no man at al, neither the demaunder
neither the stāders by, nor yet any other, and yet deliteth as
muche the hearers, as any the other can do. Now when wee
would abashe a man, for some woordes that he hath spoken,
and can ta
                           •
                        e none adu
                           •
                        untage of his persone, or makyng of
his body, wee either doulte hym at the firste, and make hym

                           •
                        eleue, that he is no wiser then a Goose: or 
                           •
                        ls wee confute

wholy his saiynges, with some pleasaunt iest, or els we extenua
                           •
                        e
and diminishe his doynges, by some pretie meanes, or
els we cast the like in his dishe, and with some other deuise,
dashe hym out of countenance: or last of all, we laugh him to
skorne out right, and sometymes speake almost neuer a word
but onely in countenaunce shewe our selfes pleasaunt.Mirthe howe many waies 
                              〈◊〉
                            is moued. But
how soeuer we make sport, either the delite is vttered by coū
                        tenaunce,
or by poynctyng to some thyng, or els shewed at
large by some tale, or els occasiō taken by some word spoken
                     The .iij question is, whether it standeth with an Orators
professiō, to delite the hearers with pleasaunt reportes, and
wittie saiynges, or no. Assuredly it behoueth a mā, that must
talke muche, euermore to haue regard to his audience, & not
onely to speake so muche as is nedefull, but also to speake no
longer then thei be willyng to heare Euen in this our tyme,
some offende muche in tediousnesse, whose parte it were to
cōfort all men with cherefulnes. Yea, the preachers of God,Prea
                              •
                           he
                              •
                           s▪
                        
mynd so muche edefiyng of soules, that thei often forget, we
haue any bodies. And therefore, some doo not so muche good
with tellyng the truthe, as thei doe harme with dullyng the
hearers, beyng so farre gone in their matters, that oftentymes
thei cannot tell when to make an ende.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         Pla
                           •
                        o therefore,
the father of learnyng, and the well of all wisedome, when
he hard Antisthenes make suche a long oraciō, that he starke
weried all his hearers, phy for shame man (ꝙ he) doest thou
not knowe, that the measuryng of an oracion, standeth not in
the speaker, but in the hearers. But some perha
                           •
                        ps wil saie
vnto me pascite quantum in uobis est, to whom I answere,
estote prudentes.
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Peter .v. Math .x. And now bicaus
                           •
                         our senses be suche, that
in hearyng a right wholsome matter, wee either fall a sl
                           •
                        pe,
whē we should moste harken, or els are weried with stil hearyng
one thyng, without any change, and thinke that the best
part of his tale, resteth in ma
                           •
                        yng an ende: the wittie & learned
haue vsed delitefull saiynges, and quicke sentences euer

                           •
                        mong their weightie causes, cōsideryng that not onely good
wil is got therby (for what is he that loueth not mirth?) but
also men wounder at suche a head, as hath mennes hartes
at his commaundement, beyng able to make theim merie when

he list, and that by one worde speakyng, either in answeryng
some thyng spoken before, or els oftentymes, in geuyng the
onset, beyng not prouoked thereunto. Again, we se that men
are full oft abashed, and putte out of countenaunce, by suche
tauntyng meanes, and those that haue so dooen, are compted
to be fine men, and pleasaunt felowes, suche, as fewe dare set
foote with them.
                     Thus knowyng, that to moue s
                           •
                        orte, is lawfull for an orator,
or any one that shall talke, in any open assembly: good
it were to knowe, what compasse he should kepe, that should
thus be merie. For feare he take to muche ground, and go beyonde
his boundes.Iestyng when it should bee spaced. Therfore, no suche shou
                           •
                        d be taunted, or
iested with all, that either are notable euill liuers, and heynous
offendours: or els are pit
                           •
                        full caitifes, & wretched beggers.
For euery one thinketh it a better and a meter deede, to
punishe naughtie packes, then to shoffe at their euill demeanoure:
and as for wretched soules, or poore bodies, none can
beare to haue thē mocked, but thinke rather, that thei should
be pitied, except thei foolishely vaunt thēselfes. Again, none
suche should be made any laughy
                           •
                        g stockes, y• either are honest
of behauiour, or els are generally welbeloued. As for other,
we maie be bold to talke with them, & make suche game
and pastime, as their good wittes shal geue good cause. But
yet this one thyng, we had nede euer to take with vs, that in
all our iestyng we kepe ameane, wherin not onely it is mete
to auoyde al grosse bourdyng, and alehouse iestyng, but also
to eschue al folishe talke, & ruffin maners, such as no honest
eares can ones abide, nor yet any wittie man can like well,
or allowe.
                  
                  
                     ¶The diuision of pleasau
                           •
                        t behauiour.
                     PLeasauntnesse, either appereth in tellyng a rounde
tale,Mirthe makyng, twoo waies vsed. or els in takyng occasiō of some one worde. The
matter is told pleasauntly, when some mannes nature
(whereof the 
                           •
                        ale is tolde,) is so set furthe, his
countenaunce so counterfeited, and all his iesture so resembled,
that the hearers might iudge the thing, to be then liuely
doen, euen as though he were there, whereof the 
                           •
                        ale was
told. Some can so l
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        ly set furthe another mannes nature,
and with suche grace reporte a tale: that fewe shalbe able to

forbeare laughter, whiche knowe bothe parties, though thei
would the cōtrary neuer so fain. Now in 
                           •
                        ount
                           •
                        rf
                           •
                        ityng after
this sort▪ if suche moderacion be not vsed, that the hearer
maie iudge more by hymself, then the pleasant disposed man
is willyng fully to set furth: it will not be well liked. For he
that excedeth and telleth all: yea, more then is nedefull, without
al repect, or consideracion had: thesame shalbe taken for a
common iesture, suche as knowe not howe to make an ende,
when thei once b
                           •
                        ginne, beyng better acquainted with bible
bable, then knowyng the frute of wisedomes lore.
                     Pleasantnesse in a saiyng,Pleasauntnes in a 
                              •
                           aiyng. is stirred by the quicke altryng
of some one worde, or of some one sentēce. But euen as in reportyng
a tale, or counterfeityng a manne, so muche is euer
naught: so scurrilitie or (to speake in old plain english) knauery
in iestyng would not be vsed, where honestie is estemed
Therfore though there be some wit, in a pretie deuised ieste:

                           •
                        et we ought to take hede, that we touche not those, whō we
would be moste loth to offend. And yet some had as l
                           •
                        u
                           •
                         lose
their life, as not bestowe their conceiued iest, and oftentimes
thei haue, as thei desire. But shall I say of suche wilful men,
as a Spaniard spake of an earnest Gospeller, that for woordes
spoken against an Ecclesiasticall lawe, suffered death in
Smithe fielde? Ah miser, non potuit tacere & uiue
                              •
                           e? Ah
wretche that he was, could he not liue, and held his peace?
                     Again, to iest when occasiō is geuen, or when the iest maie
touch al mē: it is thought to be against al good maner. Therfore
the consideracion of time,Di
                              •
                           ference betwi
                              •
                           te a common ieste
                              •
                            and a pleasaunt wise manne. & moderacion of pastyme, & s
                           •
                        ldome
vsyng of drie mockes, euen when nede moste requireth,
make a difference, and shewe a seuerall vnderstandyng, betwirte
a common iester, and a pleasaunt wise man.
                     Now the time requireth, to shew what kindes there are of
mouyng laughter, & makyng the hearer to be mery: notwithstāding
this would first be learned, that out of diuerse pleasant
speches, aūcient saiynges also maie be gathred. As for exāple
we maie by one worde, bothe pra
                           •
                        se a faithfull seruaūt
and if he be naught, we maie also iest of him, & dispraise him.
According to that mery saiyng of Nero, vpō his man y• was
light fingered. I haue one at home (ꝙ he) emōg all other, to

whom there is no cofer lockt, nor dore shut in all my house▪
meanyng that he was a picklocke, and a false verl
                           •
                        t, and yet
these wordes might haue been spoken of a faithfull seruaunt.
                     We shall delite the hearers,Pleasaunt answeres made, cōtrary to our lokyng, delite vs muche. when thei looke for one answere,
and we make theim a cleane contrary, as though wee
would not seme to vnderstande, what thei would haue. As
when one commyng frō a faire, and beyng asked in good sadnesse
of another, howe horses went there. Marie ꝙ he, some
trotte, and some amble. And thus beyng deceiued of our lookyng
(for who would haue lookte for suche an answere?) we
are oft delited with our awne errour. Again, one Pontidius
beyng sore greued, that another mā had cōmitted aduoutrie
came to a frend of his, and saied sadly: Ah lorde, what thinke
you sir of hym, that was taken in bedde of late▪ with another
mannes wife? Marie ꝙ the other, I thynke him to be a very
sluggard. Pōtidius hearyng him saie so, was abashed at the
straungenesse of h
                           •
                        s answere, and lokyng for no suche thyng
was driuen to laugh at his awne errour, although before, he
was muche greued with thaduouterers moste wicked deede.
                     One beyng sore greued with the euill behauiour of a certain

                           •
                        entlemā, spake his pleasure largely against hym, whervpon
another merie man, dissēblyng to take his part, said he
was an honester mā then so. Yea (ꝙ thother) what one thing
hath he, wherby to proue himself honest at al? Marie (ꝙ the
man) he hath the kynges pardon, & what saie you to tha
                           •
                        ?
                     Whē is it best to dine (ꝙ one) to Diogenes?Diogenes. Mary (ꝙ he)
for a riche man, when he list: for a poore man w
                           •
                        en he canne.
                     A nob
                           •
                        e man that whilome kept a chapell, beyng disposed
to serue God, went to his closette deuoutely, and made hym
self redy to praie, wherupon one came doune in hast, and said
to the Chaunter, you muste begin sir. The Chaunter beyng
a merie man, answered thus, as though he were angry. Begin
ꝙ he? I will begin with none, e
                           •
                        cept thei begin with me
And so made the whole Quier, that then was redy for syngyng,
to fall streight a laughyng The whiche is all one, for,
syng we, or laugh we, what maketh matter, so we be merie?
                     Wordeswordes doubt fully spoken. doubtfully spokē, geue oftē iust occasiō of muche
laughter. Ah (ꝙ a certa
                           •
                        n man) do you se yonder felowe, & do

you knowe him? Yea, (quod the other) I knowe him verye
well. I shall tell you sir (saide the gentilman) there is not
a manne of greater vnderstandinge within this Citye then
he is. Tushe it is not so (quod he.) No? (saide the other)
marcke well the bought of his legge, and you sha
                           •
                        l see hys
vnderstand
                           •
                        nge worthye to be compared with the beste, and
greatest of them all.
                     Sometimes it is well liked, whan by the chaungynge of
a letter,Chaungyng of a letter, or al
                              •
                           ering parte of a word, or adding a silla
                           
                              •
                           le. or takinge awaye some parte of a worde, or addinge
sometimes a sillable, we make an other meaninge. As one
saide that meante full vnhappelye, enue
                           •
                        ghynge againste
those that helde of Christes spirituall beynge in the Sacramēt:
some (quod he) wil haue a Trope to be in these wordes:
This is my bodye: But surely I would wishe the T.
were taken awaye, and they had that for their labour, whiche
is lefte behinde.
                     What carye you master Person (quod a gentilman) to a
Prieste that hadde his woman on horsebacke behynde him,
haue you gotte your male behinde you? No syr (quod the
Prieste) it is my female.
                     The interpretation of a worde doth oft declare a witte.Interpreta
                              ••
                           
                           on of a word.
As when one hath done a robbery, some wil saye, it is pitie,
he was a handsome man, to y• which another made answere
you saye truthe syr, for he hathe made these shyftes by hys
handes, and gotte his liuyng wyth lyght fingeringe, & therfore
beinge handsome as you saye he is, I woulde God he
were handsomelye hanged.
                     Sometimes it is delightfull when a mannes word is taken,
and not his meaninge.
                           
                              •
                           vordes tak
                              •
                            and not the meanyng. As when one hadde sayde to an
other (whose helpe he must nedes haue) I am sory sir to put
you to paynes: The other aunswered, I will ease you syr of
that sorowe, for I will take no paynes for you at all.
                     The turning of a word, & deniynge that wherwith we are
charged, & aunsweringAn aunswere from euyll to worse. a much worsse, doth often moue the
hearer. There was one Bassus (as Quintilian dothe tell)
whiche seinge a Ladye called Domitia to be very nighe her
selfe, spake his pleasure of her. Wherupon she being greued
charged hym wyth these woordes, that he shoulde saye she

w
                           •
                        s suche a pyuche penye, as woulde sell her olde shoue
for money,
                           
                              ••
                           udgynge wit
                              •
                           ely re
                              •
                           uked. whereupon he aunswered, No forsothe mad
                           •
                        me
(quod he) I saide not so, but these were my wordes, I
saide you bought olde sho
                           •
                        e, suche as you coulde ge
                           •
                         beste
cheape for money.
                     The Hollanders woordes ars worthye rehearsall, who
beynge a pore man (as Erasmus telleth the tale) had a cow
or two goyng in 
                           •
                        he communes, wherupon it happened that
an Oxe of a riche mans, who then was Maior of the towne
hadde gored the pore mannes cowe, and almoste kylled her.
The pore man being in this case halfe vndone, thought notwithstanding
by a wittye deuise to get right iudg
                           •
                        ment of
master Maior for the losse of his cowe, if he gotte nothynge
elles, and therfore thus he framed his tale.A wittie deuised tale to g
                              •
                           t ryght iudgmēt Sir so it is that
my cowe hath gored and almoste kylled your Oxe. What
ha
                           •
                        h she (quod he) by sainte Marye thou shalte pay for him
then. Naye (quod the poore man) I crye you mercye, youre
Oxe hathe gored my cowe. Ah (quod the Maior) that is an
other matter, we wyl talke of that hereafter at more leasure
                     These wordes were spoken of purpose, but now you shal
heare what an olde woman spake of simplicitie. In the dotynge
worlde, when stockes were saintes, and 
                           •
                        umme walles
spake, this olde grandamme was deuoutelye kneling vpon
her knees before the ymage of our Ladye. Wherupon a
merye felowe asked her what she meante to crouche & knele
there. Marie (quod the olde mother) I praye to our Ladye,
that she maye praye to her Sonne for me: with that he
laughed at her ignoraunce.A 
                              〈◊〉
                            bly
                              •
                           d answere Wherupon she thinkinge that
her wordes were spoken amisse, corrected her owne sayinge
in this wise. Naye (quod she) I praye to Christe in heauen,
that he will praye for me to this good Ladye here.
                     Wordes rehearsed contrarie to that which was spoken, &
(as a man would say) ouerthwartly answered,
                           
                              ••
                           ordes o
                              •
                           ert
                              •
                           wartly aunswered. do much abash
the opponent, & delite the hearers. As when Sergius
Galba being sicke, & therfore 
                           •
                        eping his house, had appointed
certaine of his frēdes to hear a matter of one Libo Scribonius,
Tribune of the people, a man muche noted for hys
noughtye and vncleane life: this Libo saide to him in this

wise. Good Lorde, when shall wee see you Sir abroade,
out of youre Parloure. Marye (quod he) when thou kepeste
thy selfe oute of an other mannes chambre, meanynge
that he was ouer familiar with an other mans wife. Thus
we se howe and in what maner pleasaunt sawes are gathered
and vsed, vpon the occasion of diuers wordes spoken.
                  
                  
                     Pleasaunte sporte made by rehearsynge of 
                           •
                         whole matter
                     THe nature & whole course of a matter being largelye
set oute with a comelye behauoure doth much
delite the hearers, and geu
                           •
                        th good cause of greate
pastime. And this difference is betwene a 
                           •
                        este in a
word, and a iest vtterde in a longe tale. That whiche is still
deliteful, with what wordes soeuer you tell it, is cont
                           •
                        in
                           •
                        d
in the substaunce or nature of a lōge tale:
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            betwirt a 
                              〈◊〉
                            in a word, 
                              〈◊〉
                            a 
                              •
                           est in a long
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           ale. that which loseth
his grace by alteration of a worde, is conteyned in the nature
of a woorde. They that can liuely tell pleasaunt tales
and merye dedes done, and set theim oute as well with gesture
as with voyce, leauynge nothynge behynde, that maye
serue for beautifiynge of their matter: are mooste mete for
thys purpose, wherof assuredlye there are but fewe. And
whatsoeuer he is that canne aptelye tell his tale, and wyth
countenaunce, voyce, and gesture, so temper his reporte,
that the hearers maye styll take delyte: him counte I a man
worthye to be hyghlye estemed. For vndoubtedlye no man
can dooe anye suche thinge, excepte they haue a greate mother
wytte, and by experience confirmed suche their comelines,
wherunto by nature they were most apte. Many a mā readeth
histories, heareth fables, seeth worthye actes done
euen in this our age, but few can set them out accordingly,
and tel them liuely, as the matter selfe requireth to be told
The kindes of delitinge in this sorte are diuers: wherof I
will set forth many, as hereafter they shall folowe.
                  
                  
                     Sporte moued by tellinge olde tales.
                     IF there be any olde tale or straunge history wel & wittely
applied to some mā liuing, al mē loue to hear it of
life. As if one wer called Arthur, some good felow that

were well acquainted wyth kynge Arthures bok
                           •
                        , and the
knightes of his rounde table, woulde wante no matter to
make good sporte, and for a nede woulde dubbe him knyght
of the rounde table, or els proue him to be one of his kynne,
or 
                           •
                        ls (whiche were muche) proue him to be Arthure hym
selfe. And so likewise of other names, mery panions would
make madde pastime.
                     Oftentimes the deformitieDeformitie of bodye moueth myrthe. of a mans bodye geueth ma
                           •
                        
                        ter
enoughe to be ryght merye, or els a picture in shape lyke
an other man, will make some to laughe right hartely. One
being greued with an other man, saide in his anger, I will
set the oute in thy coloures, I will shewe what thou arte.
The other beinge therwith muche chafed, shewe (quod
he) what thou canste: with that he shewed him, (pointinge
with his finger) a man with a bottell nose, blobbe cheaked,
and as redde as a Bouchers bowle, euen as like the other
manne, as anie one in all the worlde could be. I neede not
to saye that he was angrye. An other good felowe beinge
merelye disposed, called his acquaintaunce vnto him & said:
Come hither I saie, and I wil shewe thee as verye a lowte
as euer thou sawest in all thy lyfe before, with that he offered
him at his commynge a stele glasse to loke in. But surelye
I thynke he loked awrye, for if I hadde bene in hys case,
I woulde haue tolde him that I espied a muche greater lowte,
before I sawe the glasse.
                     In augmentyngeAugmentyng or d
                              •
                           minishynge or diminishinge without all reason, we
geue good cause of muche pastyme. As Diogenes seynge a
pretye towne, hauinge a greate payre of Gates at the comminge
in: Take hede quod he, you menne of this towne, lest
your towne runne out of your gates. That was a marueylous
bygge Gate I trow, or els a wonderfull little towne,
where suche passage shoulde be made.
                     A Frier disposed to tell misteries, opened to the People
that the soule of man was so little, that a leuen thousande
might daunce vpon the nayle of his thumbe. One marueylinge
much at that, I praye you master Frier quod he, wher
shall the piper stande then, when suche a number shall kepe
so small a roume.
                     
                        Mirthe is moued when vpon a trifle or a worde spoken,
an vnknowen matter and weightyeOpenynge a weyghtye 
                              〈◊〉
                            vnknowen 
                              •
                           hynge affayre is opened. As if
one shoulde finde fault with some mannes sumptuous buildinge,
or other suche thinge: whiche hadde founde muche fa
                        
                           •
                        oure
at the same mans hande: an other myght saye, well
sir, he that builded this house, saued your worship from hanginge
when the time was. A nececessarie note for him thā
                        kefullye
to remembre the builder of that house, & not slaunderouslye
to speake euil of him.
                     It is a pleasaunt dissembling,Dissemblyng
                              •
                           
                         when we speake one thing
merelye, and thyncke an other earnestlye, or elles when we
prayse that which otherwise deserueth disprayse, to the shaming
of those that are taken to be most honest.
                     As in speakinge of one that is well knowen to be nought,
to saye emong all men that are sene to, there is one that lacketh
his rewarde. He is the diligentiest felowe in hys callinge
of all other, he hath traueyled in behalfe of his countrey,
he hath watched daye and night to further his cōmune
weale▪ and to aduaunce the dignitye therof, and shall he go
emptye home? Who stode by it at suche a felde, who played
the man and cryed, stoppe the thiefe, when suche a man was
robbed? Who seeth good rule kept in suche a place? can anye
here charge him with bawdrye? Whiche of you all dare
saye or can say that euer you sawe him dro
                           •
                        ke, if then these
be true, ought not suche to be sene to: and rewarded accordingelye?
For praysinge the vnworthye, I remember once
that our worthy Latimer did set out the deuyll for his diligence
wonderfullie, and preferred him for that purpose before
all the Bishoppes in England. And no doubte, the wicked
be more busye and stirrynge, then the children of light be
in their generation.
                     What talke you of suche a man (say the an other) there is
an honest man ye maye be assured. For if a man had neade of
one, he is ready at a pynche, his body sweates for honesty, if
you come to him in a hotte sommers day, you shal se his honestye
in such sort to reeke, that it woulde pitye any christian
soule liuinge. He hath more honestye with him then he
neades, and therfore bothe is able and will lende, where it

pleaseth him best. Beware of him aboue all menne that e
                           •
                        uer
you knewe. He hathe no felowe, there is none suche, I
thinke he wil not liue longe▪ he is so honest a man, the more
pitye that suche good felowes shoulde knowe what deathe
meaneth. But it maketh no matter, when he is gone, all
the worlde will speake of him, hys name shall neuer dye, he
is so well knowen vniuersallye.
                     Thus we maye mockingelye speake well of him, when
there is not a noughtyer felowe wythin all. Englande agayne,
and euen as well sette out his noughtines this way,
as thoughe we hadde in verye dede vttered all his noughty
conditions plainelye, and without iestinge. Emonge al that
euer were pleasaunte in this kinde of delite, Socrates beareth
the name, and maye worthelye chalenge prayse. Sir
Thomas More with vs here in England▪ had an excellent
gifte not onely in this kinde, but also in all other pleasaunt
delites, whose witte euē at this houre is a wonder to al the
worlde, & shalbe vndoubtedly, euen vnto the worldes ende.
Unto this kinde of dissembling, is nexte adioyn
                           •
                        nge a maner
of speache, when wee geue an honeste name to an euyll
deede. As when I woulde call one accordingly that is of a
noughtye beha
                           •
                        oure, to saye: Ah sirrha, you are a marchant
in dede: Wher as I thinke a marchauntes name is honest.
Some olde felowes whē they thinke one to be an heritique
they will saye, he is a gospeller. Some newe felowes when
they thinke one a Papist, they wil call him straight a catholique,
& be euen with him at the landes ende. Contrariwise
some will geue an 
                           •
                        uil name to a good thinge: As a father
louynge his Sonne tenderlye, and hauynge no cause to be
greued with him, will sometimes saye to him: Come hither
sir knaue, and the mother merelye beynge disposed, wyll
saye to her swete Sonne: Ah you little horeson, wyll you
serue me so. Where as I thyncke some womenne that ofte so
saye, wil sweare vpon a booke they are none suche, and
almoste I hadde sayde, I dare sweare for some of theim
my selfe, if God hadde not forbidden me to sweare at all.
                     This Kynde also is pretye, when we gather an other

thinge by a mannes t
                           •
                        le, then he woulde 
                           •
                        ladly we shoulde
gather. When Liuius Sali
                           •
                        ator a Romayne capitaine
hadde kepte the Castell of Taren
                           •
                        um losinge the towne to
Anni
                           •
                        al his enemye,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         and that Maximus therupō had layed
siege to the same towne, and gotte it againe by the swerde:
then Sali
                           •
                        ator whyche thus kepte the Castell, desiered
him to remember, that throughe his meanes he gotte the
towne, Why shoulde I not (quod he) thyncke so? for if you
had neuer lost it, I had neuer gotte it.
                     To dissemble sometymes as thoughe wee vnderstode
not what one meant, declareth an apte witte, 
                           •
                        nd much deliteth
such as heare it. Diogenes
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . was asked on a time what
wyne he loued beste to drincke. Marye (quod he) an other
mannes wyne, meanynge that he loued that dryncke beste,
that coste him leaste. The same Diogenes likewyse was
asked what one shoulde geue hym to lette him haue a blowe
at his heade. Marye a Helmet quod he.
                     One Octa
                           •
                        ius a Libian borne (as witnesseth) Macrobius
sayde vnto Tullie when he spake hys mynde vpon a
matter. Sir I heare you not, I praye you speake owder.
No (quod Tullie)? that is maruaile to me, for as I do remember,
your eares are well bored thorowe, meanynge that
he was nayled vpon a Pillarie, or 
                           •
                        lles hadde holes made
in his eares, whyche myght well serue (as Tullie iested) to
receiue open ayre.
                     Whē Mettellus toke muster & required Cesar to be there,
not abiding yt he should be absent, thoughe his eyes greued
him, and said: What man do you se nothing at all? Yes marye
quod Cesar, as euil as I se, I can se a lordship of yours
the which was .iiii. or .v. miles from Rome) declaringe that
(his building was ouer sumptuous, and so howge with
                           •
                        ll,
(muche aboue his degree) that a blind man myght almost se
it. Nowe in those dayes ouercostlye building was generally
hated, because men sought by suche meanes to get fame &
beare rule in the commune weale.
                     The like also is of one Nasica who when he came to the
Poet Ennius, and askinge at the gates if Ennius were at

home, the maide of the house, beinge so commaunded by her
m
                           •
                        ster, made aunswere that he was not within. And when
he perceyued that she so said
                           •
                         by her maisters commaundemente,
he wente straight his waye, and saide on more.
                     Nowe shortelye after when Ennius
                           
                              •
                           nnius pleasaunt answer to Nasica came to Nasica and
called for him at the dore, Nasica cried out alowde & sayde,
Sirrha, I am not at home? What manne (quod Ennius) I
heare the speake. Do not I knowe thy voyce? Then (quod
Nasica) Ah shamelesse man that thou arte, when I sought
thee at thy home, I did beleue thy maide when she said thou
wast not at home, and wilte not thou beleue me when I tel
thee myne owne selfe that I am not at home?
                     It is a pleasaunte hearynge, when one is mocked
                           
                              •
                            mā m
                              •••
                           ed with the s
                              •
                           me he bryngeth with
the same that he bryngeth. As when one. Q. Opimius hauinge
an euill name for hys light behauoure had saide to a
pleasaunte man Egilius that semed to be wanton of liuing,
and yet was not so: Ah my swete darling Egilia, when wilt
thou come to my house swete wenche, with thy rocke & thy
spindle? I dare not in good faith (quod he,) mi mother hath
forbidde me to come to anye suspected house where euil rule
is kepte.
                     Those iestes are bitter whiche haue a hid vnderstanding
in them, wherof also a man maye gather muche more then is
spoken. A homelye felowe made his woful lamentation to
Diogenes in most pitiful sorte, because his wife had hanged
her selfe vpon a Figge tree, hopinge to finde some comforte
at his hande. But DiogenesDiogenes doggysh aunswe
                              •
                            in despyte of 
                              •
                           omen. hearinge this straunge deede,
For the loue of God (quod he) geue me some slippes of that
tree, that I might set them in some orcharde. The frute liked
him well, and belyke he thought that such slippes woulde
haue bene as good to dispatche noughtye womenne, as
lime twigges are thought mete to catch wild birdes withal
                     An Archideacon, beyng nothinge so wise as he was welthy,
nor yet so learned, as he was worshipfull, asked a yo
                           •
                        ge
man once, whether he hadde a good witte, or no. Yes mary
sir (quod he) your wytte is good inoughe if you kepe it still,
and vse it not, for euerye thinge as you knowe is the worsse
for the wearinge. Thou sayest euen truth (q
                           •
                        od he) for that

is the matter that I neuer vsed preachyng
                           •
                         for it is no
                           •
                        hyng
but a waistyng of wit
                           •
                        e, and a spen
                           •
                        yng of wynde. And 
                           •
                        et
if I woulde preache, I thynke I could do as wel as the best
of them. Yea sir (ꝙ he) but yet I would ye should 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                         proue
is for feare of strainyng your selfe to muche: Why? Do
                           ••
                        t
thou feare that (ꝙ he?) nay thou maist be assured, I w
                           •
                        l neuer
preache so long as I lyue, God beeyng my good Lorde.
There are ouer many Heretiques, for good meanyng men
to speake any thyng now a daies. You saie euen truth (ꝙ the
young man) and so went forthe, but to tel al, I had neede to
haue tyme of an other worlde, or at the lest to h
                           •
                        ue breathe
of an other bodie.
                     An vnlearned Oratour made an Oratiō on a tyme, thynkyng
that he had with his wel doyng deli
                           •
                        ed muche al m
                           •
                        n,
& moued them to mercie & pitie, & therfore sittyng doune, he
asked one Catulus if he had not moued the hearers to mercie.
Yes marie (ꝙ he) & that to great mercie & pitie bothe, for
I thynk there is none here so hard harted, but thought your
oratiō very miserable, & therfore nedeful to be greatly pi
                           •
                        ied.
                     Churlishe aunsweres, lyke the hearers some tymes very
well. When the father was cast in iudgement, the sonne
seyng hym wepe: Why wepe you father? (ꝙ he) To whome
his father aunswered: What? Shall I syng I praie the,
seeyng by a lawe I am condempned to dye. Socrates lykewyse
beeyng mo
                           •
                        ed of his wyfe because he shoulde dye an
innocent and giltelesse in the lawe: Why for shame woman
(ꝙ he) wilt thou haue me to dye giltie & deseruyng. When
one had fal
                           •
                        e into a ditche, an other pitiyng his fall, asked
hym, and said: Alas how got you into that pit? Why, Gods
mother (ꝙ the other) doest thou aske me how I gotte in, nay
tel me rather in the mischief how I shal gette out.
                     There is an other contrarie vnto this kynd, when a man
suffereth wrong, & geueth no sharpe answere at al. As when
Cato was stroken of one that caried a chest (some saie a lōg

                           •
                        owle) when the other said, after he had hit hym: Take hede
sir I pray you: why (ꝙ Cato) doest thou cary any thyng els.
                     Folie and lacke of naturall wit, or els wante of honestie
geue good matter of myrthe often tymes. When Scipio beyng

Pretor had appoincted vnto a certaine Sicilian, one
to be his lawyer that was of a good house, and had an euill
witte, litle better than half a foole: I praie you (ꝙ the Sicilian
to Scipio) appoint this lawier for myne aduersarie,
and let me haue none at al hardely.
                     In speakyng against an euill man,
                           
                              •
                           vishyng. & wishyng somewhat
thereupon, a iest may seene delitefull. When an euill man
had accused many persons, and none toke any harme by hym
but rather were acquited from tyme to tyme, and taken the
sooner for honest men: Now would to Christes passion (ꝙ a
naughtie fellow) that he were myne accuser, for thē should
I bee taken for an honest man also, through his accusacion,
Demonides hauyng crooked feete, lost on a tyme bothe his
shoone, wherupō he made his praier to God that his shoone
might serue his feete that had stolne them away. A shrewde
wishe for hym that had the shoone, and better neuer weare
shoone, than steale them so dearely.
                     Thynges gathered by cōiectureConiectures. to seeme otherwise than
they are, delite muche the eares being wel applied together.
One was charged for robbyng a Churche, and almost euidently
prou
                           •
                        d to be an offendour i
                           •
                         that behaulfe▪ the saied
man to saue hymself harmelesse, reasoned thus: Why (ꝙ he)
how should this be, I neuer robbed house, nor yet was euer
faultie in any offence besides, how then shoulde I presume
to robbe a Churche? I haue loued the Churche more than
any other, & wil louers of the Churche robbe the Churche?
I haue geuen to the Churche, howe happeneth that I am
charged to take frō the Churche hauyng euer so good mind
to church dignitie? assure your selues thei passed litle of the
Churche, that would auenture to robbe the Churche. Thei
are no Churche men, they are masterlesse men, or rather S.
Niclas Clarkes, that lacke liuyng, and goyng in procession
takes the Churche to be an Hospitall for waie fairers, or a
praie for poore and nedie beggers: but I am not suche man.
                     Thynges wantyng,Thynges wantyng. make good pastyme beyng aptely vsed.
Alacke, alacke, if suche a one had somewhat to take to,
& were not past grace: he would doe well enough without all
doubt. I warrant hym, he wantes nothyng saieth an other

of a couetouse man but one thyng, he hath neuer enough.
                     Suche a man hath no fault, but one, and if that were amend
                           •
                        d,
all were well: what is that ꝙ an other? In good
(faith) he is nought.
                     To geue a familiar aduise in the waie of pastyme, deliteth
muche the hearers.Familiare aduise geuyng. Whē an vnlerned lawyer had been
hourese and almost lost his voice with ouerlong speakyng,
one Granius gaue him counsel to drynke swete wine could,
so sone as he came home. Why (ꝙ he) I shall lose my voice,
if I do so. Marie (ꝙ he) and better do so, then vndo thy cliē
                        
                           •
                        
and lose his matter altogether.
                     But among all other kyndes of delite there is none that
so muche comforteth and gladdeth the hearer,Thynges 
                              •••
                           
                           ken contrarie to expcction. as a thyng
spoken contrarie to therpectation of other. Augustus Emperour
of Rome seeyng a handsome young man there, whiche
was muche like vnto hymselfe in contenaunce, asked hym if
euer his mother was in Rome, as thoughe he had been his
bastard. No forsouth (ꝙ he) but my father hath been here very
oftē: with that themperour was abasshed, as though the
emperours own mother had been an euil womā of her body
                     When an vnlearned Phisicion (as England lacketh none
suche) had come to Pausanias a noble Ientleman, and asked
him if he were not troubled muche with sicknes. No sir
(ꝙ he) I am not troubled at al, I thancke God, because I
vse not thy counsaill. Why doe ye accuse me (ꝙ the Phisicion)
that neuer tryed me? Mary (ꝙ Pausanias) if I had
ones tryed the, I shoulde neuer haue accused the▪ for then
I had been deade, and in my graue many daies agone.
                     An English Phisiciō ridyng by the way, & seyng a great
cōpany of men gatherd together, sent his mā to know what
the matter was, whereupō his man vnderstandyng that one
there was appointed to suffer for killyng a mā: came ridyng
backe in al post haste, and cried to his master, long before he
came at him: Get you hence sir, get you hēce for Gods loue.
What meanes thou (ꝙ his master). Mary (ꝙ the seruaunt)
yonder man shal dye for killyng of one man, and you I dare
saye, haue kilde a hundreth menne in your daies: Gette you
hence thereore for Gods loue, if you loue your selfe.

Examples bee innumerable that serue for this purpose.
                     A man may by hearyng a loude lye,A lye mocked with a lye. pre
                           ••
                        ly mocke the lye
by reportyng a greater lye. When one beyng of a lowe degre
and his father of meane welthe, had vaunt
                           •
                        d muche of the
good house that his father kepte, of two Be
                           •
                        fes spent wekelie,
and halfe a score Tunne of wyne dronke in a yeare, an
other good fellowe hearyng hym lye so shamefully: I deede
(ꝙ he) Beefe is so plētiful at my master your fathers house
that an Oxe in one daie is nothyng, and as for wyne, Beggers
that come to the doore are serued by whole gallondes.
And as I remēber your father hath a spryng of wyne in the
middest of his Court, God continue his good house kepyng.
                     Oftentymes we may graunt to an other, the same that
they wil not graunt to vs.Grauntyng to o
                              •
                           her thesame, that they wil not graunt to vs. When a base born felowe whose
parentes were not honest, had charged Lelius that he did
not liue ac
                           •
                        ordyng to his auncesters: yea, but thou doest liue
(ꝙ Lelius) accordyng to thy elders.
                     One beeyng a ientlemen in byrthe, and an vnthrifte in
condicions, called an other man in reproche begger & slaue.Better be born a begger, than dye a begger.
In dede Sir (ꝙ the poore man) you are no begger borne, but
I feare me ye wil dye one.
                     An other lykewyse called Diogenes varlet and caitif, to
wh
                           •
                        me Diogenes aunswered in this wyse. In dede suche a
one haue I been as thou now art, but suche a one as I now
am, shalt thou neuer be.
                     SalustSalust. beeyng a ientleman borne, and a man of muche
welth, and yet rather by birthe, noble: than by true dealyng
honest: enuied muche the estimacion whiche Tullie had emong
al men, and said to hym before his face: Thou art no
ientleman borne, and therefore not meete to beare Office in
this commune weale: In dede (ꝙ Tullie) my nobilitie begynnes
in me, and thyne dothe ende in the. Meanyng thereby
that though Salust were borne noble, yet he were lyke
to dye wretched, whereas Tullie beeyng borne both poore,
and base, was lyke to dye with honour, because of his vertue,
wherein chefely consisteth nobili
                           •
                        ie.
                     There is a pleasauntPleasaunt di
                              •
                           
                           sem
                              •
                           lyng in outwarde behauiour. kynde of di
                           •
                        semblyng when twoo
meetes together, and the one cannot well abyde the other:

and yet they both outwardely striue to vse pleasaunt behauiour,
and to show muche courtesie: yea to cōtende on both
partes, whiche should passe other in vsyng of faire wordes,
and makyng liuely countenaunces: sekyng by dissemblyng,
the one to deceiue the other.Checkyng a lyar with an open mocke.
                     
                     When we see a notable lye vtterde, we checke the offendour
openly with a pleasaunt mocke. As when one Uibius
Curius did speake muche of his yeares and made hym selfe
to be much yoūger then he was: (ꝙ Tullie) why than master
Uibius as farre as I can gather by my reckenyng, when
you and I declamed together last, you were not then borne
by al likelyhoode, if that be true whiche you saie.
                     When Fabia Dolobella said to thesame Tullie that she
was but thirtie yeres of age (as women by their good willes
would neuer be olde) I thynke so (ꝙ Tullie) for I haue
heard you saie no lesse, xx. yeres ago.
                     A Souldiour that thoug
                           •
                        t his estimacion stoude moste
in the vertue of his hande gunne, made a marueilouse braggue
of it, and said he was able to showte leauel a great deale
farther than any one there would beleue hym to saye truth:
wherpō he called for his man to beare witnesse of the same,
and asked hym whether it were so, or no. In deede (ꝙ his
man) you say truth, but then you muste remember Sir, you
had the wynde with you when you shotte so farre. Belyke
he thought, there woulde neuer come suche a wynde again.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Of disposicion and apte orderyng
of thynges.
                  I Haue trauailed hetherto in teachyng the right way
to fynde meete matter for euery cause, vsyng suche
Arte as my slender witte coulde beste yelde. And
now, nexte and immediatly after inuention, I thinke
meete to speake of framyng and placyng an Oration in order,
that the matter beeyng aptely sartelde, and couched together:
might better please the hearers, and with more ease
be learned of all men. And the rather I am earnest in this
behaulfe, because I knowe that al thynges stande by order,

and without order nothyng can be. For by an order wee are
borne, by an order wee lyue, and by an order wee make our
end. By an order one ruleth as head, and other obey as mē
                     bers.
By an orderOrder of what sorte it is. Realmes stande, and lawes take force.
Yea by an order the whole worke of nature and the perfite
state of al the elementes haue their appointed course. By an
order we deuise, we learne, and frame our dooynges to good
purpose. By an order the Carpenter hath his Squyre, his
Rule, and his Plumme
                        •
                     . The Tailour his mette Yarde, &
his measure: The Mason his Former, and his Plaine, and
euery one accordyng to his callyng frameth thynges thereafter.
For though matter be had, and that in greate plentie:
yet al is to no purpose, if an order be not vsed. As for example:
What auaileth Stoone, if Masons doe not worke it?
What good dothe clothe, if Tailours take no measure, or
do not cutte it out? Though Tymber be had for makyng a
Shippe, and al other thynges necessarie, yet the shippe shal
neuer be perfite, till worke men begynne to set to their handes,
and ioyne it together. In what a comenly order hath
God made man, whose shape is not thought perfite, if any
parte be altered? yea al folke would take hym for a monster,
whose feete should occupie the place of his handes. An army
neuer getteth victorie, that is not in araie, and sette in good
order of battail. So an Oration hath litle force with it, and
dothe smally profite, whiche is vtterde without all order.
And needes must he wander, that knowes not howe to goe,
neither can he otherwyse chouse, but stumble: that gropyn
                        •
                     
in the darke, can not tel where he is: Yea he must nedes both
leaue muche vnspoken, repeate often, thynges spokē before,
not knowing what, nor wher to speake best: that geues hym
selfe rather to take the chaunce of fortune, than to folowe
the right way of aduised counsell. What shoulde a man do
with a weapon that knoweth not howe to vse it? What
though one haue mountaines of golde, what auaileth hym
to haue suche heapes, if he cannot tel how to bestow them?
It is not enough to haue learnyng, but it is al to vse learnyng.
Therefore because this parte of bestowyng matter,
and placyng it in good order, is so necessarie: I will showe

what the learned haue saied in this behaulfe so muche as I
shall thynke nedeful.
                  
                     Disposic
                           •
                        on what it is.
                     DIsposicion (as Tullie doth define it) is a certaine
bestowyng of thynges, and an apte declaryng,
what is meete for euery parte, as tyme and place
do beste require.
                  
                  
                     ¶Diuidyng of Disposicion.
                     THere are two kyndes of disposyng, and placyng of
matter. The one is when we folowe the appointed
rule of Rethorique, the whiche nature doth almost
teache vs: The other is wholy fasshioned by the
discretion of hym that makes the Oration.
                     RethoriqueRhetorique what it 
                              •
                           ea
                              ••
                           heth, for orderyng of thynges. doeth teache vs, and nature also leadeth vs
thereunto, first to speake somwhat before we open our matter,
after that to tell the cause of our entent, settyng forthe
the matter plainly that al may vnderstand it, then to proue
our owne cause by good reason, and to confute all suche
thinges as are contrarie to our purpose: last of al, to gather
the whole in a somme, concludyng the matter briefely, and
so to make an ende. Nowe to place those reasons, whiche
shoulde both serue to confirme and to confute, and to tel in
what parte of the Oration it were best to vse this reason,
and that reason, that the rather wee might proue, teache,
and perswade: a right wyse man had nede to take this matter
in hande. For euen as the tyme, the place, the iudge, and
the matter it selfe shal geue cause: so must a wyse body take
his aduantage. Sometymes it shalbe expedient to vse no
preface at al, or els when the matter is wel knowne, it will
be good to leaue the matter vntolde, and streight to seeke
the confirmacion, vsyng some stronge reason for the same
purpose. Yea sometymes it may do good to neglecte the naturall
order, and begynne firste to proue the cause, and afterwarde
to tell it better, than it was tolde before.
                     If the iudge, or the hearers shalbe weried with other

                           •
                        eportes before, it is beste to goe to the matter, and proue

it out of hande with as briefe reasons, and as strong as can
be gatherde possible. And in prouyng of our matters, we
had nede euermore rather to waie our reasons, than to nō
                        ber
them, and thynke not that then we shall doe beste, when
haue the most, but then looke to doe best, when we haue the
strongest. And first of al the strongest should be vsed, and the
other placed in the middest of the Oration, the whiche beeyng
heaped together wil make a good mustar.Argumentes howe they should be digested. And yet this
also would be learned, whereas we vsed the best reasons at
the first, we shoulde also reserue some that were lyke good,
for the later end: that the hearers might haue them freshe in
their remembraunce, when they shoulde geue iudgement.
The slender reasons that can do lesse good, and yet not all,
(for some may better be omitted) woulde bee placed in the
middest (as I saied) that bothe they might bee lesse marked,
or beeyng heaped there together, they might doe more
good, especially when bothe weightie reasons went before,
and weightie reasons also, folowed after. Now a wyse man
that hath good experience in these affaires, and is able to
make hym selfe a Rhetorique for euery matter, will not bee
bounde to any precise rules, nor kepe any one order, but
suche onely as by reason he shall thynke best to vse, beeyng
maister ouer Arte, rather then Arte shoulde be maister ouer
hym, rather makyng Art by witte, than confoundyng witte
by Arte. And vndoubtedly euen in so doyng, he shal do right
wel, and contente the hearers accordyngly. For what mattereth
whether we folowe our Booke, or no, if wee folowe
witte, and appoint our selfe an order, suche as may declare
the truthe more plainely? Yea some that be vnlearned and
yet haue right good wittes: will deuise with theim selues
without any Booke learnyng, what they wil saie, and how
muche they wil say, appointyng their order, and partyng it
into thre, or foure partes, or more, if neede be, suche as they
shal thynke especial pointes, and most meete to bee touched.
Whose doynges as I can wel like, & muche commende them
for the same: so I would thynke them muche more able to do
muche better: if thei either by learning folowed a Paterne,
or els knewe the preceptes, whiche leade vs to right order.

Rules wer therfore geuen, and by muche obseruacion gathered
together, that those whiche could not see Arte hid in
another mannes doynges, should yet se the rules open, all in
an order set together: & therby iudge the rather of their doynges,
and by earnest imitacion, seke to resemble suche their
inuencion.Thuse of arte. I cannot deny but that a right wise man vnlearned,
shall doo more good by his naturall witte, then twentie
of these common wittes, that want nature to help arte. And
I know that rules wer made first by wise men, and not wise
men made by rules. For these preceptes serue onely to helpe
our nede, suche as by nature haue not suche plentifull giftes
And as for other, vnto whom nature is more fauorable, thei
are rather put the soner in remēbraunce, that suche lessons
are, then so taught as though thei neuer knewe theim, or els
neuer would vse them. And therfore a certain learned man, &
of muche excellencie, beeyng asked what was suche a figure,
and suche a trope in Rhetorique: I cannot tell (ꝙ he) but I
am assured, if you loke in the boke of myne oraciōs, you shall
not faile but finde theim. So that though he knewe not the
name of suche and suche figures, yet the nature of thē was
so familiar to his knowlege, that he had thuse of them, when
soeuer he had nede. Nowe though this man could well thus
doo, beyng of suche notable vnderstandyng, yet it were foly
that all should folowe his waie, whiche want so good a wit.
And I thinke euen he himself, should not haue lost by it neither,
if he had seen that in aglasse, whiche he often vsed to do
without knowlege. Man is forgetfull, and there is none so
wise, but counsaill maie dooe hym good. Yea, he shall dooe
muche better, that knoweth what arte other me
                           •
                         haue vsed,
what inuencion thei haue folowed, what order thei haue
kept, and how thei haue best doen in euery part. If
he like not theirs, he may vse his awne, and yet
none dooeth so euill (I thynke) but some
good maie be got by hym. The wise
therfore wil not refuse to heare:
and the ignoraunt for want,
had nede to seke a will.
                  
               
               ¶Thende of the .ii. b
                     •
                  ke.
            
            
               
               ¶The third boke.
               
                  
                     ¶Of apte chusyng and framyng of wordes and
sentences together, called Elocucion.
                     ANd now we are come to that parte of
Rhetorique, the whiche aboue al other is most
beautifull, wherby not onely wordes are ap
                           •
                        ly
vsed, but also sentences are in right order framed.
For whereas Inuencion, helpeth to finde
matter, and Disposicion serueth to place argumentes: Elocucion
getteth wordes to set furthe inuencion, & with suche
beautie commendeth the matter, that reason semeth to bee
clad in purple, walkyng afore, bothe bare and naked. Therfore
Tullie saieth well, to finde out reason, & aptly to frame
it, is the part of a wise man, but to commende it by wordes,
and with gorgious talke to tell our conceipte, that is onely
propre to an Orator. Many are wise, but fewe haue the gift
to set furthe their wisedome. Many can tell their mynde in
Englishe, but fewe can vse mete termes, and apt order: suche
as all men should haue, and wise men will vse: suche as nedes
must be had, when matters should be vttered. Now then
what is he, at whom all men wonder, and stande in a mase, at
the viewe of his wit? Whose doynges are best estemed? whō
do we moste reuerence, and compt halfe a God emong men?Eloquent men moste estemed.
Euen suche a one assuredly, that can plainly, distinctly, plē
                        tifully,
and aptly vtter bothe wordes and matter, and in his
talke can vse suche conposicion, that he maie appere to kepe
an vniformitiee, and (as I might saie) a nomber in the vttering
of his sentēce. Now an eloquēt man beyng smally learned,
can do muche more good in perswading, by shift of wordes,
and mete placyng of matter: then a greate learned clerke
shalbe able with great store of learnyng, wantyng wordes to
set furth his meanyng. Wherfore I muche maruaile that so
many seke the only knowlege of thynges, without any mynd
to commende or set furthe their entend
                           •
                        ment: seyng none cā
knowe either what thei are, or what thei haue, without the
gift of vtterance. Yea, bryng thē to speake their mynde, and

                           •
                        nter in talke with suche as are said to be learned, & you shal
finde in thē suche la
                           ••
                        e of vtterance, that if you iudge theim

by their tongue, and expressyng of their mynde: you must nedes
saie thei haue no learnyng. Wherin me thinkes thei do,
like some riche snudges, that hauyng great wealth, go with
their hose out at heeles, their shoes out at toes, and their cotes
out at bothe elbowes. For who can tell, if suche men are
worth a grote, when their apparel is so homely, and al their
behauior so base? I can call thē by none other name, but slouens,
that maie haue good geare, and nether cā, nor yet will
ones weare it clenly.Barbarous clerkes, no better then slouēs. What is a good thyng to a manne, if he
neither knowe thuse of it, nor yet (though he knowe it) is able
at all to vse it? If we thinke it comelinesse, and honestie
to set furthe the body with handsome apparell, and thynke
theim worthie to haue money, that bothe can and will vse it
accordyngly: I cannot otherwise se, but that this part deserueth
praise, whiche standeth wholy in set
                           •
                        yng furthe the matter
by apte wordes and sentences together, & beautifieth the tongue
with greate chaunge of colours, and varietie of figures.
                  
                  
                     ¶Foure partes belongyng to Elocucion.
                     
                        j. Plainnesse.
                        ij. Aptenesse.
                        iij. Composicion.
                        iiij. Exornacion.
                     
                     EMong al other lessons, this should first be learned, yt
we neuer affect any straūge y
                           •
                        kehorne termes, but so
speake as is commonly receiued: neither sekyng to be
ouer fi
                           •
                        e, nor yet liuyng ouer carelesse, vsyng our speache as
most men do, & ordryng our wittes, as the fewest haue doen.Plaines what it is.
Some seke so farre for outlādishe Englishe, that thei forget
altogether their mothers lāguage. And I dare swere this, if
some of their mothers were aliue, thei were not able to tell,
what thei say, & yet these fine Englishe clerkes, will saie thei
speake in their mother tongue, if a mā should charge thē for
coūterfeityng the kynges English. Some farre iorneid ientlemē
at their returne home, like as thei loue to go in forrein
apparell, so thei wil pouder their talke wt ouersea lāguage.
He that cometh lately out of France, wil talke Frēche English,
& neuer blushe at the matter. Another choppes in with
Angleso Italiano: the lawyer wil store his stomack with the

pratyng of Pedlers. The Auditour in makyng his accompt
and rekenyng, cometh in with sise sould, and cater de
                           •
                        ere, for
vi. s iiij.d. The fiue Courtier wil talke nothyng but Chaucer.
The misticall wise menne, and Poeticall Clerkes, will
speake nothyng but quaint prouerbes, and blynd allegories,
delityng muche in their awne darkenesse, especially, when
none can tell what thei dooe saie. The vnlearned or foolishe
phantasticall, that smelles but of learnyng (suche felowes
as haue seen learned men in their daies) will so latine their
tongues, that the simple cannot but wonder at their talke,
and thynke surely thei speake by seme Reuelacion. I knowe
them that thynke Rhetorique, to stande wholy vpon darke
woordes, and he that can 
                           •
                        atche an ynke horne terme by the
taile, hym thei compt to bee a fiue Englishe man, and a good
Rhetotician And the rather to set out this folie, I will adde
here suche a letter, as Willyam Sommer himself, could not
make a better for that purpose. Some will thinke & swere it
to, that there was neuer any suche thyng writtē, well I wil
not f
                           •
                        rce any man to beleue it, but I will saie thus muche,
and abide by it to, the like haue been made heretofore, and
praised aboue the Moo
                           •
                        e.
                     Ponderyng expēdyng, and reuolutyng with my self your
ingent affabilitee, and ingenious capacitee, for mundane affaires:
I cannot but celebrate and extolle your magnificall
dexteritee, aboue all other. For how could you haue adepted
suche illustrate prerogatiue, and dominicall superioritee, if
the fecunditee of your ingenie had not been so fertile, & woū
                        derfull
pregnaunt.An ynkehorne letter. Now therfore beeyng accersited, to suche
splendent renoume, & dignitee splendidious: I doubt not but
you will adiuuate suche poore adnichilate orphanes, as whilome
ware cōdisciples with you, and of antique familiaritie
in Lincolne shire. Emong whom I beeyng a Scholasticall
panion, 
                           •
                        btesiate your sublimitee to extoll myne infirmitee.
There is a sacerdotall dignitee in my natiue countrey, contiguate
to me, where I now contemplate: whiche your worshipfull
benignitee, could sone impetrate for me, if it would
like you to extend your scedules, and collaude me in them to
the right honorable lorde Chauncellor, or rather Archigrā
                        macian

of Englande. You knowe my literature, you knowe
the pastorall promocion, I obtestate your clemencie, to inuigilate
thus mu
                           •
                        he for me, accordyng to my confidence, and as
you know my condigne merites, for suche a compendious liuyng.
But now I relinquishe to fatigate your intelligence
with any more friuolous verbositie, and therfore he that rules
the climates be euermore your beautreux, your fortresse,
and your bulwarke. Amen.
                     What wise mā readyng this letter, will not take him for
a very Caulfe, that made it in good earnest, & thought by his
ynkepot termes, to get a good personage. Doeth wit reste in
straunge wordes, or els standeth it in wholsome matter, and
apt declaryng of a mannes mynd? Do we not speake, because
we would haue other to vnderstande vs, or is not the tongue
geuē for this ende, that one might know what another meaneth?
And what vnlearned man can tell, what half this letter
signifieth? Therfore, either we must make a difference of
Englishe, and saie some is learned Englishe, and oth
                           •
                        r some
is rude Englishe, or the one is courte talke, the other is coū
                        trey
speache, or els we must of necessitee, banishe al suche affected
Rhetorique, and vse altogether one maner of lāguage.
When I was in Cambrige, and student in the kynges College,
there came a man out of the toune, with a pinte of wine
in a pottle pot, to welcome the prouost of that house, that lately
came from the courte. And because he would bestow his
present like a clerke, dwellyng emong the schoolers: he made
humbly his thre curtesies, and said in this maner. Ch
                           •
                         good

                           •
                        uen my good lorde, and well might your lordship vare: Understandyng
that your lordeship was come, & knowyng that
you are a worshipfull Pilate, and kepes a bominable house:
I thought it my duetie to come incantiuantee, & bryng you
a pottell a wine, the whiche I beseche your lordeship take in
good worthe. Here the simple man beyng desirous to amend
                           •
                        
his mothers tongue, shewed hymself not to bee the wisest
manne, that euer spake with tongue.
                     Another good felowe in the coūtrey, beyng an officer, and
Maiour of a toune, and desirous to speake like a fine learned
man, hauyng iust occasion to rebuke a runnegate felow, said

after this wise in a greate heate. Thou yngram and vacacion
knaue, if I take thee any more within the circumcision of
my dampnacion: I will so corrupte thee, that all vacacion
knaues shall take ilsample by thee.Roper
                              •
                           pe ch
                              ••
                           yng.
                     
                     Another standyng in muche nede of money, and desirous to
haue some helpe at a ientlemanns hand, made his complaint
in this wise. I praie you sir be so good vnto me, as forbeare
this halfe yeres rent. For so helpe me God and halidome, we
are so taken on with contrary Bishoppes, with reuiues, and
with subsides to the kyng, that al our money is cleane gone.
These wordes he spake for contribucion, relief, and subsidie.
And thus we see that poore simple men are muche troubled,
and talke oftentymes, thei knowe not what, for lacke of wit
and want to Latine & Frenche, wherof many of our straūge
woordes full often are deriued. Those therefore that will
eschue this foly, and acquaint themselfes with the best kynd
of speache, muste seke frō tyme to tyme, suche wordes as are
commonly receiued, and suche as properly maie expresse in
plain maner, the whole conceipte of their mynde. And looke
what woordes wee best vnderstande, and knowe what thei
meane: thesame should sonest be spoken, and firste applied to
the vtteraunce of our purpose.
                     Now whereas wordes be receiued, aswell Greke as Latine,
to set furthe our meanyng in thenglishe tongue, either
for lacke of store, or els because wee would enriche the language:
it is well doen to vse them, and no man therin can be
charged for any affectacion, when all other are agreed to folowe
thesame waie. There is no man agreued, when he heareth
(letters patentes) & yet patentes is latine, and signifie
                           •
                        h
open to all men. The Communion is a felowship, or a commyng
together, rather Latine then Englishe: the Kynges
prerogatiue, declareth his power royall aboue all other, and
yet I knowe no man greued for these termes, beeyng vsed in
their place, nor yet any one suspected for affectacion, when
suche generall wordes are spoken. The folie is espied, when
either we will vse suche wordes, as fewe men doo vse, or vse
theim out of place, when another might serue muche better.
Therfore to auoyde suche folie, we maie learne of that most

excellent Orator Tullie, who in his thirde booke, where he
speaketh of a perfect Oratoure, de lareth vnder the name of
Crassus, that for the choyse of wordes, foure thinges should
Foure thinges obserued, for choyse of wordes. chiefly be obserued. First, that suche wordes as we vse, shuld
bee proper vnto the tongue, wherein wee speake, again, that
thei be plain for all men to perceiue: thirdly, that thei be apt
and mete, moste properly to sette out the matter. Fourthly,
that woordes translated from one significacion to another,
(called of the Grecians, Tropes) bee vsed to beautifie the
sentence, as precious stones are set in a ryng, to commende
the golde.
                  
                  
                     ¶Aptenesse what it is.
                     SUche are thought apt wordes, that properly agre vnto
that thyng, whiche thei signifie, and plainly expresse
the nature of thesame. Therfore thei that haue regard
of their estimacion, do warely speake, and with choyse, vtter
woordes moste apte for their purpose. In weightie causes,
graue wordes are thought moste nedefull, that the greatnesse
of the matter, maie the rather appere in the vehem
                           •
                        ncie of
their talke.Aptnes. So likewise of other, like order muste be taken.
Albeit some, not onely do not obserue this kynde of aptnes,
but also thei fall into muche fondnesse, by vsyng wordes out
of place, and appl
                           •
                        yng theim to diuerse matters without all
discrecion. As thus. An ignorant felowe comyng to a ientlemannes
place,V
                              ••
                           apte vsyng of apt wordes & seyng a greate flocke of shepe in his pastour
saied to the owner of theim, now by my truthe sir, here is as
goodly an audiēce of shepe, as euer I saw in al my life. Who
will not take this felowe meter to talke with shepe, then to
speake emong menne? Another likewise seeyng a house faire
buylded, saied to his felowe thus: good lorde, what a handesome
phrase of buildyng in this? Thus are good wordes euil
vsed, when thei are not well applied, and spokē to good purpose.
Therfore I wishe that suche vntoward speakyng, maie
geue vs a good lesson, to vse our tongue warely, that our
wordes and matter maie still agree together.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Composicion.
                     When we haue learned vsuall and accustomable wordes
to set furthe our meanyng, we ought to ioyne them together

in apt order, that the eare maie delite, in hearyng the harmomonie.
I knowe some English men, that in this poynct haue
suche a gift in the Englishe, as fewe in Latine haue the like
and therfore, delite the wise and lerned so muche, with their
pleasaunt composicion: that many reioyce, when thei maie
heare suche, and thynke muche learnyng is gotte, when thei
maie talke with suche. ComposicionComposicion what it is. therefore, is an apte
ioynyng together of wordes in suche order, that neither the
eare shal espie any ierre, nor yet any man shalbe dulled with
ouerlong drawing out of a sentence, nor yet muche confounded
with myngelyng of clauses, suche as are nedelesse, beyng
heaped together without reason, and vsed without nomber.
For, by suche meanes the hearers will be forced, to forgettefull
oft, what was saied first, before the sentence be halfe ended:
or els bee blynded with confoundyng of many thynges
together. Some again will bee so shorte, and in suche wise
curtall their Sentences,Faules in cō
                           posicion. that thei had nede to make a commentarie
immediatly of their meanyng, or els the moste that
heare them, shalbe forced to kepe counsaill.
                     Some will speake oracles, that a man cannot tell, whiche
waie to take theim, some will be so fine, & so Poeticall with
all, that to their semyng, there shall not stande one heire amisse,
& yet euery body els shall thinke thē meter for a ladies
chamber, then for an earnest matter, in any open assemblie.
                     Some wil roue so muche, and bable so farre without order,
that a manne would thynke, thei had a greate loue, to
heare themselfes speake.
                     Some repeate one woorde so often, that if suche woordes
could be eaten, and chopte in so ofte, as thei are vttered out,
thei would choke the widest throte in all England. As thus.
If a man knewe, what a mans life wer, no man for any mā
                        nes
sake, would kill any man, but one mā would rather help
another man, considryng man is borne for man, to help mā, &
no to hate man. What man would not be choked, if he chop
                           •
                        
al these men at ones into his mouth, & neuer drouke after it?
Some vse ouermuche repeticiō of some one 
                           •
                        etter, as pitiful
pouertie praieth for a peny, but puffed presūpciō, passeth not
a poynct, pāperyng his panche, wt pestilēt pleasure, procuring

his passe porte to poste it to Hell pytte, there to be punished
with paines perpetuall. Some will so sette their wordes
that they muste be fayne to gape after euerye worde spokē,
endinge one worde with a vowell, and beginninge the next
wyth an other, whyche vndoubtedlye maketh the talke to
seme mooste vnpleasaunte. As thus Equirie assuredlye euerye
iniurye auoydeth. Some will set the carte before the
horse, as thus. My mother and my father are both at home,
euen as thoughe the good man of the house ware no breaches,
or that the graye Mare were the better Horse. And
what thoughe it often so happeneth (God wotte the more
pitye) yet in speakinge at the leaste, let vs kepe a natural order,
and set the man before the woman for maners sake.
                     An other cominge home in haste after a long iourney,
sayeth to hys manne: Come hither sir knaue, helpe me of
with my bootes and my spurres. I praye you sir geue him
leaue firste to plucke of youre spurres, ere he meddle wyth
your bootes, or els your man is like to haue a madde pluckinge.
Who is so folyshe as to saye the counsayle and the
kynge, but rather the Kinge and his counsayle, the father
and the sonne, and not contrary. And so likewise in al other
as they are in degree firste, euermore to set them formost.
                     The wise therfore talkinge of diuers worthye menne together,
will firste name the worthiest, and kepe a decent order
in reportynge of their tale. Some ende their sentences
all alike, makyng their talke rather to appeare rimed meter
then to seme playne speache, the whiche as it muche deliteth
beynge measurablye vsed, so it muche offendeth when
no meane is regarded. I hearde a preacher delityng much in
thys kynd of composition, who vsed so oftē to ende his sentence
with wordes like vnto that whiche wente before, that
in my iudgemente, there was not a dosen sentences in hys
whole sermon, but they ended all in ryme for the most part.
Some not best disposed, wished the Preacher a Lute, that
with his rimed sermon he myght vse some pleasaunt melodye,
and so the people myghte take pleasure diuers wayes,
and daunce if they liste. Certes there is a meane, & no reason
to vse any one thinge at all times, seynge nothinge deliteth

(be it neuer so good) that is alwayes vsed.
                     Quintilian likeneth the coloures of Rhetorique to
a man
                           •
                        es eye sighte. And nowe (quod he) I woulde not haue
all the bodye to be 
                           •
                        ull of eyes, or nothinge but eyes: for thē
the other partes shoulde wante their due place and proporcion.
Some ouerthwartelye sette their woordes, placynge
some one a myle frome his felowes, not contented with
a playne and ca
                           •
                        ye composition, but seke to sette wordes they
can not tell howe, and therfore one not likynge to be called
and by printe published Doctoure of Phisike, woulde neades
be named of Phisike Doctour, wherin appeared a wonderfull
composition (as he thought) straunge vndoubtedlye,
but whether wise or no, lette the learned sitte in iudgement
vpon that matter.
                     An other. As I rose in the mornynge (quod one) I
mette a carte full of stones emptye. Belike the manne was
fastinge, when the carte was full, and yet we see that throughe
straunge composition this sentence appeareth darke.
                     Some will tell one thinge .xx. times, nowe in, nowe out,
& when a man would thinke they had almost ended, they are
ready to beginne againe as freshe as euer they were. Such
vayne repetitions declare both wante of witte, and lacke of
learninge. Some are so homely in all their doynges, and so
grosse for their inuention, that they vse altogither one maner
of trade, and seke no varietie to eschewe tediousnes.
                     Some burden their talke with nedelesse copye, and
will seme plentifull, when they shoulde be shorte. An other
is so curious and so fine of his tongue, that he can not tell
in all the worlde what to speake. Euerie sentence semeth
commune, and euerye worde generallye vsed, is thought to
be folyshe, in his wise iudgemente. Some vse so manye interpositions
bothe in their talke and in their writinge, that
they make their sayinges as darke as hell. Thus whā faultes
be knowen, they may be auoyded: and vertue the soner
may take place, when vice is forsene, and eschewed as euill.
                  
                  
                     Of Exornation.
                     WHen wee haue learned apte woordes and vsuall
Phrases to sette forthe oure meanynge, and can
orderlye place them without offence to the eare,

we maye boldelye commende and beautifie oure talke wy
                           •
                        h
diuers goodlye coloures, and delitefull translations, that
oure speache maye seme as bryghte and precious, as a ryche
stone is fayre and orient.
                     EXornationExornation. is a gorgiousse beautifiynge of the tongue
with borowed wordes, and chaung of sentence
or speache, with muche varietie. Firste therfore (as
Tullie saythe) an Oration is made to seme ryghte
excellente by the kinde selfe, by the colour and iuice of speache.
Ther are .iij. maner of styles or endi
                           •
                        inges,Thre mane
                              •
                            of stiles or endi
                              •
                           inges. the great or
mighty kind, whē we vse great wordes, or vehemēt figures:
                     The smal kinde, when we moderate our heate by meaner
wordes, and vse not the most stirring sentences:
                     The lowe kinde, when we vse no Metaphores, nor translated
wordes, nor yet vse any amplificatiōs, but go plainelye
to worke, and speake altogether in commune wordes.
                     Nowe in all these three kindes, the Oration is muche commended,
and appeareth notable, when wee kepe vs styll to
thatistyle, whiche wee firste professed, and vse suche wordes
as seme for that kinde of writinge most conuenient.
                     Yea, if we minde to encrease, or diminish: to be in a heate,
or to vse moderatiō: to speake pleasauntly, or speake grauelye:
to be sharpe, or to be softe: to talke lordlye, or to speake
finelie: to waxe auncient, or familiar (which al are comprehended
vnder one of the other three:) we muste euer make
oure wordes apte and agreable to that kinde of stile, whiche
we firste ganne to vse. For as frenche hodes do not become
Lordes: so Parliament Robes are vnsitting for Ladies.
Comelines therfore must euer be vsed, and all thinges
obserued that are most mete for euery cause, if we loke by attemptes
to haue our desire.
                     There is another kind of Exornaciō
                        Exorna
                              •
                           ion 
                              •
                            by coloures of Rhetorique. yt is not egua
                           •
                        ly sparpled
throughout ye whole oratiō, but is so disseuered & parted,
as starres stand in the firmament, or floures in a gardē,
or prety deuised antiques in a clothe of Araise.
                  
                  
                     Vvhat a fygure is?
                     A Figure is a certaine kinde, either of sentence, oration,
or worde, vsed after some new or straunge wise, muche
vnlike to that, which men communely vse to speake.
                  
                  
                     
                     The diuision of Fygures.
                     THere are thre kindes of figures, the one is when the
nature of wordes is chaunged from one signification
to an other called a Trope of the Grecians:
The other serueth for woordes when they are not
chaūged by nature, but only altered by speaking, called of y•
Grecians a Scheme: The third is when by deuersity of inuention,
a sentence is manye wayes spoken, and also matters
are amplified by heapynge examples, by dilatynge argumentes,
by comparinge of thynges together, by similitudes,
by contraries, and by diuers other like, called by Tullie
Exornacion of sentences, or coloures of Rhetorique.
                     By all whiche Figures, euerye Oration maye be muche
beautified, and without the same, not one can attaine to be
counted an Oratoure, thoughe his learninge otherwise be
neuer so greate.
                  
                  
                     Of the fyrste vse of Tropes.
                     WHen learned and wise menne gan firste to enlarge
their tongue,Tropes how they wer fyrst 
                              •
                           ounded▪
                         and sought with greate vtteraunce
of speache to commende causes: they founde
full ofte muche wante of wordes to set out their
meanynge. And therfore remembrynge thinges of like nature
vnto those wherof they spake: they vsed suche wordes
to expresse their minde, as were most like vnto other. As for
example. If I shoulde speake against some notable Pharisee,
I might vse translation of wordes in this wise: Yonder
man is of a croked iudgment, his wyttes are clowdie, he liueth
in deepe darkenes, dusked altogether wyth blynde ignoraunce,
and drowned in the raginge sea, of bottomeles superstition.
Thus is the ignoraunte set out, by callinge hym
croked, clowdye, darke, blinde, and drownde in superstition.
All whiche wordes are not proper vnto ignoraunce, but borowed
of other thinges, that are of lyke nature vnto ignoraunce.
For the vnskilfull man hath his wytte set oute of

order, as a mannes bodye is set out of ioynte, and therupon
it maye be sayde to be croked. Likewyse he maye be called
clowdye, for as the clowdes kepe the Sunne shinynge from
vs, so dothe his Ignoraunce kepe him blindefolde from the
true vnderstandinge of thinges. And as when the eyes are
oute, no manne can see anye thinge: so when perfecte iudgemente
is wantinge, the truthe can not be knowen. And so
likewise of all other. Thus as necessitye hath forced vs to
borowe wordes translated: so hath time and practice made
theim to seeme moost pleasaunt, and therfore thei are mucht
the rather vsed. Yea, when a thynge full ofte can not be
expreste by an apte and mete woorde, we do perceyue (when
it is spoken by a woorde translated) that the likenes of that
thynge whiche appeareth in an other worde, muche lighteneth
that, which we woulde most gladly haue perceyued.
                     And not onely do menne vse translation of wordes (called
Tropes) for nede sake, when thei can not finde other: but
also when they maye haue mooste apte wordes at hande, yet
wyll they of a purpose vse translated wordes. And the reason
is this. Menne counte it a poynte of witte to passe ouer
suche woordes as are at hande, and to vse suche as are
farre f
                           •
                        tcht and translated: or elles it is, because the hearer
is led by cogitacion vpon rehearsall of a Metaphore, &
thinketh more by remembraunce of a word translated, then
is there expreslye spoken: or elles because the whole matter
semeth by a similitude to be opened: or last of al, bicause euery
translation is commenly, & for the most part referred to
the senses of the body, & especially to ye sense of seing, which
is the sharpest and quickest aboue all other. For whē I shal
saye that an angrye manne fometh at the mouthe, I am
brought in remembraunce by this translation to remember
a bore, that is fightyng vseth muche foming, the whiche is a
fowle and lothelye sighte. And I cause other to thinke that
he brake pacience wonderfully, when I set out his rage cō
                        parable to a bores fominge.
                     An other beinge offended wyth checkes geuen, will saye,
I maruaile sir what you meane to be euer snarringe at me,
wherein is declared a brutishenes, consideringe he speaketh

biting wordes, as muche without reason & as vncomelye,
as a dogge dothe, when he snarreth, the whiche wee see
is nothing semely. There is nothing in all the worlde, but
the same maye haue the name of some other worde, the whiche
by some similitude is lyke vnto it. Notwithstandinge
there ought muche warenesse to be vsed in chosyng of wordes
tanslated, that the same be not vnlike that thing, wherunto
it is applied, nor yet that the translation be vncomely
or suche as may geue occasion of any vncleane meaning.
                  
                  
                     A Trope.
                     A TropeTrope what it is. is an alteration of a word or sentence from
the proper significatiō to that whych is not proper.
                     The diuision of Tropes.
                     Tropes are either of a word,Deuision of Tropes. or or a longe continued speche
or sentence.
                     Tropes of a worde are these.
                     
                        A Metaphore or translation of wordes.
                        A worde makinge.
                        Intellection.
                        Abusion.
                        Transmutation of a word.
                        Transumption.
                        Chaunge of a name.
                        Circumlocution.
                     
                     Tropes of a longe continued speache or sentence
are these.
                     
                        An Allegorie, or inuersion of wordes.
                        Mountinge.
                        Resemblinge of thinges.
                        Similitude.
                        Example.
                     
                  
                  
                     Vvhat is a Metaphore.
                     A MetaphoreMetaphora is an alteration of a woorde from the
proper and naturall meanynge, to that whiche is
not proper, and yet agreeth therunto, by some lykenes
that appeareth to be in it.
                     
                        An Oration is wonderfullye enriched, when apte Metaphores
are gotte and applied to the matter. Neither can anye
one perswade effectuouslye, and winne men by weyght
of his Oration, withoute the helpe of woordes altered and
translated.
                  
                  
                     The diuer
                           •
                        itye of translations.
                     FIrste we alter a worde from that which is in the
minde, to that which is in the bodye. As when we
perceyue one that hath begiled vs, we vse to saye:
Ah sirrha, I am gladde I haue smelled you oute.
Beinge greued with a matter, we saye communelye we can
not digest it. The Lawyer receiuing money more then neadeth
oftentimes, will saye to his Client wythout any translation.
I fele you wel, whē the pore man thinketh yt he doth
well vnderstand his cause, and will helpe him to some good

                           •
                        nde. For so, communelye we saye, when we knowe a mans
minde in anye thinge. This kinde of mutation is muche vsed,
when we talke earnestlye of any matter.
                  
                  
                     From the creature wythout reason, to that whyche
hathe reason.
                     THE seconde kinde of translation is, when we goo
from the creature wythout reason to that whiche
hathe reason, or contrarye from that whiche hathe
reason, to that whiche hath no reason. As if I shoulde
saye, such an vnreasonable brawler, did nothinge elles
but barke like a Dogge, or like a Fore. Women are saide to
chatter, churles to grunte, boyes to whyne, and yonge men
to yell. Contrariwise, we call a Foxe false, a Lyon proude,
and a Dogge flatteringe.
                  
                  
                     From the lyuynge to that whyche hath
no lyfe.
                     FRom the liuynge to the not liuynge, we vse many
translations. As thus. You shall praye for al men
dispersed throughoute the face of the earthe. The
arme of a tree. The syde of a Bancke. The lande
cryeth for vengeaunce. From the liuinge, to the not liuing:
Hatred buddeth emonge malicious men, his wordes flowe
out of his mouthe. I haue a whole world of busines.
                     In obseruing the worke of Nature in al seueral substaūces

we maye finde translations at wyll, then the whiche nothinge
is more profitable for anye one that myndeth by hys
vtteraunce to stirre the hartes of menne either one waye or
other.
                     A worde makingeword making. called of the Grecians Onomatopeia
is when we make wordes of oure owne mynde, suche as be
deriued from the nature of thinges. As to call one Patche
or Cowlson, whom we see to do a thinge folyshelye, because
these two in their time were notable foles. Or when one is
lustye to saye Taratauntara, declaringe therby that he is as
lustye, as a Trumpette is delitefull, and styrringe: or when
one woulde seme galaunte, to crye hoyghe, whereby also is
declared courage. Boyes beynge greued will saye some one
to an other, Sir I wyll cappe you, if you vse me thus, and
withholde that frome me whyche is myne owne: meanynge
that he will take his cappe from him. Againe, when we see
one gaye and galaunte, we vse to saye, he courtes it. Quod
one that reasoned in diuinitie wyth his felowe, I like well
to reason, but I can not chappe these textes in scripture, if
I shoulde dye for it: meaning that he coulde not tell in what
chapiter thinges were conteyned, althoughe he knewe full
well that there were suche sayinges.
                  
                  
                     Intellection.
                     INtellectionIntellection. called of the Gretians, Synecdoche,
is a Trope, when wee gather or Iudge the
whole by the parte, or part, by the whole. As thus.
The king is come to London, meaning therby that
other also be come with him. The Frenche man is good to
kepe a Forte, or to skyrmishe on horsebacke, wherby we declare
the Frenchmen generally. By the whole ye part, thus.
All Cambridge sorowed for the deathe of Bucer, meaninge
the most parte. All Englande reioyseth that pilgrimage is
banished, and Idolatrye for euer abolished: and yet all England
is not glad, but the most parte.
                     The like phrases are in the Scripture, as when the Magians
came to Jerusalem, & asked where he was that was

borne Kyng of the Iewes. Herode starte vp beeyng greatly
troubled, and al the citie of Ierusalem with hym, and yet al
the Citie was not troubled, but the most part. By the signe
we vnderstande the thyng signified, as by an Iuie garlande,
we iudge there is wyne to sel. By the signe of a Beare, Bul
Lyon, or any suche, wee take any house to be an Inne. By
eatyng breade at the Communion, wee remember Christes
death, and by Faith, receiue hym spiritually.
                  
                  
                     ¶Abusion.
                     ABusion,Abusion. called of the Grecians Catachresis, is when
for a certaine proper woorde we vse that whiche is
most nighe vnto it: As in callyng some water, a fishe
ponde, though there be no fisshe in it at all: or elles
when we saie, here is long talke, and small matter. Whiche
are spoken vnproperly, for we cannot measure, either talke,
or matter by length, or breadth.
                  
                  
                     ¶Transmutacion of a worde.
                     TRansmutacionTransmuta
                           
                              •
                           ion. helpeth much for varietie, the whiche
is when a woorde hath a proper signification of
the owne, & beyng referred to an other thyng, hath
an other meanyng, the Grecians cal it Metonymia
the whiche is diuerse waies vsed. When we vse the au
                           ••
                        hor 
of a thyng, for the thyng selfe. As thus. Put vpon you the
Lord Iesus Crhiste, that is to say, be in liuyng suche a one,
as he was. The Pope is banished England, that is to saie,
al his superstition, and Hypocrisie, either is, or shoulde be
gone to the Deuill by the Kynges expresse will, and commaundement.
Againe when that whiche doeth conteyne, is 
vsed for that whiche is conteined. As thus. I haue dronk an
hoggeshead this weeke: Heauen may reioyce, and hell may
lament, when olde men are not couetouse. Contrarywise,
when the thyng conteined is vsed for the thyng conteinyng.
As thus. I praie you come to me, that is to say, come to my
house. Fourthely, when by the efficient cause, the effecte is 
streight gatherde thereupon. As thus. The Sonne is vp,
that is to saie, it is day. This felowe is good with a long
bowe, that is to saie, he shouteth wel.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Transumption.
                     TRansumption is, when by digrees wee go to that,
whiche is to be shewed. As thus: Suche a one lyeth
in a darke doungeon, now in speaking of darkenesse,
we vnderstand closenesse, by closenesse, we gather
blackenesse, and by blackenesse, we iudge depenesse.
                  
                  
                     ¶Chaunge of name.
                     CHaunge of a name, is when for the propre name,Antonomasia. some name of an office, or other calling is vsed. As thus: the
Prophete of God saith: Blessed, are they who
                           •
                        e synnes
be not imputed vnto them, meanyng Dauid. The
Poete saieth: It is a vertue, to eschew vice, wherein I vnderstande
Horace.
                  
                  
                     ¶Circumlocution.
                     CIrcumlocution is,periphrasis a large description either to sette
forth a thyng more gorge
                           •
                        uslie, or els to hyde it, if the
eares cannot beare the open speakyng: or when with
fewe wordes we cannot open our meanyng, to speake
it more largely. Of the first thus. The valiaunt c
                           •
                        urage of
mightie Scipio subdued the force of Carthage and Numā
                        tia.
Henry the fifte, the most puissaunt Kyng of Englande,
with seuen thousand men toke the Frenshe Kyng prisoner
with al the flower of nobilitie in Fraunce. Of the seconde,
When Saule was casyng hymselfe vpon the grounde, Dauid
toke a peece of his garment, tooke his weapon that laie
by hym▪ and might haue staine hym. Suche a one defiled his
bodie with suche an euill woman. For the thirde parte, the
large commentaries written, and the Paraphrasis of Erasmus
englished: are sufficient to showe the vse therof.
                  
                  
                     ¶Vvhat is an Allegorie.
                     AN Allegorie is none other thyng, but a Metaphore
vsed throughout a whole sentence, or Oration. As
in speakyng against a wicked offendour, I might
say thus. Oh Lorde, his nature was so euill, and his
witte so wickedly bente, that he ment to bouge the shippe,
where he hymselfe sailed, meanyng that he purposed the destruction
of his owne countrie. It is euill puttyng strong
wine into weake vesselles, that is to say it is euill trustyng

some womē with weightie matters. The English Prouerbes
gatherde by Ihon Heywood helpe wel in this behaulf,
the whiche commenly are nothyng elles but Allegories, and
darcke deuised sentences. Now for the other fower figures
because I mynde hereafter to speake more largely of them,
and Quintilian thynketh them more meete to be placed emong
the figures of Exornacion, I wil not trouble the reader
with double inculcation, and ewyse tellyng of one tale.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Schemes, called otherwyse sentences of a
worde and sentence.
                     I Might tary a longe tyme in declaryng the nature of
diuerse Schemes,Scheme what it is. whiche are woordes or sentencies
altered, either by speakyng, or writyng, contrarie to
the vulgare custome of our speache without chaungyng
their nature at all: but because I knowe the vse of the
figures in word is not so great in this our tōgue, I wil run
them ouer with asmuche haste as I can.
                  
                  
                     ¶The diuision of Schemes.
                     STraunge vsyng of any worde or sentence contrarie
to our daiely wont, is either when we adde, or take
away a sillable, or a word, or eucrease a sentence by
chaunge of speache cōtrarie to the commune maner
of speakyng.
                  
                  
                     ¶Figures of a worde.
                     THose be called figures of a word, when we chaunge
a worde, and speake it contrarie to our vulgare and
daily speache. Of the whiche sorte, there are sixe in
nom
                           •
                        er.
                     
                        i. Addition at the first.
                        ij. Abstraction from the first.
                        iij. Iuterla
                              •
                           yng in the middest.
                        iiij. Cuttyng from the middest.
                        v. Addyng at the ende.
                        vi. Cuttyng from the end.
                     
                     OF Addition. As thus. He did all to berattle hym.Prosthe
                              ••
                           s.
Wherein appereth that a sillable is added to this
worde (rattle.) Here is good nale to sel, for good ale.
                     
                        Of Abstraction from the first, thus.Apheresis. As I romed al alone,
I ganne to thynke of matters greate. In whiche sentence,
(ganne) is vsed, for beganne.
                     Interlacyng in the middest. As. Relligion, for religion.
                           
                              •
                           penthesis.
Cuttyng from the middest.Syncope. Idolatrie, for Idololatrie.
Addyng at the end.Proparalepsis Hasten your busines, for, Haste your
businesse.
                     Cuttyng from the end. A faire may,Aporope. for, maide.
                     Thus these figures are shortely sette out, and as for the
other Schemes, whiche are vtterde in whole sentences, and
expressed by varitie of sreache: I wil set them forth at large
emong the coloures & ornamentes of Elocution, yt folowe.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of coloures and ornamentes to commende
and sette forth an Oration.
                     NOW, when we are able to frame a sentence handsomly
together,Coloures of Rhetorique. obseruyng number and kepyng cō
                        position,
suche as shal lyke best the eare, & do know
the vse of Tropes, and can applie them to our purpose:
than thornamentes are necessarie in an Oratiō, & sentences
woulde bee furnished with moste beautifull figures.
Therfore to thende that they may be knowne, suche as most
commende and beautifie an Oration: I wil set them forthe
here in suche wise as I shal best be able, folowyng the order
whiche Tullie hath vsed in his Booke made of a perfite
Oratour.
                  
                  
                     ¶Restyng vpon a poyncte.
                     WHEN wee are earnest in a matter,Commor
                              ••
                           io. and feele the
weight of our cause, wee rest vpon some reason,
whiche serueth best for our purpose. Wherin this
figure appereth most, & helpeth muche to set forthe
our matter. For if we stil kepe vs to our strongest holde, and
make ofterecourse thither, though we be dryuē through bytalke
to go from it nowe and than: we shall force them at
length, either so auoide our strong defence, or elles to yelde
into our handes.
                  
                  
                     ¶An euident, or plaine settyng forthe of a thyng as
though it were presently doen.
                     
                        THis Figure is called a description, or an euident declaratiō
of a thyng,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         as though we sawe it euen now
doen. An example. If our enemies shall inuade, and
by treason wynne the victorie, we al shal dye euery
mothers sonne of vs, and our Citie shalbe destroied sticke &
stoone. I see our children made slaues, our daughters rauisshed,
our wifes caried away, the father forced to kil his own
sonne,Description of outrage after 
                              •
                            battaile. the mother her daughter, the sonne his father, the
sucking child slaine in the mothers bosome, one standyng to
the kuees in anothers bloude, Churches spoiled, houses
pluckte doune, and al set in fier rounde about vs, euery one
cursy
                           •
                        g the day of their birth, children criyng, women wailyng,
and olde men passyng for v
                           •
                        ry thought, and euery one
thynkyng hymselfe most happy that is first ridde out of this
worlde, suche will the crueltie be of our enemies, and with
suche horrible hatred wil they seeke to dispatche vs. Thus
where I might haue said, we shal al be destroied and saie no
more, I haue by description sette the euill forth at large. It
muche auaileth to vse this figure in diuerse matters, the
whiche whosoeuer can do, with any excellent gift, vndoubtedly
he shal muche delite the hearers. The circumstaunces
wel considered in euery cause, geue muche matter for the
plaine opening of the thyng. Also similitudes, examples, cō
                        parisons
from one thyng to another, apte translacions, and
heaping of allegories and all suche figures as serue for amplifiyng,
do muche commende the liuely settyng forthe of any
matter. The miseries of the Courtiers lyfe might well
be described by this kind of figure. The commoditie of learnyng,
the pleasure of plowe men, and the care that a Kyng
hath. And not onely are matters set out by description, but
men are painted out in their colours, yea buildynges are set
forth, Kyngdomes, and Realmes are portured, places, and
tymes are described.Diuersitie of natures▪
                         The Englishe man for feedyng, and
chaung of apparel: The Duytche man for drynkyng: The
Frenche man for pryde and inconstaunce: The Spāyard for
nymblenes of bodie, and muche disdaine: The Italian for
great witte and pollicie: The Scottes for boldenes, and the
Boeme for stubbornesse.
                     
                        Many people are described by their degree as a man of
good yeres is compted sober, wise and circumspect: a young
man wilde, and carelesse: a woman bablyng, inconstant, and
redy to beleue al that is tolde her.
                     By vocation of life, a souldiour is counted a great bragger,
and a vaunter of hymselfe: a Scholer simple: a russed
coate, sadde aud sometymes craftie: a courtier, flatteryng: a
citezen, ie
                           •
                        tle.
                     I
                           •
                         describing of persons there ought alwaies a commelinesse
to be vsed,Description of persone. so that nothyng be spoken whiche may be
thought is not in them. As if one shall describe Henry the
sixth, he might cal hym ientle, milde of nature, ledde by perswasion,
& redy to forgeue, carelesse for wealthe, suspectyng
none, merciful to al, fearefull in aduersitie, & without forecast
to espie his misfortune. Again for Richarde the third I
might bryng hym in, cruell of harte, ambiciouse by nature,
enuiouse of mynde, a depe dissembler, a close man for weightie
matters, hardie to reuenge, and feareful to lose his high
estate, trustie to none, liberal for a purpose, castyng still the
worst, and hoping euer the best. By this figure also we imagine
a talke for some one to speake, and according to his person
we frame the Oration. As if one should bryng in noble
Henry the .viij. of most famouse memorie to enueigh against
rebelles, thus he might order his Oration. What if Henry
theight were alyue, & sawe suche rebellion in this Realme,
would not he say thus, and thus? yea me thynkes I heare
hym speake euen now. And so set forth suche wordes as we
would haue hym to saie.
                     Some tymes it is good to make God, the Countrie, or
some one towne to speake, and loke what we woulde say in
our owne person, to frame the whole tale to them. Suche
varietie doth muche good to auoide tediousenes, for he that
speaketh al in one sort though he spake thinges neuer so wittely
shal sone wery his hearers. FiguresThe vse of figures. therfore wer inuē
                        ted
to auoide sacietie, and cause delite: to refresh with pleasure
& quicken with grace, the dulnesse of mās braine. Who
wil loke of a whit waul an houre together, where no worke
manship is at al? Or who wil cate stil one kinde of meate, &

neuer desire chaunge? Certes as the mouthe is daintie: so
the wit is tickle, and wil sone lothe an vnsauery thing.
                  
                  
                     ¶A stop, or half tellyng of a tale.
                     A Stoppe is, whē we breake of our tale before we haue
told it.Precisio. As thus. Thou that art a young man of suche
towardnes hauyng suche frendes to plaie me suche a
parte, wel, I will saie no more, God amende all that
is amisse. Or thus. Dothe it become the to be, shal I tel al,
Naie, I wil not for very shame.
                  
                  
                     ¶A close vnderstandyng.
                     A Close vnderstandyng is, when more may be gatherd
than is openly exprest.Significatio plus ad intelligēdū
                           
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            dixeris. A naughtie fellowe that vsed
muche robbery, founde hym selfe greeued that the
greate Oratour Demosthenes spent so muche oyle
wherby he watched from tyme to tyme in compassyng matters
for thy commune weale: In dede (quoth) DemosthenesDemosthenes.
darke nightes are best for thy purpose, meanyng that he was
a great robber in the night. O
                           •
                        e also beeyng set in a heate,
because another had contraried hym for the choise of meates,
was muche more greued when he gaue hym this tauut.
You may boldely (ꝙ he) speake for fishe eatyng, for my maister
your father hath many a time & ofte wipt his nose vpon
his sleeue, meanyng that his father was a fishemonger.
                  
                  
                     ¶Shorte sencences.
                     THen shorte clauses, or sentences are vsed when we
speake at a worde,Distincte concisa breuitas. parte of our minde, and nest after
speake as briefely againe, vsyng to make almost euery
worde a perfite sentence. As thus. The man is
sore wounded, I feare me he will dye. The Phisicions mistrust
hym: the partie is fledde, none persueth: God sende vs
good lucke.
                  
                  
                     ¶Abatyng, or lessenyng of a thyng.
                     WE make our doynges appere lesse, whē with wordes
we extenuateExtenuatio
                              •
                           
                         and lessen thesame. As when one
had geuen his fellowe a sound blowe, beyng rebuked
for the same saied he scante touched hym. Likewise,
when two haue fought together, to say that the one
had his legge prickte with a sworde, whē perchaunce he had
a great wounde.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Vvittie iestyng.
                     MAny pleasaunt ientlemen are well practised in merie
conceited iestes,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . and haue both suche grace and
delite therin, that they are wonderfull to beholde,
and better were it to be sharpely chidde of diuerse
other, then pleasauntly taunted by any of thē. When a ientleman
of great landes & small witte had talked largely at a
supper, and spake wordes scant worth the hearyng, an other
beeyng muche greeued with his foolie, saied to hym: Sir I
haue taken you for a plaine meanyng ientlemā, but I know
nowe, there is not a more deceiptfull bodie in al Englande:
with that, other beyng greeued with the young ientlemans
foolie, boldely began to excuse hym for deceipt, and therfore
said, he was to blame to charge hym with that fault, consideryng
his nature was simple, and few can say that euer he
was craftie. Wel ꝙ thother, I must nedes say he is deceiptful,
for I toke hym heretofore for a sober wittie young man,
but now I perceiue, he is a foolish bablyng felowe, & therfore
I am sure he hath deceiued me like a false craftie child,
as he is: with that they al laughed, and the ientleman was
muche abashed. But as touchyng sharpe tauntes, I haue
largely declared them in place, where I treated of laughter.
                  
                  
                     ¶Digression, or swaruyng from the matter.
                     WE swarue sometymes from the matter vpon iust
consideracions,Digressio ab 
                              •
                           e non longa. makyng the same to serue for our
purpose as wel as if we had kepte the matter stil.
As in making an inuectiue against rebelles, & largely
setting out the filth of their offence, I might declare by
the way of a digression, what a noble countrie England is,
how great commodities it hath, what trafike here is vsed, &
howe muche more nede other Realmes haue of vs, than we
haue neede of them. Or when I shal geue euidence, or rather
declame against an hainouse Murtherer, I may digresse
from the offence doen, and enter in prayse of the deade man,
declaryng his vertues in moste ample wyse, that the offense
doen, may be thought so muche the greater, the more honest
he was that hath thus been slaine.
                     
                        Notwithstādyng this would be learned, that (whē we make
any suche digression) thesame maie well agre to the purpose
and be so set out, that it confounde not the cause, or darken
the sense of the matter deuised.
                  
                  
                     ¶Proposicion.
                     PRoposicion is a short rehersall of that,Proposicio quid sis dicturus. wherof we
mynde to speake. I will tell you (ꝙ one) there is
none hath a worse name then this felow, none hath
been so often in trouble, he maie he fautelesse, but I
can hardely beleue it, there are enow that will testifie of his
naughtinesse, and auouche his euill demeanour to bee suche,
that the like hath not been hard heretofore.
                  
                  
                     ¶An ouer passage to another matter.
                     WHen we go frō one matter to another, we vse this
kynde of phraise.Seiunctio as eo quod dictum est▪
                         I haue tolde you the cause of all
this euill, nowe I will tell you a remedy for thesame.
You haue heard of iustification by faith onely,
now you shal here of the dignitee of workes, and how necessary
thei are for euery christian body.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of commyng again to the matter.
                     WHen wee haue made a digression,Reditus ad propositū. wee ma
                           •
                        e declare
our returne, and shewe that whereas wee haue roued
a litle, we will now kepe vs within our boundes.
In this kynd of digression, it is wisedome not
to wander ouer farre, for feare wee shall werie the hearers,
before we come to the matter again. I knew a preacher, that
was a whole houre out of his matter, and at length remembryng
hymself, saied, well, now to the purpose, as though al
that, whiche he had spoken before, had been litle to the purpose,
whereat many laughed, and some for starke wearinesse
wer fain to go awaie.
                  
                  
                     ¶Iteratyug and repeatyng thynges said before.
                     WHen a man hath largely spoken his mynd,Iteratio. he may repeate
in fewe wordes, the somme of his saiyng. As if
one should be charged with felonie, that is a man of
welth and honestie, he might thus gather his mynd together
after a lōg tale told. First I wil proue there is no cause that
I should steale, again that I could not possible at suche a

tyme steale, and last, that I stole not at all.
                  
                  
                     ¶The conclusion, or 
                           •
                        appyng vp of matter.
                     THe conclusion, is an apt knittyng together of that,
whiche we haue said before.Rationis apta conclusio. As thus. If reason can
perswade, if examples maie moue, if necessitee maie
helpe, if pitee maie prouoke, if daungers foreseen,
maie stirre vs to be wise: I doubte not but you will rather
vse sharpe lawes, to represse offendours, then with dissolute
negligence, suffer all to perishe.
                  
                  
                     ¶Mountyng aboue the truthe.
                     MOuntyng aboue the truthe, is when we do setfurthe
thynges excedyngly & aboue all mennes expectacion,
meanyng onely that thei are very great.Veritatis superlatio, at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            
                           
                              ••
                           aiectio. As thus, god
promised to Abrahā, that he wold make his posteritee, egual
with the sa
                           •
                        des of the yearth. Now it was not so said, that
there should be so many in deede, but that the nomber should
bee infinite. For, whether we shall vnderstande those, to bee
the children of Abraham, that came of his stocke in fleshe, or
els take thē for the children of Abraham, that haue the faithe
of Abraham: wee shall neuer proue the nomber of men, to bee
e
                           •
                        uall with the sandes of the sea, though wee could reken all
that haue been, from the beginnyng of the worlde. Therfore
in this speache, wee muste vnderstande there is a mountyng,
called of the Grecians hyperbole: we vse this figure muche
in English. As thus. He is as swift as a swallowe, he hath
a belly as bigge as a barrell, he is a giaunt in makyng. The
whole Temmese is litle enough to serue hym, for wasshyng
his handes. In all whiche speaches wee mounte euermore
a greate deale, and not meane so as the wordes are spoken.
                  
                  
                     ☞Askyng other, and answeryng our self.
                     BY askyng other, and answeryng to the question our
self,Rogatio. we muche commende the matter, and make it appere
very pleasant. If I would rebuke one that hath
committed a robberie, I might saie thus. I wonder what
you ment to commit suche felonie. Haue you not landes? I
knowe you haue. Are not your frendes worshipfull? Yes assuredly.
Wer you not beloued of them? No doubt you were.
Could you haue wāted any thyng y• thei had? If you would
haue eaten gold, you might haue had it. Did not thei alwayes

bidde you seke to them, and to none other? I knowe thei
did. What euill happe had you then, to offende in suche sorte
not goyng to your frendes, whiche would not se you want,
but sekyng for that, whiche you should not haue, endaungeryng
your self by vntrue dealyng, to fele the power & strēgth
of a law, whē otherwise you might haue liued in sauegard?
                     The like kynd of writyng is also vsed, whē we make another
body to speake, and yet not aske them any question at al.
As when D. Haddon had comforted the duchesse of Suffolkes
grace for her childrē, and had said thei wer happly gone
because thei might haue fallen hereafter, and loste that worthy name, whiche at their death thei had: at last he bringeth
in the mother, speakyng motherlike, in her childrens behalfe
of this sort, and answereth still to her saiynges. But al these
euilles wherof you speake (ꝙ she) hadde not chaunced: Yet
suche thynges doo chaunce. Yet not alwayes: Yet full ofte.
Yet not to al: Yet to a great many. Yet thei had not chaunced
to myne: Yet wee knowe not. Yet I might haue hoped:
Yet better it had been to haue feared.
                  
                  
                     ☞Snappishe askyng.
                     WE doo aske oftentymes, because we would knowe:
we do aske also,Percōtatio because we woulde chide, and sette
furthe our grief with more vehemencie, the one is
called Interrogatio, the other is called Percontatio.
Tullie enueighyng against Catiline, that Romaine rebell,
beginneth his oracion chidingly, questio
                           •
                        yng with Catiline
of this sort. How long (Catili
                           •
                        e) wilt thou abuse our
sufferaunce? How long will this rage and madnesse of thine
go aboute to deceiue vs?
                  
                  
                     ☞Dissemblyng or close iestyng.
                     WHen we iest closely, and with dissemblyng meanes,
grigge our felowe,Dissimutatio, alia dicentis ac significanti
                              •
                           
                         when in wordes wee speake one
thyng, and meane in hart another thyng, declaryng
either by our countenaunce, or by vtteraunce, or by
some other waie, what our whole meanyng is. As when we
se one bostyng himself, & vain glorious, to hold him vp with
ye and naie, and euer to ad more to that, whiche he saieth. As
I knowe one that saied hymself, to be in his awne iudgemēt

one of the best in all Englande, for triyng of metalles, & that
the counsaill hath often called for his helpe, and cannot wāt
hym for nothyng. In deede (ꝙ another) Englande had a sore
losse, if God should call you. Thei are all Bungelers in cō
                        parison
of you, and I thynke the best of theim, maie thanke
you for all that he hath: but yet sir your cunnyng was suche,
that you brought a shillyng to nyne pence, naie to sixe pence
and a grote to two pence, and so gaue hym a frumpe, euen to
his face, because he sawe hym so folishe. A glorious ientlemā
that had twoo seruauntes, and belike would be knowen not
onely to haue them, but also to haue mo, said in the presence
of a worshipfull man, I meruaile muche where all my seruauntes
are? Marie sir (ꝙ one) that thoughte to hitte hym
home: thei wer here al two, euen now. Thus he closly mockt
hym, and worthely. For, the nomber is not greate, that standeth
vpō .ij, and (all) is to muche, when we speake of so fewe.
                  
                  
                     ¶Doubtfulnesse.
                     DOubtfulnesse is then vsed, whē we make the hearers
beleue,Dubitacio. that the weight of our matter causeth
vs to doubte, what were best to speake. As when a
kyng findeth his people vnfaithfull, he maie speake
in this wise. Before I begin, I doubt what to name ye. Shal
I call you subiectes? You deserue it not. My frendes ye are
not. To cal you enemies wer ouerlitle, because your offence
is so greate. Rebelles you are, and yet that name doeth not
fully vtter your folie. Traitors I maie call you, and yet you
are worse then traitors, for you seke his death, who hath geuen
you life. Thoffence is so great, that no man can comprehend
it. Therfore I doubt what to call you, except I should
call you by the name of theim all. Another. Whether shall I
speake, or holde my peace? If I speake, you will not heare, if
I holde my peace, my conscience condempneth my silence.
                  
                  
                     ¶Distribucion.
                     DIstribucion,Distributio is whē we apply to euery body, suche
thynges as are due vnto them, declaryng what euery
one is in his vocacion. It is the duetie of a
Kyng, to haue an especiall care ouer his whole
realme. It is thoffice of his nobles, to cause the kynges will

to be fulfilled, and with all diligence to further his Lawes,
and to se iustice doen euery where.
                     It is the part of a subiect, faithfully to do his princes cō
                        maundement,
& with a willyng hart to serue him at al nedes.
                     It is thoffice of a bishop to setfurthe Gods worde, & with
all diligence to exhort men to all godlinesse. It is an husbandes
duetie to loue his wife, & with ientle meanes to rule her.
It is the wifes office, hūbly to submit her self to her husbā
                        des
will. Seruauntes should be faithfull to their maistres,
not onely for feare of a law, but also for cōscience sake. Masters
should vse their seruauntes accordyngly, paiyng theim
that, whiche is due unto them. A father should bryng vp his
children in the feare of God. Children should reuerēce their
fathers with all submission. It is also called a distribucion,
when we diuide the whole, into seuerall partes, and saie we
haue foure poynctes, whereof we purpose to speake, comprehendyng
our whole talke within compasse of thesame.
                  
                  
                     ¶Correccion.
                     COrreccion,Correctio. is when we alter a woorde or sentence, otherwise
then we haue spokē before, purposyng therby
to augmēt the matter, and to make it appere more vehemēt.
Tullie against Verres,Tullie against Uerres. geueth a good example.
We haue broughte before you my Lordes, into this place of
iudgement, not a thefe, but an extorcioner and violēt robber,
not an aduouterer, but a rauisher of maides, not a stealer of
churche goodes, but an errant traitor, bothe to God and all
godlinesse: not a common ruffin, but a moste cruell cut throte
suche as if a man should rake hell for one, he could not finde
the like. Again, if one would enueigh against bacbiters, after
this sort. Thou hast not robbed hym of his money, but thou
hast taken awaie his good name, whiche passeth all worldly
goodes, neither hast thou slaūdered thyne enemie, but thyne
awne brother, & frende, that meant thee well, and hath doen
thee pleasures: nay thou hast not slandred him, but thou hast
slain hym. For a man is halfe hanged, that hath lost his good
name. Neither hast thou killed him with the sword, but poysoned
hym with thy tongue, so that I maie call it rather an
enchanting, then a murther. Neither hast thou killed one mā
                        
alone, but so many as thou hast brought out of charite, with
thy moste venemous bacbityng Yea, and last of al, thou hast
not slain a man, but thou hast slain Christe in his members,
so muche as laie in thee to do. But of this figure I haue spoken
heretofore, where I wrote of amplificacion.
                  
                  
                     ¶Reieccion.
                     REieccionReiectio. is then vsed, when we lay suche faultes frō vs,
as our enemies would charge vs with all, saiyng
it is foly to thynke any suche thyng, muche more to
speake it: or els to saie, suche a mannes worde is no slaunder,
or it nedeth not to talke of suche toyes. Or thus. Who wold
thinke that I would doo suche a deede? Or is it like that I
would do suche a dede? Antony charged Tully, that he was
the occasion of ciuill battaill. Nay (ꝙ Tullie) it is thou, it is
thou manne and none other, that settes Ceasar on worke, to
seke the slaughter of his countrey.
                  
                  
                     ☞A Buttresse.
                     A Buttresse is a fe
                           •
                        se made for that,premunitio whiche we purpose
to hold vp, or go about to compasse. As thus. I hope my
lordes, bothe to perswade this man by reason, & to haue
your iudgemēt in this matter. For wheras it is a sore thyng
to be iustly accused, for breaking frendship, then assuredly if
one be wrōgfully slandred, a man had nede to loke about him
                  
                  
                     ☞A familiar talke, or communicacion vsed.
                     COmmunicacionCommunicatio. is then vsed, when
we debate with other,
and aske questiōs, as though we loked for an answer,
and so go through with our matter, leauyng the
iudgement therof to their discrecion. As thus. What thinke
you in this matter? Is there any other better meanes to dispatche
the thyng? What would you haue doen, if you were
in thesame case? Here I appeale to your awne conscience,
whether you would suffer this vnpunished, if a man should
do you the like displeasure.
                  
                  
                     ☞Descripcion of a mannes nature, or maners.
                     WE describeDescriptio the maners of men, when we set thē furthe
in their kynd what thei are. As in speakyng against a coueteous
man, thus. There is no suche pi
                           •
                        che pe
                           •
                        y on
liue, as this good felowe is. He will not lose the paryng of

his nailes. His heire is neuer rounded, for sparyng of money
one paire of shoen serueth hym a .xij. moneth, he is shod with
nailes like a horse. He hath been knowē by his cote this .xxx
winter. He spentones a grote at good ale, beyng forced thorowe
companie, and taken short at his worde, wherevpon he
hath taken suche conceipt sins that tyme, that it hath almost
cost hym his life. Tullie describeth Piso for his naughtines
of life, wonderfully to heare, yea, worse then I haue setfurth
this coueteous man. Read the Oracion against Piso, suche
as be learned.
                  
                  
                     ☞Error.
                     ERrourErroris inductio. is, when wee thinke mu
                           •
                        he otherwise then the
truth is. As whē we haue conceiued a good opinion of
some one man, & are often deceiued, to saie, who would
haue thought, that he euer would haue doen so. Now of all
menne vpon yearth, I would haue least suspected hym. But
suche is the world. Or thus. You thinke suche a man a worthy
personage, and of muche honestie, but I will proue, that
he is muche otherwise: a man would not thynke it, but if I
do not proue it, I will geue you my hedde.
                  
                  
                     ☞Mirthe makyng.
                     I Haue heretofore largely declared, the waies of mirth making,
& therfore I litle nede to renue thē here in this placeIn hilaritatē impulsio
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶Anticipacion, or Preuencion.
                     ANticipacion,Ante occu
                              •
                           patio. is when we preuent those wordes, that
another would saie, and disproue theim as vntrue, or
at least wise, answere vnto them. A Godly Preacher
enueighed earnestly against those, that would not haue the
Bible to bee in Englishe, and after earnest probacion of his
cause, saied thus: but me thynkes I heare one saie. Sir, you
make muche a dooe, aboute a litle matter, what were we the
worse, if we had no scripture at al? To whom he answered:
the scripture is left vnto vs by Goddes awne will, that the
rather we might knowe his commaundementes, & liue therafter
al the daies of our life. Sometymes this figure is vsed
when we saie, we will not speake this or that, & yet doo notwithstandyng.
As thus. Suche a one is an Officer, I will
not saie a briber. Righte is hyndered throughe might
                           •
                        ,

I will not saie, ouerwhelmed. Thus in saiyng we will not
speake, we speake our mynde after a sort, notwithstandyng.
                  
                  
                     ¶A Similitude.
                     A SimilitudeSimilitudo is a likenesse when .ij. thynges, or mo then two, are so cōpared and resembled together, that thei
bothe in some one propertie seme like. Oftentymes
brute beastes, and thynges that haue no life, minister
greate matter in this behalfe. Therefore those that delite to
proue thynges by similitudes, must learne to knowe the nature
of diuerse beastes, of metalles, of stones and al suche, as
haue any vertue in them, & be applied to mannes life. Sometymes
in a worde appereth a similitude, whiche beyng dilated
helpeth wel for amplificaciō. As thus. You striue against the
streme, better bowe then breake. It is euill runnyng against
a stone wall. A man maie loue his house wel, and yet not ride
vpon the ridge. By all whiche, any one maie gather a similitude,
and enlarge it at pleasure. The prouerbes of Heiwode
helpe wonderfull well for this purpose. In comparyng a
thyng from the lesse to the greater, Similitudes helpe well
to set out the matter. That if we purpose to dilate our cause
hereby with poses and sentences, wee maie with ease talke
at large.Similitude enlarged. This shall serue for an e
                           •
                        ample. The more precious
a thyng is, the more diligently should it bee kepte, and
better hede taken to it. Therfore tyme, (cōsideryng, nothyng
is more precious,) should warely bee vsed, and good care taken,
that no tyme bee lost, without some profite gotten. For
if thei are to be punished, that spende their money, and waist
their landes, what folie is it, not to thynke theim worthie
muche more blame, that spend their tyme (whiche is the chifest
treasure that God geueth) either idlely, or els vngodly?
For what other thyng doeth manne lose, when he loseth his
tyme, but his life? And what can bee more deare to man, then
his life? If wee lose a litle money, or a ryng of golde with a
stone in it, we compt that greate losse. And I praie you, whē
wee lose a whole daie, whiche is a good porcion of a mannes
life, shall wee not compte that a losse, consideryng though
our money bee gone, wee maie recouer thesame again, but
tyme lost can neuer be called backe again. Again whē we lose

our money, some bodye getteth good by it, but the losse of
time turneth to no mannes auayle. There is no man that
loseth in anye other thynge, but some bodye gayneth by it,
sauynge onelye in the losse of time. Yea, it hathe saued the
lyfe of some, to lose al that they hadde. For riches be the occasion
sometimes of muche mischiefe in this lyfe, so that it
were better sometymes wastefullye to spende, then warely
to keepe: by the losse of time, no man hath profited him selfe
any thing at all. Besides this, the better & more precious a
thing is, the more shame to spēd it fondly. Though mē kepe
their goodes neuer so close, and locke them vp neuer so fast,
yet often times, either by some mischaunce of fyre, or other
thinge, they are lost, or els desperate Dickes borowes nowe
and then againste the owners wille, all that euer he hathe.
And now though ye owner be vndone, yet is he not therfore
dishonest, considerynge honestye standeth not in wealthe or
heapes of money: But the losse of tyme, seynge it happeneth
throughe oure owne folye, not onelye dothe it make
vs wretches, but also causeth menne to thinke that wee are
paste all grace. A wonderfull kynde of infamie, when the
whole blame shall reste vpon none other mannes necke, but
vpon his onelye that suffereth all the harme. Wyth money
a manne maye bye lande, but none can gette honestie of that
pryce: and yet with well vsinge of tyme, a manne not onely
might get him muche worshippe, but also myghte purchase
himself a name for euer. Yea, in a smal time a man might get
greate fame, and liue in much estimation. By losinge of money
wee lose little elles: by losynge of time, wee lose all the
goodnes and gyftes of GOD, whiche by laboure might be
hadde.
                     Thus a Similitude myghte be enlarged by heapynge
good sentences, when one thinge is compared wyth an other,
and a conclusion made therupon.
                     Emonge the learned menne of the Churche, no one vseth
this figure more then Chrisostome, whose writynges the
rather seme more pleasaunte and swete. For similitudes are
not onelye vsed to amplifie a matter, but also to beautifie
the same, to delite the hearers, to make the matter playne,

and to shewe a certaine maiestye wyth the reporte of suche
resembled thinges, but because I haue spokē of similitudes
heretofore in the boke of Logique, I will surcesse to talke
anye further of this matter.
                  
                  
                     ☞Example.
                     HE that myndeth to perswade, muste neades be well
stored with examples.Exemplum And therfore muche are they
to be commended whiche searche Chronicles of all
ages, and compare the sta
                           •
                        e of our elders, with this
prese
                           •
                        te time. The historye of Goddes boke to the christian
is infallible, and therfore the rehearsall of suche good thinges
as are therin conteyned, moue the faythfull to all vpright
doinge and amendmente of their lyfe. The Ethnicke
aucthoures styrre the hearers, beynge well applyed to the
the purpose. For when it shall be reported that they whiche
hadde no knowledge of God, liued in a brotherlye loue, one
towardes an other, detested aduoutrye, banished periures,
hanged the vnthanckefull, kepte the ydle withoute meate,
tyll they laboured for their liuynge, suffered none extorcion,
exempted Brybers frome bearynge rule in the commune
Weale: the Christians muste neades be ashamed of
their euyll behauiour, and studye much to passe those, whiche
are in callynge muche vnder theim, and not suffer that
the ignoraunte and Paganes lyfe, shall counteruayle the
taughte chyldren of God, and passe the Christians so much
in good liuynge, as the Christians passe theim in good learninge.
Uneguall examples commende muche the matter.
I call theim vneguall, when the weaker is brought in againste
the stronger, as if chyldren be faythfull, much more
ought menne to be faythfull. If wome
                           •
                        ne be chaste, and
vndefiled: menne shoulde muche more be cleane, and wythoute
faulte. If an vnlearned manne wyll do no wronge, a
learned man and a preacher muste muche more be vprighte,
and liue without blame. If an housholder will deale iustlye
with his seruauntes, a Kynge muste muche the rather

                           •
                        eale iustelye with his subiectes.
                     
                        Examples gathered out of histories and vsed in this sort,
helpe muche towardes perswasion. Yea, brute beastes minister
greate occasion of righte good matter, considerynge
manye of theim haue shewen vnto vs, the paternes and ymages
of diuers vertues.
                     DouesDoues seyng an hauke, gather all together, teachynge vs
none other thing, but in aduersitie to sticke one to another.
                     CraynesCraynes in the nyght haue their watche, warninge vs
neuer to be carelesse, for if their watche faile them, they al
neuer leaue tyll they haue killed that one Crayne, teachyng
vs that no traytours are worthye to liue vpon earth. The
watche for his safegarde, and because he woulde not slepe:
holdeth a stone in his fote, the which falleth from him, whē
he beginneth to waxe heauy, and so he kepeth him selfe s
                           •
                        yll
wakyng. Wherby wee maye learne that all menne in their
vocation shoulde be right ware and watchfull. The Henne
clocketh her chickens, feadeth them, and kepeth theim from
the Kyte. Womenne must clocke their children, bring them
vp well, and kepe them from euill happe. Nowe I myght
in speakinge of some odious vyce, largelye sette oute some
example belonginge to the same, and compare it with o
                           •
                        her
by heapinge of Chronicles, and matchinge of thynges together.
                     The vnthankefullVn
                              •
                           hankeful
                              •
                           nes how euil it is in this age (whereof there is no small
number) can not haue enoughe saide againste theim. And
therfore I am minded to saye somewhat againste theim, to
the vtter abhorrynge of all suche vnkynde dealynge. For
he that is vnthankeful, and for herty loue, sheweth cankard
hatred: wanteth all other Uertues, that are required to be
in manne. The chiefe perfection and the absolute fulfillyng
of the Lawe, standeth in the loue which manne oweth first
to God, and nexte to his neighboure. Lette a 
                           〈◊〉
                         haue
fayth that he may be able to translate mountaines (as saint
Paule sayeth:) yea, let his haue neuer so good qualities, or
be he neuer so politique a manne for the saulfegarde of his
Countrey, be he neuer so wise, so ware, and so watchful: yet
if he wante Loue, he is nothynge elles but as a soundinge
brasse, or a tinckelinge Cymbal.
                     
                        Nowe he that is churlishe and vnthankefull, muste neades
wante loue, and therfore wanteth he all other goodnes.
The Persians therfore seyng the greatenes of this offence
and that where it rested, all vyces for euer were banished:
prouided by a law that suche should suffer death as felons,
which were founde faultye with vnthankefulnes.Vnthankefulnes punyshed by the Pers
                              •
                           
                           
                           
                              •
                           s with death
                     
                     And yet I can not see but they deserue rather an exquisite
kynde of Deathe (suche as fewe haue sene, or fewe haue
felte) then to suffer lyke Deathe with other, that haue not
like offended wyth them.
                     But nowe because this offence is an euill most odious,
and the principal occasion of all other mischiefe, I will set
forthe three notable examples, the one of a Dragon, the seconde
of a Dogge, and the thirde of a Lyon (whiche all thre
in thankefulnes, if that be true whiche is reported of theim
wonderfullye exceaded,) and the rather I seke to set theim
oute, that the wycked herebye maye well knowe what they
theim selues are, when bruite Beastes shall sette theim al
to schole.
                     There was a manne (as Plinie writeth) whiche fostered
vp a yong Dragon,Thankfulnes of a Dragon who seynge the same beaste to waxe
wonderfull greate, feared to kepe his Dragon anye longer
within his house, and therfore he put him out into a wylde
Foreste. It happened afterwarde that the same manne
traueylinge on hys iourney throughe the Foreste, was
besette with thieues. And nowe beynge in this distresse,
and lokinge for none other ende but deathe, made (as lothe
to departe) a grea
                           •
                        e showte and an outcrye: strayghte vpon
whose noyse, and at the knowledge of his voyce, the Dragō
came to him in all the haste possible. Wherupon the theues
beinge greatelye afrayed, ranne cleane awaye to saue theim
selues harmeles. Thus throughe the thanckefulnes of a
Dragon, this mans life was saued.
                     The dogge of the Romaine Fuluius is more wonderful
This Fuluius traueylinge by the waye, was slayne wyth
slaues that laye in wayte for him.Thākefulnes 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           . Hys Dogge seynge his
master deade, laye by him for the space of two dayes. Wherupon
when the manne was missinge, and searche made for
him: they founde him dead, with his Dogge liynge by him.
                     
                        Some marueylinge to see the Dogge lye there by hys
deade master, stroke him, and woulde haue driuen him from
the deade corse, and coulde not: some seynge suche kindenes
in the Dogge, and pitiynge him that he should lye there wt
                        out
meate, two or thre dayes before: cast him a pece of flesh,
wherupon the Dogge strayghte caried the meate to his masters
mouthe, and woulde not eate anye whitte him selfe,
thoughe he hadde forborne meate so longe before. And last
of all, when this deade bodye shoulde be caste into the riuer,
(according to the maner of the Romaines) the Dogge leapt
in after, and holdynge vp his maister so longe as he coulde,
did chose rather to dye with him, thē to liue without him.
                     The Lyon (wherof Appian the Grammarian doth speake)
is also straunge for his kindenes, and almost incredible.Thākefulnes of a Lyon.
A seruaunte that hadde runne awaye from his master, and
hidde him selfe for feare in a caue, within a greate woodde,
toke a thorne out of a Lions fote, whiche then came to him
for succour as he lay there. Now whē he had done, the lion
to requite his good turne, brought suche meate to the caue,
as he coulde kyll in the woode. The whiche meate the Seruaunte
rostynge againste the Sunne, (beynge in the mooste
hotte countrey of all Affrica) did eate from time to time. At
length yet being werye of suche a lothesome lyfe, he left the
caue, & came abrode, by meanes wherof, he was takē again,
and beinge a slaue to his master (who hadde power of life &
deathe ouer him) he was condempned to be cast to the wylde
beastes at Rome, there to be deuoured of a Lyon. The pore
caytife stode pitifullye in the sighte of thousandes, euer iokinge
when he sholde be deuoured. It happened at thesame
time, when this felow was thus adiudged to dye: that the
same Lyon was taken, whose foote he healed in the wood.
When the Lyon was putte to him, he came firste very terribly
towarde this felowe, and immediatly knowyng what
he was, stoode styll, and at length fauned gently vpon him.
The felow at firste being amased, began to take harte vnto
him afterwardes, as halfe knowing him likewise, and thus
they began bothe to take acquaintaunce thone of thother, & played
together a good space withoute all daunger, wherupon

the people beynge amased, muche wondered at the
straungenes of this thinge. And standinge thus astonied,
they sente to knowe of the slaue, what this matter shoulde
meane. Unto whom this poore wretche opened the whole
thynge altogether, euen as it happened. When the people
hearde this, they not onely reioysed much at the sight therof,
but also they made earnest request to his Master for his
lyfe. His master marueylinge as muche as anye of them,
at suche an vnwonte kyndenes: gaue him not onelye hys
life, but also his fredome. And nowe to the ende he myght
haue somewhat whereupon to lyue, the people gaue hym a

                           •
                        ee for terme of his lyfe. The felowe by and by gotte him a

                           •••
                        e and a coler, and caried the Lyon vp and downe the citye
in suche sorte, as huntesmenne carye a Greyhounde, or a
Spaniell, the people styll wonderynge, and sayinge euer as
he came bye: Beholde a manne that hath cured a Lyon, behold
a Lyon that hath saued a man.
                     The whiche example, the more straunge it is, the more
ashamed maye they be that are vnnaturall, and maye learne
kindenes of a bruite Beaste. For suche menne beynge
ouercome with kindnes by Beastes, are worsse then Beastes,
& more mete rather to be tormented with Deuils, then
to liue with men.
                  
                  
                     Of enlargynge examples by copye.
                     ANd now because examples enriched by Copy, helpe
muche for Amplification: I will geue a taste, howe
these and suche lyke Histories maye be encreased.
                     And for the better handelynge of theim, nedefull it
is to marke well the circumstaūces: that beynge well obserued
and compared together on bothe partes, they maye the
rather be enlarged.
                     As thus.Example enlarged. That whiche bruite Beastes haue doone,
shalt thou being a man seme not to haue done? They shewed
them selues natural, and wilt thou appeare vnnaturall?
Nay they ouercame nature, and wilte thou be ouercome of
them? They became of beastes in bodye, men in nature, and
wilt thou become of a manne in bodye, a Beaste in nature?
                     They beinge withoute reason, declared the propertye of

reasonable creatures, and wilte thou beinge a man endued
wyth reason, ap
                           •
                        eare in thy doynges altogether vnreasonable?
Shall Dogges be th
                           •
                        nkefull: and menne, yea, christian
menne wante suche a vertue? Shall wormes shewe
suche kindenes: and menne appearre gracelesse? It had ben
no matter if they had bene vnthankefull: but man can neuer
escape blame, seinge God hathe commaunded, and Nature
hathe graffed this in all menne: that they shoul
                           •
                        e do to other,
as they woulde be done vnto. Agayne, they for m
                           •
                        ate
onelye sh
                           •
                        wed them selues so kinde: and shal man for so many
benefites receiued, and for such goodnes shewed, requite
for good will, euil dedes: for hartie loue, deadlye hatred: for
vertue, vyce: and for life geuen to him, yelde death to other?
Nature hath parted man and beast: and shall man in nature
be no manne? Shamed be that wretche that goeth agaynst
nature, that one ye hath the shape of a man, and in nature is
worse then a beast. Yea, worthye are all suche ra
                           •
                        her to be
torne with deuils, then to liue with men. Thus an example
might moste copiouslye be augmented, but thus muche for
this time is sufficient.
                     The saiynge of Poets and all their fables are not to be
forgotten,Poeticall narrations profitable. for by them we may talke at large, and winne mē
by perswasion, if wee declare before hande, that these tales
were not fayned of suche wise menne without cause, neither
yet continued vntyll this tyme, and kepte in memorie without
good consideration, and therupon declare the true meanynge
of all suche writinge. For vndoubtedlye there is no
one tale emonge al the Poetes, but vnder the same is comprehended
some thinge that perteyneth eyther to the amendemente
of maners, to the knowledge of trueth, to the settynge
forthe of Natures woorcke, or elles to the vnderstandinge
of some notable thynge done. For what other is the
paynefull trauayle of Ulisses discribed so largelye by Homere,
but a liuely picture of mans miserie in this life.
                     And as Plutarche sayth▪ and likewise Basilius Magnus:
In the Iliades are described strengthe and valeantenes of
the bodye: In Odissea is set forthe a lyuelye Paterne of
the minde.
                     
                        The PoetesPoets vnder cul
                              •
                           ures shew muche wisdome. were wise men, & wished in harte the redresse
of thinges, the whiche when for feare they durst not openly
rebuke, thei didde in coloures paynte theim oute, and tolde
menne by shadowes what they shoulde do in good south: or
els because the wycked were vnworthy to heare the truth,
they spake so, that none myght vnderstande, but those vnto
whom they pleased to vtter their meaninge, and knewe thē
to be menne of honeste conuersation.
                     We reade of DanaeDanae the fayre damosel, whom Iuppiter

                           •
                        empted full ofte; and coulde neuer haue his pleasure, tyll
a
                           •
                         lengthe he made it raine golde, and so as shee sate in her
chimney, a greate deale fell vpon her lappe, the whyche shee
toke gladly, and kepte it there: within the which gold Iuppiter
him selfe was comprehended, wherby is none other
thynge elles signified, but that women haue bene, and wyll
be ouercome with money▪
                     
                     Likewise Iuppiter fanseinge the fayre maide IsisIsis could
not haue his will, till he turned him selfe into a fayre whyte
Bull, whiche signified that beautie may ouercome the best.
                     If a manne woulde speake agaynste couetous Caytifes,
can he better shewe what they are, then by settynge forthe
the straunge plague of Tantalus,Tantalus who is reported to be in
Hell, hauinge water comminge styll to his chynne, and yet
neuer able to drynke: and an apple hangyng before his mouthe,
and yet neuer able to eat?
                     IcarusIcarus. woulde nedes haue wynges and flye contrary to
nature, wherupon when he hadde them sette together with
ware, and ioyned to his syde, he mounted vp into the ayre.
But so sone as the sunne hadde somewhat heated him, and
his waxe began to melte, he fel downe into a greate Riuer,
and was drowned out of hande, the whiche water was euer
after called by his name. Now what other thing dothe this
tale shewe vs, but that euerye man should not meddle with
thinges aboue his compasse.
                     MidasMidas. desiered that whatsoeuer he touched, the same
might be golde: wherupon when Iuppiter hadde graunted
him his bounde: his meate, drinke, and al other thinges turned
into gold, and he choked with his owne desire, as al cocouetouse

men lightely shalbe, than can neuer bee content
when they haue enough.
                     What other thyng are the wonderfull labours of Hercules,Hercules laboures w
                              •
                           at they signi
                              ••
                           ed.
but that reason shoulde withstande affection, and the
spirite for euer should fight, against the fleshe? We Christians
had like fables heretofore of ioyly felowes, the Images
wherof were set vp (in Gods name) euen in our Churches.
But is any man so mad to thynk that euer there was suche
a one as S. ChristoferS. Christofer what he signified. was paincted vnto vs? Mary God
forbid. Assuredly when he liued vpō earth there were other
houses builded for hym, then we haue at this tyme, and I
thynke tailers were muche troubled to take measure of him
for makyng his garmentes. He might be of kynne to Garganteo,
if he were as bigge as he is set forthe in Antwerpe▪
But this was the meanyng of our elders (and the name self
doth signifie none other) that euery mā should beare Christ
vpon his backe, that is to say, he should loue his brother as
Christe loued vs, and gaue his body for vs: he shoulde tra
                        
                           ••
                        ile
through hunger, colde, sorowe, sickenes, deathe, and al
daungers with al sufferaunce that might be. And whether
should he trauaile? to the euerliuyng GOD▪ but how? In
darkenes? No forsouth, by the light of his word. And therfore
Sainct Christofer beyng in the Sea, and not well able
to gette out (that is to say beyng almost drouned in synne, &
not knowyng whiche waie best to escape) an Heremite appered
vnto hym with a lāterne & a light therein, the whiche
dothe signifie none other thyng to the Christian but the
true woorde of God, whiche lighteneth the hartes of men, &
geueth vnderstandyng to the youngelinges (as the Prophet
doth saie). Againe, Sainct GeorgeS. George on horse backe. he is set on horsebacke &
killeth a Dragon with his speare, whiche Dragon woulde
haue deuoured a virgine, whereby is none other thyng mēt
but that a Kyng and euery man vnto whom thexecution of
iustice is committed, should defende the innocent against the
vngodly attemptes of the wicked, and rather kill suche deuilles
by marcial law, than suffer the innocentes to take any
wrong. But who gaue our clargie any suche aucthoritie
that those monsters shoulde bee in Churches as laye mens

Bookes? God forbadde by expresse worde to make any grauen
Image, and shal we be so bolde to breake Gods wil for
a good entent, and call these Idolles laie mens Bookes? I
could talke more largely of examples, & heape a nomber here
together, aswell of Ethnike Aucthours, as of other here at
home: but for feare I should be tediouse, these for this tyme
that suffise.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of Fables.
                     THe feigned fables, such as are attributed vnto brute
beastes, would not be forgotten at any hand. For not
onely they delite the rude & ignoraunt, but also they
helpe muche for perswasion.Apologi. And because suche as
speake in open audience haue euer moe fooles to heare them
than wise men to geue iudgement: I would thynke it not amisse,
to speake muche accordyng to the nature and fansie of
the ignoraunt, that the rather thei might be wonne through
fables, to learne more weightie & graue matters▪ for al men
cannot brooke sage causes, and auncient collacions: but wil
lyke earnest matters the rather, if some thing be spokē there

                           •
                        mong agreyng to their natures. The multitude (as Horace
doth say) is a beast, or rather amōster that hath many heades
Fables▪ how nedeful they are to 
                              •
                           eache the ignoraū
                           
                              •
                           e. and therefore like vnto the diuersitie of natures, varietie of
inuencion must alwaies be vsed. Talke altogether of moste
graue matters, or depely searche out the ground of thynges
or vse the Quiddities of Dunce to sette forth Gods misteries:
& you shal see the ignoraunt (I warrant you) either fal
a slepe, or elles bid you farewel. The multitude must needes
be made mery: & the more foolish your talke is, the more wise
wil they counte it to be. And yet it is no foolishnesse, but rather
wisedome to wynne men by tellyng of fables to heare
of Gods goodnesse. Undoubtedly fables well sette forthe,
haue doen muche good at diuerse tymes, and in diuerse cō
                        mune
weales. The Romaine Menenius Agrippa allegyng
vpon a tyme a fable of the conflicte made betwixt the partes
of a mans bodie, and his belie: quieted a marueilouse stirre
that was lyke to ensewe & pacified the vprore of 
                           •
                        ediciouse
rebelles, whiche els thought for euer to destroy their countrie.
Themistos
                           •
                        es perswaded the Atheniās not to chaunge

their Officers, by rehersyng the fable of a scabbed fore. For
(ꝙ he) when many flees stode feedyng vpon his rawe fleshe,
& had wel fedde themselues, he was contented at anothers
persuasion, to haue them slapte away: whereupon their ensewed
suche hungry flees afterwardes, that the sorie fo
                           •
                        e
beyng al alone was eaten vp almost to the harde boone, and
therefore cursed the tyme that euery he agreed to any suche
euil counsel. In lyke maner (ꝙ Themistocles) if you will
chaunge Officers, the hungry flees will ea
                           •
                        e you vp one after
another, whereas now you liue beyng but onely bitten,
and lyke to haue no farther harme, but rather muche welth
and quietnesse hereafter, because they are filled, and haue enough,
that heretofore suckte so muche of your bloud.
                     Now likewyse as I gaue a lesson how to enlarge an example,
so may fables also in lyke sorte be sette out, & augmented
at large by Amplification. Thus muche for the vse
of fables. Againe, sometymes fei
                           •
                        ed Narrations and wittie
inuented matters (as though they were true in deede) helpe
wel to set forwarde a cause, & haue great grace in thē, beyng
aptely vsed & wel inuented. Luciane passeth in this pointe:
& sir Thomas More for his Eutopia can soner be remēbred
of me, then worthely praised of any according as the excellē
                        cie
of his inuenciō in that behaulf doth most iustly require.
                  
                  
                     ¶Digestion.
                     DIgestionDigesti
                              •
                           . is an ordely placyng of thynges, partyng
euery matter seuerally. Tullie hath an example
hereof in his Oration whiche he made for Sextus
Roscius Amarinus. There are three thynges (ꝙ Tullie)
whiche hynder Sextus Roscius at this tyme, the accusacion of his aduersaries, the boldenes of them, and the
power that they beare. Eruscus his accuser hath taken vpō
hym to forge false matte
                           •
                        , the Roscians kinsfolke haue boldly
aduentured, & wil face out their doynges, & Chrisogonus
here, that most can do, wil presse vs with his power.
                  
                  
                     ¶A whisht, or a warnyng to speake no more.
                     A Whisht, is when we bid them holde their peace that
haue least cause to speake, and can do litle good with
their talkyng.Reticen
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           . Diogenes beeyng vpon the Sea emong

a number of naughtie packes in a greate storme of wether,
when diuerse of these wicked felowes cried out for feare of
drownyng, some with fained prayour to Iuppiter, some to
Neptune, and euery one as they beste fantaised the goddes
aboue:
                           
                              •
                           iogenes. whishte (ꝙ Diogenes) for vp Gods mother, if God
hym selfe knowe you be here, you are lyke to be drowned
euery mothers sonne of you. Meanyng that they were so
nought, and so fainedly made their prayour to false Godes
without mynde to amende their naughtie lyfe, that the lyuyng
God woulde not leaue them vnpunished though they
cried neuer so fast. Wee vse this figure likewyse, when in
speakyng of any man: we saie, whisht, the woulfe it at hand:
when the same man cometh in the meane season, of whome
we spake before.
                  
                  
                     ¶Contrarietie.
                     COntrarietieContentio. is, when our talke standeth by contrarie
wordes, or sentences together. As thus wee mighte
despraise some one man. he is of a straunge nature as
euer I sawe, for to his frende he is churlishe, to his
foe he is ientle: geue him faire wordes, and you offende hym:
checke hym sharpely, and you wynne hym. Let hym haue his
will, and he will flye in your face: kepe hym shorte, and you
shal haue hym at commaundement.
                  
                  
                     ¶Fre
                           •
                        nesse of speache.
                     FReenesse of speache,Liberavox is when wee speake boldely, &
without feare, euen to the proudest of them, whatsoeuer
we please, or haue list to speake. Diogenes
herein did excel, and feared no man when he sawe
iust cause to saie his mynde. This worlde wanteth suche as
he was, and hath ouer many suche, as neuer honest mā was,
that is to say, flatterers, fawners, and southers of mennes
saiynges.
                  
                  
                     ¶Stomake grief.
                     STomake grief,Iracundia. is when we will take the matter as
hote as a tost. We nede no examples for this matter,
hote men haue to many, of whom they may be bould
and spare not, that fynde them selues a colde. Some tymes

we en
                           •
                        reate earnestly and make meanes by pra
                           •
                        er to wynne
fauour.Deprecatio Somtymes we seke fauour by speakyng well of the
companie present.Cōcilia
                              •
                           io. As. Thorowe your helpe my lordes this
good deede hath been done.Laesio. Some tymes we speake to hurte
our aduersaries, by settyng forth their euil behauior.Purgatio. Sometymes
we excuse a fault, and accuse the reporters.Optatio. Sometymes
we wishe vnto God for redresse to euil. Sometimes we
curse the extreme wickednes of some pastgood roisters.Execratio. In
al whiche I thynke neither examples neede, nor yet any rehersal
had been greately necessarie, cōsidering al these come
without any great learnyng, sauing that for apt bestowing,
iudgement is right nedeful.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of figures in sentencies, called Schemes.
                     WHen any sentence vpon the placyng, or settyng of
wordes, is said to be a figure: thesaied is alwaies
called a Scheme, the whiche wordes beyng altered,
or displaced, the figure streight doth lose his
name, and is called no more a scheme. Of this sorte there be
diuerse, suche as hereafter folowe.
                  
                  
                     ¶Doublettes.
                     DOublettes,Geminatio verborum. is when we reherse one and thesame
worde twise together. Ah wretche, wretche, that
I am. Tullie against Catiline inueighyng sore against
his traiterouse attemptes, saith after a lōg
rehersed matter, and yet notwithstandyng all this notouriouse
wickednesse: the mā liueth stil, liueth? Nay mary he cometh
into the counsel house whiche is more. An other: Darrest
thou showe thy face, thou wretched theef, thou theefe I
saie to thyne owne father, darrest thou looke abrode? Thus
the ofte repeatyng of one worde doth munhe stirre the hearer,
and makes the worde seeme greater, as though a sworde
were ofte digged & thrust twise, or thrise in one place of the bodie.
                  
                  
                     ¶Alteryng parte of a worde.
                     ALteryng parte of a word,Pau
                              •
                           um immutat 
                              〈◊〉
                            verbum. is when we take a letter, or
sillable from some word, or els adde a letter, or sillable
to a worde. As thus. Williā Somer seyng muche
a do for accomptes makyng, & that the Kynges Maiestie of

most worthie memorie Henry theight wanted mony suche
as was due vnto hym: And please your grace (ꝙ he) you
haue so many frauditours, so many conueiers, and so many
deceiuers to get vp your money, that they get al to themselues.
Whether he said true, or no, let God iudge that. it was
vnhappely spoken of a foole, & I thynke he had some Scholemaister:
he shoulde haue saied Auditours, Surueyours,
and Receauours.
                  
                  
                     ¶Repetition.
                     REpetitionRepetitio a primo. is when we begynne diuerse sentencies
one after another with one and thesame worde. As
thus: When thou shalt appere at the terrible da
                           •
                        e
of iudgemēt before the high maiestie of God, where
is then thy richesse? where is then thy deintie faire? where
is thē thy great band of men? where are then thy faire houses?
wher are then al thy lādes, pastures, parkes, & forestes?
I might saie thus of our soueraine lord the Kynges maiestie
that now is. Kyng Edwarde hath ouerthrowne idololatrie:
Kyng Edwarde hath bannished superstition: Kyng
Edward by Gods helpe hath brought vs to the true knowlege
of our creation: Kyng Edwarde hath quieted our cō
                        sciencies,
& laboured that al his people should seeke healthe
by the death and Passion of Christ alone.
                  
                  
                     ☞Conuersion.
                     COnuersionConuersio
                              •
                            eiusdem in extremum. is an ofte repeatyng of the last worde, & is
contrarie to that which went before. Whē iust dealing
is not vsed: welth goeth away, fryndship goeth away,
truth goeth awaie, all goodnes (to speake at a worde)
goeth awaie. Where affections beare rule, there reason is
subdued, honestie is subdued, good wil is subdued, & al thinges
els that withstande euil, for euer are subdued.
                  
                  
                     ¶Comprehension.
                     COmprehersion,Conuersio in eadem. is when bothe the aboue rehersed figures
are in one kynd of speakyng vsed, so that bothe
one first worde must ofte be rehersed, & likewise al one
last worde. What winneth the hartes of men? Liberalitie.
What causeth men to aduenture their lifes, and dye
willyngly in defence of their masters? Liberalitie. What cō
                        tinueth

the sta
                           •
                        e of a Kyng? Liberalitie. What becometh a
woman best,Silence b
                              •
                           cometh a wom
                              •
                           n best. & first of al? Silence. What seconde? Silence.
What third? Silence. What fourth? Silence. Yea if a man
should aske me til dowmes day, I would stil crie, silence, silence,
without the whiche no woman hath any good gifte,
but hauing thesame, no doubt she must haue many other notable
giftes, as the whiche of necessitie do euer folow suche
a vertue.
                  
                  
                     ¶Progression.
                     PRogressionProgressio standeth vpō contrarie sentences which
answere one another. If we would rebuke a naughty
boie, we might with cōmendyng a good boie, say
thus. What a boie are thou in cōpar
                           •
                        son of this fellow
here. Thou sleapes: he wakes: thou plaies: he studies:
thou art euer abrode: he is euer at home: thou neuer waites:
he stil doth his attendaunce: thou carest for no body: he doeth
his dutie to al men: thou doest what thou ca
                           •
                        st to hurt al, &
please none: he doth what he can, to hurte none, & please all.
                  
                  
                     ¶Lyke endyng, and lyke fallyng.
                     THen the sentences are said to ende lyke, when those
wordes do end in like sillables, which do lacke cases.Similite
                              •
                            desinens, similiter cadens.
Thou liues wickedly, thou speakes naughtely. The
rebelles of Northfolke (ꝙ a most worthie man that
made an inuectiue against thē) through slauerie, slew Nobilitie:
in dede miserably, in fashiō cruelly, in cause deuilishly.
                     Sentencies also are said to fal like, when diuerse wordes
in one sentenc
                           •
                        e ende in lyke cases, & that in ryme. By great
trauaile is got muche auaile, by earnest affection, men learne
discrecion.
                     These .ij. kyndes of Exornacion are then most delitefull
when contrarie thynges are repeated together: when that
ones again is vtterde, whiche before was spoken: when sentencies
are turned, and letters are altered. Of the first this
may be an example: Where learnyng is loued, there labour
is estemed: but wher sleuth is thought solace, there rudenes
taketh place. A Kyng is honoured, that is a Kyng in dede.
wil you drink or you go, or wil you go or you drinke. There
is a diffrence betwixt an horsemilne, & a milnehorse. He is a

meter man to driue the Carte, than to serue in the Courte.
Through labou
                           •
                         cometh honour, through ydell lyuyng foloweth
hangyng. Diuerse in this our tyme delite muche in
this kynd of writyng, whiche beeyng measurably vsed, deliteth
muche the hearers, otherwyse i
                           •
                         offendeth, and werieth
mens eares with sacitie. S. AugustineAugustine. had a goodly gifte in
this behaulf, & yet some thinkes he forgot measure, and vsed
ouermuche this kynde of figure. Notwithstandyng the people
were suche wher he liued, that they toke muche delite in
rimed sentences, & in Orations made ballade wise. Yea thei
were so nyce & so waiwarde to please, that excepte the Preacher
from tyme to tyme coulde ryme out his Sermon, they
woulde not long abide the hearyng. TacitusTacitus. also sheweth
that in his tyme, the iudges & sergeauntes at the lawe were
driuen to vse this kynd of phrase both in their writyng, & also
in their speaking. Yea great lordes would thynk thēselfes
contēpned, if learned men (when they spake before thē)
sought not to speake in this sorte.Rymed sentences vsed without measure. So that for the flowyng
stile, & ful sentence, crepte in mynstrelles elocution, talkyng
matters altogether in rime, & for weightinesse & grauitie of
wordes, succeded nothyng els but wantonnesse of inuencon.
Tullie was forsaken, with Liuie, Cesar, & other: And Apuleius,
Ausonius, with suche mynstrell makers were altogether
folowed. And I thynke the Popes heretofore (seeyng
the people folie to be suche) made al our Hymnes & Anthemes
in rime,Rymes made, to mocke the simple. that with the singyng of mē, plaiyng of organnes,
ringyng of belles, & r
                           •
                        nyng of Hymnes, & Sequencies
the poore ignoraunt might thinke the Harmonie to be heauenly,
& verely beleue that the Angels of God made not a
better noise in heauen. I speake thusmuche of these two figures,
not that I thinke folie to vse them (for thei are pleasaunt
& praise worthie) but my talke is to this end, that thei
shoulde neither onely, nor chefely to vsed, as I know some
in this our time do ouermuche vse them in their writynges.
And ouermuche (as al men know) was neuer good yet. Yea
a man may haue ouermuche of his mothers blessyng if she
wil neuer leaue blessyng. Therefore a measure is best, yea euen
in the best thynges. And thus farre for these .ij. figures.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Egual members.
                     EGuall members are suche, when the one halfe of the
sentence answereth to the other,Pa
                              •
                           ia pa
                              •
                           ibus rela
                              •
                           a. with iust proporciō
of nomber, not that the sillables of necessitee, should
be of iust nōbre, but that the eare might iudge them,
to bee so eguall, that there maie appere small difference. As
thus. Lawe without mercie, is extreme power, yet men thorowe
folie, deserue suche iustice. Learnyng is daungerous,
if an euill man haue it. The more noble a manne is, the more
ientle he should be. Isocrates passeth in this behalfe, who is
thought to write altogether in nomber, kepyng iust proporcion
in framyng of his sentence.
                  
                  
                     ¶Like emong themselfes.
                     SEntences are called like, when contraries are set
together,Similia inter se. and the firste taketh asmuche as the other
folowyng: and the other folowyng taketh asmuche
a waie, as that did, whiche went before. As thus▪
Lust hath ouercome shamefastenesse, impudencie hath ouercome
feare, and madnesse hath ouercome reason. Or els sentences
are said to be like emong themselfes, when euery part
of one sentēce is eguall, and of like weight one with another
As thus. Is it knowen, tried, proued, euident, open, and assured
that I did suche a deede? Another. Suche riote, Dicyng,
Cardyng, pikyng, stealyng, fighting, ruffines, queanes
and harlottes, must nedes bryng hym to naught.
                  
                  
                     ¶Gradacion.
                     GRadacionGradatio. is when we reherse the worde that goeth
nexte before, and bryng another woorde thereupon
that encreaseth the matter, as though one should go
vp a paire a staiers, and not leaue til he come at the
toppe. Or thus. Gradacion is when a sentence is disseuered
by degrees, so that the worde, whiche endeth the sentence goyng
before, doeth begin the nexte. Labour getteth learnyng,
learnyng getteth fame, fame getteth honour, honour getteth
blesse for euer. Another. Of slouthe cometh pleasure, of pleasure
cometh spendyng, of spēdyng cometh whoryng, of whoryng
cometh lacke, of lacke cometh thefte, of thefte cometh
hangyng, and there an ende for this world.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶Regression.
                     THat is called regression,Regressio. when we repeate a worde
eftso
                           •
                        es, that hath been spoken, and rehersed before,
whether thesame bee in the beginnyng, in the
middest, or in the latter ende of a sentence.
                     In the beginnyng, thus. Thou art ordeined to rule other,
and not other to rule thee.
                     In the middest, thus. He that hath money, hath not geuen
it and he that hath geuen money, hath not his money still:
but he that hath geuen thankes, hath thankes still, & he that
hath them still, hath geuen them notwithstandyng.
                     In the latter ende, thus. Manne must not liue to eate, but
eate to liue. Man is not made so the Sabboth, but the Sabboth
is made for man. If man do any filthy thyng, and take
pleasure therein: the pleasure goeth awaie, but the shame tarieth still.
If manne do any good thyng with pain, the paines
go awaie, but the honestie abideth still.
                  
                  
                     ¶wordes loose.
                     WOrdes louse are suche,Dissolutnm which as are vttred without
any addicion of coniunccions, suche as knitte
woordes and sentences together. As thus. Obeye
the Kyng, feare his lawes, kepe thy vocacion, doo
right, seke rest, like well a litle, vse all menne, as thou wouldest
thei should vse thee.
                  
                  
                     ¶Out criyng.
                     OUt criyng is when with voyce we make an exclamacion.Exclamatio
Oh Lorde, O God, O worlde, O life, O
maners of menne? O death, where is thy styng? O hell
where is thy victorie?
                  
                  
                     ¶Oft vsyng of one worde in diuerse places.
                     CAn he haue any mannes harte in hym, or deserueth
he the name of a man, that cruelly killeth a poore innocent man,
who neuer thought hym harme.
                  
                  
                     ¶A cause geuen to a sentence vttered.
                     I Feare not myne aduersarie, because I am not giltie.
I mistrust not the Iudges, because thei are iuste, the
quest will not cast me, the matter is so plain.
                  
                  
                     ¶A cause geuen to thynges contrary.
                     
                        BEtter it were to rule, then to serue: For, he that ruleth,
liueth: because he is free. But he that serueth,
cannot be saied to liue. For where bondage is, there
is no life properly.
                  
                  
                     ¶Sufferaunce.
                     TAke your pleasure for a tyme, and do what you list,Permissio▪
                        
a tyme will come when accompt shalbe made. Whē
thynges cannot be, that we would haue, we should
will that, whiche we can haue. Pacience is a remedy
for euery disease.
                  
                  
                     ¶A doubtyng.
                     SHall I call hym foole,Dubitatio. or shall I call hym varlet,
or bothe? Another. What made hym to commit
suche a robberie? Lacke of money, or lacke of wit,
or lacke of honestie? I doubte whether to call hym
a foolishe knaue, or a knauishe foole. When muche matter
was here in Englande, for callyng the Pope, supreme hedde
of the Churche (ꝙ a Spanyarde,A Spaniardes dou
                              •
                           te. that whilome was of the
Popes courte in Rome) you doubt muche here in England,
whether the Pope be hedde of the churche or no, and greate
variaunce there is emonges you, at the whiche foly of yours
I doo muche maruaill, for we doubte muche at Rome, whether
he be a member of the Churche at all, or no.
                  
                  
                     ☞Reckenyng.
                     REckenyng, is when many thynges are nombred together.Dinumeratio.
There is no streat, no house, no man, no child, no
shop, no lodgyng in all this toune, but he hath been in
it. There is no stone, no Diamōd, no Saphire, no Rubie, no
Christall, no Turcasse, no Emerode, but he knoweth theim
perfectly. By this figure we may enlarge that, by rehersyng
of the partes, whiche was spoken generally, & in fewe wordes.
This maie be an example. Suche a ientle man beyng an
vnthrifte, hath spent all that euer he had. Thus the sentenceSentence amplified by seuerall rehersyng of thynges.
maie be ampli
                           •
                        ied, if we shew particularly what he had, and
tell seuerally how he spent it. Loke what enheritaunce came
to him (whiche was no small thyng) by the death of his awn
kinne, and his wifes kinsfolk: What dower soeuer he had by
mariage of his wife, which by report was very greate thyng
Whatsoeuer he got by executorship: Whatsoeuer the kinges

Maiestie gaue hym. What booties soeuer he gotte in warre
fare, looke what money he had, what plate, what apparell,
what householde stuffe, what lande and Lordeshippes, what
Shepe, goodes, Parkes, and Medowes, yea, whatsoeuer he
had, moueable, or vnmoueable, his house, and all that euer he
had: he hath so spent in fewe daies, so wasted it, & made suche
hauocke of all together, emong the beastly compagnie of filthy
queanes, emong abhominable harlottes, with banquetyng
from daie to daie, with sumpteous reare suppers, with
drinkyng in the nighte, with dain
                           •
                        ees and delicates, and a
                           •
                        l
suche swete delites, with Dicyng, Cardyng, and all maner
of gamenyng: that he hath now left neither crosse nor crucifixe,
no not a dodkin in all the worlde, to blesse hymself with al.
Thus these wordes (he hath spent all his goodes in riot)
are dilated, and sette furthe at large, by rehersyng seuerally
euery thyng, one after another.
                  
                  
                     ¶Reasonyng a matter with our selfes.
                     THen wee reason the matter with our selfes,Disputatio when
we aske questions of our selfes, and answere therevnto.
As thus. Howe came this good felowe by all
that he hath? Did his father leaue hym any lande?
Not a foote. Did his frendes geue hym any thyng? Not a
grote. Hath he serued in any vo
                           •
                        acion, to heape vp so muche
wealth? No
                           •
                        e hath liued more idlely. Doeth he not leane to
some noble man? Yea, but he neuer receiued more then .iiij.
marke wages. How then cometh he by all that euer he hath,
liuyng without labour, hauyng no frendes to helpe hym, hauyng
so litle to take vnto by all outwarde apparaunce, and
spendyng so l
                           •
                        berally, and owyng no man a grote in all the
world? Assuredly, it cannot be otherwise, but that he cometh
naughtily by moste of that, whiche he hath Another. Seyng
thou art so basely borne, so poore in state, so smally learned,
so hard fauoured, and hast no witte at al, what meanest thou
to vaunte thy self so muche, and to make suche bragges as
thou doest. What doeth make thee to waxe so proude? Thy
stocke wherof thou diddest come? Why manne, thei are very
base folke. Thyne awne wealth? 
                           •
                        ushe, thou art as poore as

Iob. Thy learnyng? Marie thou neuer camst yet where any
learnyng did growe. Thy beautie? Nowe in good sothe, a
worse fauoured manne can there not be vpon yearth again.
Thy witte? Now God he knoweth, it is as blounte as may bee.
What other thyng then, is all this thy braggyng, but
plain madnesse.
                  
                  
                     ¶Resemblyng of thynges.
                     
                        REsemblyng of thynges, is a comparyng or likenyng
of looke, with looke, shape, with shape, and
one thyng with another. As when I see one in a
greate h
                           •
                        ate, and fiersely set vpon his enemie, I
might saie, he lette flee at hym like a Dragon. Or thus. He
lookes like a Tyger, a man would thinke he would eate one,
his countenaunce is so ougle. He speakes not, but he barkes
like a Dogge: he whettes his tethe like a Bore, he beates the
grounde with his foote, like a greate Horsse: he is as raumpyng
as a Lion. By this figure called in Latine Imago,
                        Imago. that
is to saie an Image, we mighte compare one manne with another,
as Salust compareth Ceasar and Cato together, or
we mighte heape many men together, and proue by large rehersall,
any thyng that we would, the whiche of the Logicians
is called induccion.
                  
                  
                     ¶Answeryng to our self.
                     WE are saied to answere our self, when wee seme to
tell our self,Sibi ipsi responsio. what we will do. Phedria in Terence
beyng muche troubled and out of quiet, because he
was not receiued of his woman, but shutte out of
dores, when he was moste willyng to se her, made as though
he would not come to her afterwardes, nor yet se her at all,
when she did moste iently sende for hym. And therfore beyng
in his anger, thus he saied: Well, what shall I dooe? Shall
I not go, not euen now when she sendes for me, of her awne
accorde? Or shall I be of suche a nature, that I cannot abide
the despitefulnesse of harlottes? She hath shutte me out, she
calles me again. Shal I go to her? Naie I will not, though
she entreate me neuer so faire.
                  
                  
                     ☞Order.
                     
                        ORderOrdo. is of twoo sortes, the one is, when the worthier
is preferred, and set before. As a man is sette
before a woman. The seconde is, when in amplificacion,
the weightiest wordes are sette last, and in
diminishyng, thesame are sette formoste. With what looke,
with what face, with what harte dare thou do suche a dede?
                  
                  
                     ☞Brief describyng, or circumscripcion.
                     CIrcumscripcion,Circumscriptio. is a briefe declaryng of a thyng. As
thus. He is free, that is subiect to no euil. It is a vertue
to eschewe vice.
                     There are diuerse other colours of Rhetorique, to commende
and set furthe a sentence, by chaunge of wordes, and
muche varietee of speache, but I had rather offende in speakyng
to litle, then deserue rebuke in saiyng to muche. Forasmuche
as close silence maie so
                           •
                        er be pardoned, then immoderate
bablyng can want iust blame, & therfore thus an ende.
                  
                  
                     ¶Of memorie.
                     AS I haue labored to set out thother partes of Rhetorique,
in suche ample wise as I thought moste nedefull
so it standeth me in hand, not to slacken myne endeuor,
now that I am come to speake to memorie. For, though man
haue vnderstandyng and iudgement, whiche is one parte of
wisedome: yet wantyng a remembraunce to apply thynges
aptly, when tyme and place shall best require: he shal do but
small good with al his vnderstandyng. And therfore it is said
not without reason, that thesame is memorie to the mynde,
that life is to the body. Now then what els must thei do that
esteme reason, and loue knowlege, but cherishe the memorie
from tyme to tyme, as an especiall and souereigne preseruatiue,
against thinfeccion of cankard obliuion. The faulkners
saie, it is the first poyncte of haukyng to hold faste. And yet I
cannot thinke otherwise, but that in al good learnyng also,
it is best & moste expedient, euermore to hold fast. For, what
auaile good thynges, if we cannot kepe theim, if wee receiue
them in at one eare, and let theim out as fast again at the other
eare? A good thriftie man will gather his goodes together
in tyme of plentie, and laie theim out again in tyme of

nede: and shall not an Oratour haue in store good matter, in
the cheste of his memorie, to vse and bestowe in tyme of necessitee?
I doubte not, but all men desire to haue, a good remembraunce
of thynges, the whiche what it is, how it is diuided,
and howe it maie bee preserued, I will shewe in as
fewe woordes as I can.
                  
                  
                     ☞what is memorie.
                     MEmorieMemorie what it is▪
                         is the power retentiue of the mynde, to
kepe those thinges, whiche by man
                           •
                        es wit are cō
                        ceiued,
or thus. Memorie is the power of the mind
that conteineth thynges receiued, that calleth to
mynde thynges past, & renueth of freshe, thynges forgotten.
                  
                  
                     ¶The place of memorie.
                     THe Phisicians declare, that in the former parte of
the hed, lieth the common sense, the whiche is therfore
so called, because it geueth iudgement, of al the
fiue outwarde senses, onely when thei are presently
occupied aboute any thyng. As when I heare a thyng, or see
a thyng, my common sense iudgeth, that then I doe heare, or
se thesame. But the memorie called the Threasure of the
mynde, lieth in the hynder parte, the whiche is made moste
perfect by temperatnesse, and moderacion of qualitees in the
brain. For where humours excede or want, there must nedes
ensue muche weakenesse of remembraunce. ChildrenChildren and old men haue but euill memories. therefore
beyng ouer moyst, and olde menne ouer drie, haue neuer
good memories. Again, where ouer muche cold is, & extreme
moysture, there is euer muche forgetfulnesse. Therfore it auaileth
greatly, what bodies we haue, and of what constitucion
thei bee compacte together.Hot and moys
                              •
                            bodies sone conc
                              •
                           iue. For suche as bee hotte and
moyste, do sone conceiue matters, but thei kepe not long. Again,
thei that bee colde and drie,Colde and drie kepe thynges sure. dooe hardely conceiue, but
thei kepe it surely, when thei ones haue it. And the reason is
this, heate beyng chief qualitee, dooeth drawe thynges vnto
it (as we maie se by the Sonne) the whiche notwithstādyng
are sone after dissipated & resolued. Again, who hath seen a
print made in water of any yerthly thing? Then though heat
and moysture together, drawe thynges vnto them, yet (we se

plainly) thei cannot long hold theim. But when the brain is
cold and drie, thynges are therfore the faster holden, because
it is the propertie of colde and drought, to thicken all thynges,
and to harden theim faste together, as we see the water
through coldenesse, is congeled, and softe thynges are frosen
oftentymes, almoste as harde as a stone. So that moysture,
through heate beyng chief qualitee, doth drawe: and drought
through coldnesse, whiche is chief contrary to heate, dooeth
harden and make thynges fast together. But now how dooe
wee knowe, that the memorieMemorie in the latter part of the hedde. resteth in the latter parte of
the hedde? No doubte, experience hath proued, and confirmed
this to be moste true. For, there hath been some, that beyng
hurt in that place, haue vtterly forgot their awne name
I do remember one man, that (beeyng hurte in that place, at
the insurreccion of the Lincolne Shire men, xv. yeres past)
could not deuise the makyng of some Letters, in his Crosse
rowe, when he tooke penne and ynke, to write to his frende,
whereas before that tyme, he wrote bothe faste and faire, and
was learned in the Latine. And therefore when he wrote, he
would stande musyng a greate while, before he could call to
his remembraunce, howe he vsed to make a .P. a G. or suche
another letter, whereupon diuerse muche marueiled what
he would haue, or what he ment at the first tyme. For beyng
greued, and willing to aske help, he could not vtter his meanyng,
for lacke of remembraunce, and yet his tongue serued
hym well otherwise, to vtter whatsoeuer came in his hedde.
                  
                  
                     ¶The diuision of memorie.
                     MEmorieMemorie diuided. is partly naturall, and partly artificiall.
Naturall memorie is, when without any preceptes
or lessons, by the onely aptenesse of nature, we
beare awaie suche thynges as wee heare. Wherein
some heretofore, did muche excell, and greatly passe all other.
As Themistocles,Themistocles. who had so good a memorie, that
when one proffered to teache hym the arte of memorie, naye by
saincte Mar
                           •
                        e (ꝙ he) teache me rather the arte of forgettyng.
Declaryng thereby that his memorie was passyng
good, and that it was more pain for hym, to forgette suche
thynges, as he would not kepe, then hard to remember suche

thinges as he would knowe.
                     MithridatesMithridates also hadde suche an excellente memorie,
that whereas he was Lorde and ruler ouer .xxij. straunge
countries that spake diuers speaches one from an other: he
was able to talke wyth euerye one of theym in their owne
countrey language.
                     Likewyse CyrusCyrus. Kynge of the Persians, hauinge a
greate armye of menne, knewe the names of all his Souldiours.
                     CyneasCyneas Ambassadoure for kinge Pyrrhus, called euerye
one by his name that was in the Parliamente house at
Rome, the seconde daye after he came thither, the number
of them beyng foure times as many as they 
                           •
                        e, that belonge
vnto the Parliament here in Englande.
                     Iulius CesarIulius Cesar. is reported that he coulde reade, heare,
and tel one what he should write, so fast as his penne could
runne, and endite letters hym selfe altogether at one time.
                     Thus we see that naturallye menne haue hadde wonderfull
memories, as contrarywise there haue bene hearde
of as straunge forgetfull wittes. Some hathe not knowen
his right hande from his lefte. An other hath forgotteForgetful wittes. his
owne name. An other hath caried his knyfe in his mouth,
and hath runne rounde aboute the house sekinge for it. An
other hath tolde a tale halfe an houre together, and immediatly
after hath forgotte what he spake al that while.
                     Cicero telleth of one Curio, that where as he woulde
make a deuision of three partes, he woulde either foget the
thirde, or make vp a fourthe, contrarye to his firste purpose
and entente.
                     This I remember beinge a boye,Belike thys man had the arte of forget
                              •
                           tinge. that where as a preacher
hadde taken vpon him to set forthe the .xij. Articles of
our beliefe, he coulde not in all the worlde finde oute paste
nine. So that he was fayne to saye, he was assured there
was twelue, where soeuer the other thre were become, and
he doubted not but the hearers knewe theim better then he
did, and therfore he woulde for his parte saye no more, but
commit them all to God, and those nine (thought he) were
enoughe for him at that time, to set forthe and expounde for

their vnderstandinge.Pre
                              •
                           erua
                              •
                           ion o
                              •
                            Memorie.
                     
                     Nowe the beste meane bothe to mende an euil memory
and to preserue a good, is firste to kepe a diet, and eschewe
surfites, to slepe moderatelye, to accompanye with women
rarelye, and laste of all to exercise the witte with cunnynge
of manye thinges without Booke, and euer to be occupied
with one thinge or other. For euen as by laboure the witte
is whetted, so by lithernes the witte is blunted.
                     But nowe concerning the other kinde of memorye called
artificial, I had nede to make a long discourse, considering
the straungenesse of the thinge to the English eare, and the
hardnes of the matter, to the ignoraunte & vnlearned. But
firste I will shew from whence it hath beginning, and vpon
what occasion it was first inuented, before I aduenture to
declare the preceptes that belonge vnto the same.
                  
                  
                     The firste founder of the arte of Remembraun
                           •
                        e.
                     THE inuention of this Arte is fatherde vpon Simonides,Simonides, 
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           st aucthoure of the Arte of remembraūce.
for when the same manne (as the fable recordeth)
had made in behalfe of a triumphāt Champion
called Scopas, for a certaine summe of money
a Ballade, suche as was then wonte to be made for Conquerours:
he was denied a piece of his rewarde, because he
made a digression in his songe (whiche in those dayes was
customablye vsed) to the praise and commendatiō of Castor
and Pollur (who were then thoughte being Twinnes, and
gotte by Iuppiter to be Goddes) of whom the Champion
willed him to aske a porcion, because he hadde so largelye
set forthe their worthye doynges. Nowe it chaunced, that
where as there was made a great feast to the honour of the
same Uictorye, and Simonides had bene placed there as a
geiste, he was sodainely called from the table▪ and told that
there was two yonge men at the dore, & bothe on horsebacke
whiche desiered moste earnestlye to speake with him oute of
hande. But when he came out of the dores, he sawe none at
all, notwithstanding, he was not so sone out, and his fote
on the thresholde, but the Parlour fell downe immediatlye
vpon theim al that were there, and so crusshed their bodies

together, & in such sorte, that the kinsfolke of those whiche
were deade, comming in, and desierous to burie them euery
one according to their calling, not onely could they not perceiue
them vp their faces, but also they coulde not discerne
them by any other marke of any parte in all their bodies.
                     Then Simonides well remembringe in what place euerye
one of theim did sitte, tolde theim what euery one was, and
gaue them their kinsfolkes carkases, so many as were there
Thus the arte was first inuented. And yet (thoughe this be
but a fable) reason might beat thus much into our heades,
that if the like thinge had bene done, the like remembraunce
might haue ben vsed. For who is he that seeth a dosen sit at
a table whom he knoweth verye well, can not tell, after they
are all risen, where euery one of them did sitte before? And
therefore be it that some man inuented this tale: the matter
serueth well our purpose, and what nede we any more?
                  
                  
                     Vvhat thinges are requisite to get the Arte of Memorie.
                     THey that wyll remember manye thynges and rehearse
them together out of hande: muste learne to
haue places, and digest Images in them accordingly
                     A Place what it is.
                     A place is called anye rowme apt to receiue thinges.
                     An Image what it is.
                     An Image is any picture or shape, to declare some certayne
thing therby. And euē as in waxe we make print wt a seale
so we haue places wher liuely pictures must be set. The places
must be greate,Places vowe they must be. of small distaunce, not one like an other,
and euermore the fifte place must be made notable aboue the
rest, hauinge alwayes some seuerall note from the other, as
some antique, or a hande pointing, or suche like, that the rather
hauinge a greate number of places, we might the better
knowe where we are, by the remembraunce of suche notable
and straunge places. And thus hauynge theim well
appoynnted, wee muste kepe theim freshe in oure memorye,
and neuer chaunge them, but vse them styll, whatsoeuer we
haue to saye. But the ymages we may chaunge as the matter
shal geue iust cause, vsinge suche as shall serue beste for
the knowledge of thinges.
                     
                        The whiche Images muste be sette forthe as thoughe they
were stirring,Images how they must be. yea they must be sometimes made raumping,
and last of all, they muste be made of thinges notable, suche
as maye cause earnest impression of thinges in our mind. As
a notable euill fauoured man, or a monstruous horse, suche
as sainte Georges horse was wonte to be, or any such like,
helpe well for remembraunce.
                     
                        i. The places of Memory are resembled vnto
Waxe and Paper.
                        ij. Images are counted lyke vnto letters or
a Seale.
                        iij. The placing of these Images, is like vnto
wordes written.
                        iiij. The vtteraunce and vsing of them, is like
vnto readynge.
                     
                     ANd therfore as we do reserue paper, and yet chaūg
our writynge, putting out wordes as occasion shal
serue, and settinge other in their rowme: so may we
do for the Images inuented, chaunge our pictures
ofte, and reserue the papers still. Some gather their places
and ymages oute of the crosse rowe, beginninge euerye
letter with the name of some Beaste, and so go thorowe the
whole, makyng in euerye beaste fyue seuerall places, where
the impression of thinges shalbe made, that is to saye, in the
Heade, the Bealye, in the Taile, in the former parte of the
legges, and also in the hinder part. So that bi this meanes,
there shall be gathered, an hundreth and fiftene places.
                     Some againe will set their places in his heade or bodye
wi
                           •
                        h whom they speake. As to make the nose, the eyes, the
forheade, the heere, the eares, and other partes, to serue for
places. And for makinge places in anye house, churche, or other
rowme, this lesson is also geuen, that wee enter oure
firste places alwaies vpon the right hande, neuer returning
backe, but goynge on styll as I might saye in a circuite, til
we come to that place where we first beganne. But first before
the Images be inuented, the places muste be learned

perfitelye, and therfore one geueth coūsayle that we should
go into some solitary place where no company is, and there
make our places, walking vp and downe foure or fiue times
and callyng styll to our remembraunce what and where the
places are. And not onely to do this once or twise, but to laboure
in it two or thre dayes at seuerall times, vntil we shal
be able to tel our places vpon our fingers endes.
                     And nowe to make this harde matter somewhat plaine,
I will vse an example. My frende (whom I toke euer to
be an honest manne) is accused of thefte, of aduoutrie, of ryot,
of manslaughter, and of treason, if I woulde kepe thes
                           •
                         wordes
in my remembraunce, and rehearse them in order as
they were spoken, I muste appoynte fiue places, the whiche
I hadde neade to haue so perfectlye in my memorye, as
coulde be possible. As for example, I will make these in
my chamber. A dore, a windowe, a presse, a bedsteade, and a
chimney. Now in ye dore, I wil set Cacus the thefe, or some
suche notable verlet. In the windowe I will place Venus.
In the presse I will put Apitius yt famous glutton. In the
bedsteade I will set Richard the thirde kinge of England,
or some like notable murtherer. In the chimney I wil place
the blacke Smythe, or some other notable traytoure.
                     That if one repete these places, and these Images twise or
thrise together, no doubte, though he haue but a meane memorie,
he shal carye awaye the wordes rehearsed with ease.
And like as he maye do with these fiue woordes, so maye he
do wyth fiue score, if he haue places freshe in hys remembraūce,
and do but vse him selfe to this trade one fortenight
together.
                     Therfore thoughe it seme straunge and folyshe to them
that knowe it not, yet the learned haue taken this waye, &
doubte not but maruayles maye be done, if one haue places
readye made for the purpose, and haue them freshe in his remembraunce.
For what other thinge els do they that appoynt
ymages in certaine places made for that purpose, but
write (as a manne woulde saye) vpon Paper, that which is
spoken vnto them? What maketh the olde manne (that for
lacke of naturall heate and moisture, scante knoweth hys

right hande from his lefte) remember in the morning where
he layed his purse all nyght, but the beddes heade, whyche
lyghtlye is the appoynted place for all mennes purses, especiallie
such as be wayfairers, and haue but little store.
                     Shall some gentilman playe blyndefolde at the chesse, and
can not a learned man be able to rehearse vp a score or two
of straunge names together? A Neteherde hauinge the
charge and kepynge of .xviij. score heade of beastes in a wyld
Fenne, that belonge to diuers menne, will not onelye tell,
who be the owners of al suche cattell, but also he wil shew
a manne twise a weeke where anye one is feading, and if he
wante one amonge the whole, he will tell immediatly what
it is, and whose it is that is wantynge. Then fonde are
they that counte the Arte of Memorye so harde, seynge
they will neither proue the hardenes of it, nor yet blowshe
at the matter, when they see pore neteherdes go so farre beyonde
them. Howe many thinges dothe Memorie conteine
marueylous to beholde, and muche more would, if we were
not altogether slouthful, and as carelesse to kepe, as we are
to gette, good thinges I meane, not goodes of thys world.
Euerye Artificer hath through exercise and laboure, an artificiall
memorye, sauynge the learned man onely, who hath
most nede of it aboue all other.
                     When we come to a place where we haue not bene many
a daye before, we remembre not onely the place it selfe, but
by the place, we call to remembraunce manye thinges done
there. Yea sometimes a window maketh some remēber that
they haue stollen in their daies some thing out of it. Sometimes
a chimney telleth them of manye late drinkinges and
sittinges vp by the fire. Sometimes a bedstead putteth thē
in remembraūce of many good morowes, sometimes a dore,
& sometimes a parler. Thus we se places euē wtout images,
helpe oft the memorye, muche more then shall we remēbre,
if we haue both places and Images.
                     But nowe because I haue halfe weried the reader with
a tedious matter, I will harten him agayne wyth a merye
tale. At the time of rebellion in Northfolke, there was a
priest emong al other adiudged to dye vpō a gibet in a grene

place, a little from the hyghe waye side. This Prieste s
                           •
                        
                        inge
the place of his laste ende, stode a whyle musinge wyth
him selfe, and saide to the companye there. Now Lord God
what a thinge is this.God graunt al rebels lyke remembraunces. It comes to my remembraunce nowe
that aboute fourtene yeres paste, I was merye here vpon
thys Bancke wyth an other Prieste, and wallowynge me
downe vpon the grasse, I said these wordes: Haec requ
                              •
                           
                           es
mea in seculū seculi, hic habitabo quoniam elegi eam.
The whiche Sentence beynge a Psalme of Dauid, is nothinge
els in Englishe, But this is my restynge place for
euer and euer, here shall be my dwellynge, because I haue
chosen it. And nowe (quod he) I finde it to be ouer true, so
that I thinke it be Goddes wyl I should dye, and therfore
I take it in good worthe, and thus I desire you al to praye
for me. Thus we see that the place brought hym in remembraunce
of a sentence spoken .xiiij. yeres before.
                     Therfore this knoweledge is not to be neglected, no thoughe
we do contemne it, yet we haue the vse of it. For if we
be fully disposed to remēber a thing, we do call vp the memorye,
and styrre it to mynde thynges lyke thereunto. As
if one be called Wingefeld, and I feare to forget this name
I might remembre the winge of a byrde,Remembraūce bi thinges like and a grene feld to
walke in. Sometymes we remēber the whole, by kepyng in
mynde some parte of a word. As when one is called Crowcroft,
I myght by remembring of a Crowe, the rather mind
his name.
                     Notwtstāding ther be some (emōg whō is Erasmus) which
like not this arte of Memorie, but saye it rather hindereth,
then helpeth a mans wit. And yet Tullie the greatest Oratour
emong the Romaynes, did wel alowe it, and proued it
good by a naturall reason. For where as we knowe some
thinges (sayeth he) onelye by vnderstandynge, and some by
the sence of seynge, those we kepe best in our mindes whiche
we knowe by sight, & haue marked with our eyes. As for example.
When I se a Lyon, ye ymage therof abideth faster in
my mind, thē if I should heare some report made of a Lyon
Emong all the senses, the eye sight is most quicke, & cōteineth
the impressiō of thinges more assuredly, thē any of the
other senses do.
                     
                        And the rather when a manne bothe heareth and seeth a
thinge (as by artificiall memorye he dothe almoste se thinges
liuelye) he dothe remember it muche the better. The sight
printeth thinges in a mannes memorye, as a seale doth
prynce a mannes name in waxe. And therfore heretofore Images
were sette vp for remembraunce of Sainctes, to be
laye mennes bokes, that the rather by seinge the Pictures
of suche menne, they might be stirred to folowe their good
liuynge. The whiche surely hadde bene well done, if God
had not forbidden it. But seinge thinges muste be done not
of a good entente, but euen as God hath commaunded, it is
well doone that suche Idolles are cleane taken oute of the
churche. Marye for this purpose wherof we nowe write,
they woulde haue serued gayly well. Thus the arte is sone
tolde, but the practise of it is all. And therfore if one desire
to excell herein, let him take paynes to gather his places together,
and kepe them well in remembraunce, prouinge by
halfe a score, how he shall be able to vse a hundreth. And no
doubte, but time and exercise shall make him perfecte.
                     For the beste arte of memorye that can be, is to heare
muche, to speake muche, to reade muche, and to write much.
And exercise it is that dothe all, when we haue saide al that
euer we can.
                  
               
               
                  Of Pronunciation.
                  PRonunciation is an apte orderinge bothe of the
voyce,Vtteraunce it is. countenaunce, and all the whole bodye, accordynge
to the worthines of suche woordes and
mater as by speache are declared. The vse hereof
is suche for anye one that liketh to haue prayse for tellynge
his tale in open assemblie, that hauing a good tongue, and a
comelye countenaunce, he shalbe thought to passe all other
that haue the like vtteraunce: thoughe they haue much better
learning. The tongue geueth a certayne grace to euerye
matter, and beautifieth the cause in like maner, as a
swete soundynge Lute muche setteth forthe a meane deuised
Ballade. Or as the sounde of a good instrumente styrreth

the hearers, and moueth muche delite, so a cleare soundyng
voice comforteth muche our d
                        •
                     intie eares, with muche
swete melodie, and causeth vs to allowe the matter rather
for the reporters sake, thē the reporter, for the matters sake.
Demosthenes therfore,Demostenes saiyng of pronunciation. that famouse Oratour beyng asked
what was the chiefest point in al Oratorie, gaue the chiefe
and onely praise to Pronunciation, being demaunded, what
was the seconde, and the thirde, he stil made answere, Pronunciation,
and would make none other aunswere, till they
lefte askyng, declaryng hereby that Arte without vtteraūce
can dooe nothyng, vtteraunce without Arte can dooe right
muche. And no doubte that man is in outwarde apparaunce
halfe a good Clarke, that hath a cleane tongue, and a comely
gesture of his bodie.Aeschines. Aeschines lykewyse beyng bānished his
countrie through Demosthenes, when he had redde to the
Rhodians his owne Oration, and Demosthenes aunswere
thereunto, by force wherof he was bannished, and all they
marueiled muche at the excellencie of the same: then (ꝙ Aeschines)
you would haue marueiled muche more if you had
heard hymselfe speake it. Thus beyng cast in miserie & bannished
for euer, he could not but geue suche great reporte of
his most deadly and mortal ennemy.
                  
                     ¶The partes of Pronunciation.
                     PRonunciation standeth partely in fashionyng the
tongue, and partely in framyng the gesture.
                     The tongue, or voice is praise worthie, if the vtteraunce
be audible, strong, and easie, & apte to order
as we liste. Therfore they that mynde to gette praise in
tellyng their minde in open audience must at the first beginnyng
speake somwhat softely, vse meete pausyng, and being
somewhat heated, rise with their voice, as the tyme & cause
shal best require. Thei that haue no good voices by nature,
or cannot wel vtter their woordes, must seeke for helpe elswhere.
Exercise of the bodie, fastyng, moderacion in meate,
and drynke, gaping wyde, or singyng plaine song, & counterfeityng
those that do speake distinctly, helpe muche to haue
a good deliueraunce. Demosthenes beeyng not able to propronounce

the first letter of that Arte whiche he professed,
but would say, for, Rhethorique, Letolike, vsed to put litle
stones vnder his tongue, & so pronounced, whereby he spake
at lengthe so plainely as any man in the worlde coulde doe.
Musicians in England haue vsed to put gagges in childrēs
mouthes that they might pronounce distinctely, but nowe
with the losse and lacke of Musicke, the loue also is gone of
bringyng vp children to speake plainely. Some therebe that
either naturally,Faultes in pronunciation or through folie haue suche euill voices &
suche lacke of vtteraunce, & suche euil gesture, that it muche
defaceth all their doynges. One pipes out his woordes so
small through defaulte of his wynde pype, that ye woulde
thinke he whisteled. An other is so hource in his throte, that
a man woulde thynke he came lately from scouryng of harnesse.
An other speakes, as though he had Plummes in his
mouthe. An other speakes in his throte, as though a good
Ale crūme stacke fast. An other ratles his wordes. An other
choppes his wordes. An other speakes, as though his wordes
had neede to be heaued out with leauers. An other speakes
as though his wordes shoulde be weyed in a ballaunce.
An other gapes to fetche wynde at euery thirde woorde.
This man barkes out his Englishe Northrenlike with Isay,
and thou ladde. An other speakes so finely, as though he
were brought vp in a Ladies Chamber. As I knew a Priest
that was as nice as a Nonnes Henne, when he would saie
Masse, he woulde neuer saie Dominus vobiscum, but Dominus
vobicum. In like maner as some now wil say, the
Commendementes of God, blacke vellet, for Commaundementes
and blacke veluet. Some blowes at their noistrelles.
Some sighes out their wordes. Some synges their sentencies.
Some laughes altogether, when they speake to any
bodie. Some gruntes lyke a Hogge. Some cackels lyke a
Henne, or a Iack Dawe. Some speakes as thoughe they
shoulde tel a tale in their sleeue. Some cries out so loude,
that they would make a mans eares ake to heare thē. Some

                           •
                        oughes at euery worde. Some hēmes it out. Some spittes
fier, they talke so hotely. Some makes a wrie mouthe, and
so they wreste out their wordes. Some whynes lyke a Pig.

Some suppes their wordes vp as a poore man doth his porage.
Some noddes their head at euery sentence. An other
winckes with one iye, and some with both. This mā frowueth
alwaies when he speakes. An other lookes 
                           •
                        uer as
though he were mad. Some cannot speake, but thei must go
vp and doune, or at the lest be stirryng their feete as though
they stode in a cockeryng Bote. An other wil plaie with his
cappe in his hande, & so tel his tale. Some when they speake
in a great companie, will looke al one way, as I knewe a
reader in my daies, who loked in lyke sorte when he redde
to Scholers, whome one thought to disappoint of suche
his constant lookes: and therefore against the nexte daie he
painted the Deuil with hornes vpon his heade in the selfe
same place where the Reader was wont alwaies to looke,
the whiche straunge monster when the reader sawe, he was
half abashed, and turned his face an other way. Some pores
vpon the grounde, as though thei sought for pynnes. Tullie
telles of one Theophrastus Tauriscus, who is saide to declaime
arsee versee. Some swelles in the face & sill
                           •
                        s their
chekes ful of wynde, as though they would blow out their
woordes. Some settes forth their lippes two ynches good
beyonde their teeth. Some talkes as thoughe their tongue
went of patyns. Some showes al their teeth. Some speakes
in their teeth altogether. Some leates their wordes fall in
their lippes, scant openyng theim when they speake. There
are a thousand suche faultes emong menne bothe for their
speache, and also for their gesture, the whiche if in their
young yeres they be not remedied, they will hartely be forgotte
when they come to mans state. But the rather that
these faultes may be redressed: I haue partly declared heretofore
the righte vse of vtteraunce, and nowe I mynde by
Goddes helpe to shewe the right vse of gesture.
                  
                  
                     ¶Vvat is gesture.
                     GEsture is a certaine comely moderacion of the countenaunce,Gesture what it is.
and al other partes of mans body, aptely
agreeyng to those thynges whiche are spoken▪
That if wee shall speake in a pleasaunt matter, it is meete
that the loke also should be chereful, and al the gesture stirryng

thereafter. The heade to be holden vpright, the forehead
without frownyng, the browes without bendyng, the
nose without blowyng, the iyes quicke and pleasaunt, the
lippes not laid out, the tethe without grennyng, the armes
not muche cast abrode, but comely set out, as time, and cause
shal best require: the handes somtymes opened, and sometimes
holde together, the fingers pointyng, the brest laid out,
and the whole body stirryng altogether with a seemely moderacion.
By the whiche behauiour of our body after suche
a sorte, we shal not onely delite men with the sight, but perswade
them the rather the truth of our cause.
                     Q. Hortensius had suche delite to vse comely gesture,Hortensius. &
had suche grace in that behaulfe: that I doubt whether men
had a greater desire to see hym, than they had to heare hym.
His countenaunce so wel agreed with his wordes, and his
woordes were so meete for his contenaunce, that not onely
he did please the iudgement of his hearers, and contented
their mynde: but also he pleased their iyes, and delited their
eares, so muche as could be wished.
                     Tullie saith well: The gesture of man, is the speache of
his bodie, and therfore reason it is, that lyke as the speache
must agree to the matter, so must also the gesture agree to
the mynde. for, the iyes are not geuen to man onely to se, but
also to shewe, and set forth the meanyng of his mynde, euen
as vnto a Bore are geuen briselles: to a Lyon, the taile: to a
horse, his cares: whereby their inclinacions and soubdeine
affections are sone espied. When we see a man loke redde in
the iyes, his browes bent, his teeth bytyng his vpper lip, we
iudge that he is out of pacience. Therefore as we
ought to haue good regarde for the vtteraunce of our wordes, so
we ought to take
hede
that our gesture
be comely, the whiche bothe
beyng wel obserued, shal euerease fame
and gette estimacion vniuersally.
                     
                        But heare an end. And now as my wil hath been earnest
to doe my beste: so I wishe that my paines may bee taken
thereafter. And yet what needes wishyng, seeyng the good
will not speake euill, and the wicked can not speake well.
Therfore beyng staied vpon the good, and assured
of their ientle bearyng with me: I feare
none, because I stande vpon a
saufe grounde.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶Faultes escaped in thenprintyng.
            
               FOlio .viii. line .xxxii.i. reade, vaunte.
               Fol .xxxiii. lyne .i. Reade, or doe we.
               Fol .lxxvi. line .vii.i. respecte.
               Fol .lxxvi. line .viii. iester.
               Fol .lxxxi. line .vii. seme.
               Fol .lxxxvi. line .xv.ii. Rhetorician.
            
         
         
            
            ¶A Table to fynde out suche matter as is
conteined in this Booke, first by the Leafe, and
nexte by the Page, or syde of the Leafe.
            
               A.
               A Batyng, or lessenyng of a thyng.
               xcvi.i.
               Abraham.
               xxvij.i.
               Abraham howe he is said to be the father of many Nacions.
               xcvij.ij.
               Abusion what it is.
               xciij.i.
               Aduersaries reasons when they should best be confuted.
               v.i.
               Aegyptians what order they vsed to bannishe idelnesse.
               xv.ij.
               Aeschines.
               c.xix.i.
               Affections must be moued.
               ij.ij.
               Affections howe they woulde bee moued.
               lxxi.ij.
               Affections must first bee stirred in hym, that seeketh to stirre other.
               lxxiij.ij.
               Affectation in speakyng Englishe fonde and straunge.
               lxxxvi.i.ij.
               Allegorie what it is.
               xciij.ij.
               Alcestes wyfe.
               xxxi.ii.
               Al
                     •
                  eryng parte of a worde, howe, & what it is.
               cvii.i.
               Ambiguitie.
               liii.i.
               Amplification.
               lxiiii.i.
               Amplification what it is, and how it is deuided.
               lxvi.ii.
               Amplification by comparyng of thynges, and encreasyng of the least.
               lxviii.i.
               Amplification by examples.
               lxviii.i
               Amplification by cōtraries.
               xcix.i.
               Amplificatiō by lessenyng of great faultes to make other seme greater.
               xcix.i.
               Amplification by praisyng the vnworthie the rather that an other may haue more praise.
               lxx.i.
               Amplification by cōiectures.
               lxx.ij.
               Amplification by thynges encreased, and diminished.
               lxxi.i.
               Anaragoras pacience.
               xl
                     •
                  iii.ii.
               Anticipacion wha
                     •
                   it is.
               C.i.
               Aptenesse what it is.
               lxxxviii.i.lxxxix.i.ij.
               Argumentes when they shoulde chiefely be vsed.
               v.i.
               Augmentes howe they shoulde be digested.
               lxxxiiii.
               Art surer guidy than nature.
               iii.ij
               Art to what stede it serueth.
               lxxxv.i
               Arthemisia.
               xxxi.ii.
               Assured truthe what it is.
               xviii.ii.
               Askyng other, & aunsweryng our selfe.
               xcvii.ii.xcviii.i.
               Attemptes worthie.
               vii.ii.
               Athenians forbad Prefaces, and Conclusions.
               lxiiii.i.
               Argumentyng, or diminishyng, to moue laughter.
               lxxviii.ii.
               Augustus fauourable to maried folke that had children.
               xxiiii.ii.
               Augustus abashed at a boies aunswere.
               lxxxii.i.
               Augustine.
               cviii.ii.
            
            
               B.
               BAckebytyng sette forthe by Amplification.
               lxiiii.ii.
               
                  Barbarouse Clarkes no better than slouens.
               lxxxvi.i.
               ABeldames blīd answer.
               lxxvij.ij
               Begynnyng of an Oration what it is.
               lv.i.
               Better borne a begger, than dye a begger.
               lxxxij.ij.
               Better not to hurt a good matter by euil speache, than to further it by good talke.
               v.ij.
               Bibulus pacience for losse of his children.
               xlv.i.
               Blamīg other, how it is said.
               lvij.i
               Brute beastes nature for mournyng.
               xlij.i.
               Buttresse what it is.
               xcix.ij
            
            
               C.
               CAtoes saiyng to him that stroke him, & bad him beware.
               lxxxi.i.
               Chalengyng, or refusing, whē thei are vsed.
               liij.ij.
               Chaūge of name what it is.
               xciij.ij
               Chaunging parte of a letter, word or sillable.
               lxxvij.i.
               Churlishe aunsweres delite sometimes.
               lxxxi.
               Circumstauncies in praising.
               x.i.
               Circumstauncies necessarie to bee noted in al causes.
               v.i.
               Circūstauncies in obseruyng profite.
               xx.ij.
               Circumlocution.
               xciij.ii.
               Close vnderstandyng what it is.
               xcvi.i
               Commons what it is.
               xix.i.
               Cōposiciō out of course.
               lxxxix.i.ii
               Commendyng.
               xxxvi.i.
               Comfortyng the affllicted.
               xxxvi.i.
               Cōmodus the Emperour.
               xliii.ii.
               Comparyng a fault doen, howe it is vsed.
               lvii.ii.
               Composicion.
               lxxxviii.i.
               Comprehension what it is.
               cvii.ii.
               Conclusion what it is.
               iiii.ii.xcvii.ii.lxiii.i.
               Confessyng what it is.
               lvii.
               Cōfirmaciō what it is.
               iiii.ii.lxi.ii
               Confirmacion to proue matters▪ out of Logique.
               lxii.i.
               Confirmacion gatherd of the person.
               lxii.i.
               Confutatiō what it is.
               iiii.i.lxii.ii.
               Coniectures.
               viii.
               Coloures of Rhetorique what they are.
               xciiii.
               Coloures of Rhetorique lykened to the iye sight.
               lxxxix.ii.
               Coniectural State, or issue.
               xlix.i.
               Conuersion what it is.
               c.vii.
               Cōstante truth what it is.
               xviii.ii.
               Contrarie lawes.
               lii.i.
               Continuaunce what it is.
               xix.ii.
               Contrarietie.
               cvi.ii.
               Cornelia.
               xxxi.ii.xliiii.ii.
               Correction.
               lxvii.xcix.i.
               Counsel & good aduise geuē.
               vii.ii.
               Craynes, what straung order they vse.
               cii.
               Curio, passyng in forgetfulnesse.
               cxvii.i.
               Cyneas memorie, notable.
               cxiii.i.
               Cyrus memorie how great it was
               cxiii.i.
            
            
               D.
               DAnae that faire Damosel, how she was deceiued.
               ciiii.ii.
               
                  Dauid commēded for killyng Goliah.
               x.ij.
               Dauid bewailyng the sickenesse of his sonne.
               xliiij.i.
               Death common to all.
               xxxix.ij.
               Death purchaceth rest.
               xlj.j.
               Definicion alwaies nedefull to bee knowen.
               xlvij.ij.
               Definicion how it should bee vsed in causes criminall.
               lij.j.
               Deformitee of body moueth mirth
               lxxviij.ij.
               Delityng nedefull.
               ij.ij.
               Demosthenes tale of the Asses shadowe.
               lv.j.
               Demosthenes saiyng of pronunciacion.
               C.xix.i.
               Demonides saiyng, when he had lost his shooen.
               lxxxj.ij
               Descripciō of a mās nature.
               xcix.ij.
               Descripcion of person.
               xcv.ij.
               Descripcion of an euill and wicked offense.
               lxxij.
               Difference betwixte a common iester, & a pleasaunt wisemā.
               lxxvj.
               Difference betwixt a iest in a word and a long tale.
               lxxviij.
               Digestion what it is.
               Cvj.j.
               Digression or sweruyng.
               xcvj.ij.
               Diminucion.
               lxvij.
               Diogenes beeyng called verlette, what he saied.
               lxxxij.ij.
               Diogenes whishte or warnyng geuen.
               Cvj.ij.
               Diogenes.
               lxxvj.ij.lxxx.j.
               Disposicion and apte orderyng of thynges.
               lxxxiij.j.
               Disposicion what it is.
               lxxxiiij.i.
               Dissēblyng or couert iestīg.
               xcviii.j
               Dissemblyng pleasauntly.
               lxxxj.i
                     •
                  .
               Distribucion.
               xcviii.ij.
               Diuision of example.
               Cij.j.
               Diuision of figures.
               xc.
               Diuision of Tropes.
               xcj.ij.
               Diuisiō of figures in a word.
               xciii
                     •
                  .
               Diuision of states or issues in causes of iudgement.
               xlviij.ii.
               Diuision of causes iuridic.
               liij.ij.
               Diuision of howe many partes it must be made.
               lx.
               Diuision of proposicions.
               lxi.i
                     •
                  .
               Dogge of a Romaines, how thankfull he was.
               Cii.ij.
               Doues.
               C.ii.
               Doubtfulnesse.
               xcviii.i
                     •
                  .
               Doublettes what thei are.
               cvii.j.
               Dragō how thankful he was.
               cii.ij.
               Duke of Suffolke and lorde Charles his brother.
               viij.i.xxxvii.ij.
            
            
               E.
               EAsinesse of trauaile.
               xvi.ij.
               EDucacion of a noble.
               vii.ij.
               EGuall members what thei are.
               Cix.j.
               Eloquēce by what meanes it maie be atteigned.
               ii.ij.
               Elocucion what it is.
               iiii.j.
               Elocucion an apte chosyng of wordes and sentences.
               lxxxv.ii.
               Eloquēt men most estemed.
               lviii.i
                     •
                  .
               Enteraunce what it is.
               iiii.i.
               Enteraunce into any matter, twoo waies diuided.
               lv.j.
               Enteraunce apte.
               lviii.j.
               Entrance apt for preachers.
               lviii.ij
               
                  Ending like, and fallyng like what thei are.
               cviii.i.
               Errour what it is.
               c.i.
               Essens haters of mariage.
               xxxiii.i.
               Euill to liue emong the euill.
               xl.i.
               Euident settyng furthe of a matter.
               xcv.i.
               Example what it is.
               c.ii.
               Example, howe it maie be enlarged by Copie.
               ciii.ii.
               Example of commendyng a noble personage.
               viii.i.
               Example of cōmendyng kyng Dauid, for killyng Goliah.
               x.ii.
               Example in commendyng of Iustice.
               xiii.ii.
               Exhortacion.
               xxxiii.ii.
               Exornacion what it is.
               xc.i.
            
            
               F.
               FAbia Dolobella wittely mocked of Tulli.
               lxxxiii.i.
               FAbles moste nedefull some tymes to be told.
               cv.ii.
               Fame foloweth worthy feats.
               xxxv
               Familiar and pleasaunt aduise geuen.
               lxxxv.i.
               Familiar talke vsed.
               xcix.ii.
               Fastyng set furth by diuision.
               lxi.i.
               Fauoure winnyng, and affeccions mouyng, when thei are moste necessarie.
               v.i.
               Fau
                     •
                  es in composicion.
               lxxxviii.ii.
               Frenesse of speache.
               cvi.ii.
               Frier howe 
                     〈◊〉
                   was asked, when he preached of mannes soule.
               lxxviii.ii
               Figure of Rhetorique what it is and diuision of thesame.
               xci.ii.
               Figure of a worde what it is.
               xciiii.
               Figures to what vse thei are.
               xcv.ii.
               Figures in sentences called Scheme
                     •
                  .
               cvii.i.
               Fiue thynges to bee considered in an Oratour.
               iii.ii.
               Foly in many yt go to the law.
               xx.ii
               Folie of theim that lament the departure of their frendes.
               xxxix.ii
               Foly, and lacke of witte, geue occasion of pastyme.
               lx
                     •
                  xi.i.
               Fortitude what it is.
               xix.i.
               Foure thynges obserued for choyse of wordes.
               lxxxviii.i.
            
            
               G.
               GEsture what it is.
               cxviii.i.
               GIauntes fightyng againste nature what thei sig.
               xxvi.i
               GOod hede to be takē at the firste, in handelyng a matter in iudgement.
               v.i.
               Good to be bolde in moste daunger if otherwise we cānot escape.
               v.ii
               Good will, makes greate burdeynes light.
               xvii.i.
               Goodes leut, muste bee restored at the owners will.
               xli.ii.
               Gorgias.
               lxxx.i.
               Gradacion what it is.
               cix.i.
               Grauntyng to other, that thei will not graūt to vs.
               lxxxii.ii.
               Grecians reuengement for aduenterie.
               xxv.i.
            
            
               H.
               HEarers how thei should bee made attentiue.
               lv.i.
               HEarers good will howe it should be gotte.
               lv.i.
               Hebrues law for maried.
               xxiiii.i.
               
                  Hebrues stoned aduou
                     •
                  rers.
               xxv.i.
               Hebrues curse.
               xxix.
               Hercules labours what thei signifie.
               cv.i.
               Hieromes praise vpō virg.
               xxviii.ij
               Hipsicratea.
               xxxi.ii.
               Heliogabalus.
               lxxx.i.
               Hollanders wittie deuise.
               lxxvii.ii.
               Honestie comprehendeth all Uertues.
               xvi.ii.
               Honest names geuen to an euill thyng.
               lxxix.ii.
               Honorablenes what it is.
               xix.i.
               Hope of rewarde maketh men take paines.
               xix.ii.
               Horace Puluillus pacience for the losse of his childe.
               xlv.ii.
            
            
               I.
               IAcob.
               xxvii.i.
               ICarus.
               ciiii.ii.
               IElousie vnknowē to wise menne.
               xxxi.ii.
               Ientlenesse what it is.
               xix.ii.
               Iestyng when it should bee spared.
               lxxv.ii.
               Images how thei muste be vsed for remembraunce.
               cxi
                     •
                  ii.ii.
               Imitacion or folowyng the wise, nedefull.
               xxx.ii.
               Impaciēce without comfort.
               xliii.i.
               Inclinacion of nature.
               vii.ii.
               Insinuacion what it is.
               lv.i.
               Intelleccion what it is.
               xcii.i.
               Interpretacion of a Lawe, called the state legalle, what it is.
               lv.i.
               Interpretacion of a worde.
               lxxvii.i.
               Inuencion what it is.
               iii.ii.
               Iobs pacience in aduersitee.
               xliiii.i.
               Iudgement geuen what it is.
               xix.i.
               Isis.
               ciiii.ii.
               Iulia.
               xxxi.ii.
               Iustice commended.
               xiii.ii.
               Iustice what it is, and how largely it extendeth
               xiiii.i.
               Iustice naturall in euery one of vs
               xiii.ii.
               Iustice necessarie for all men.
               xiiii. and ii.
               Iustice easie to be obserued, if will bee not wantyng.
               xv.ii.
               Iustice what it is.
               xvii.ii.
               Iulius Cesar.
               xlv.i.
               Iulius Ceasar of what greace remembraunce he was.
               cxiii.ii.
               Iuridiciall state or issue.
               xlix.i.
            
            
               L.
               LAughter mouyng and howe many 
                     •
                  hynges are to bee considered in that beha
                     •
                  fe.
               lxxiiii.i.
               Lawes of Englande.
               xvii.i.
               Lawes profitable for the purse.
               xx.ii.
               Lawes maintein life.
               xxi.ii.
               Lawfull emong the Hebrues, for the maried to kill the aduouterer.
               xxv.i.
               Lawes contrary, haue foure lessōs to be obserued.
               xxv.ii.
               Lawyers neuer dye beggers.
               xx.ii.
               Lawyers readie to espie doubtes.
               liii.
               
                  Letter of coumfort to the Duches grac
                     •
                   of Suffolke.
               xxxvi.ii.
               Legall state, or issue.
               xlix.i.
               Lia beeyng barrein, thought to bee out of Goddes fauour.
               xxiiii.i.
               Liberalitee, commended with heapes of sentences.
               lxv.ii.
               Lycurgus Lawe against vnmaried folke.
               xxv.i.
               Liyng, pretely mocked.
               lxxxii.ii.
               Life, the right waie to death.
               xl.ii.
               Likenesse of thynges emong theim selfes.
               Cix.i.
               Lion, how thankfull he was.
               Ciii.
               Logique must bee learned for confirmacion of causes.
               xiii.i.
               Lowlines, set out by ampl.
               lxiiii.ii.
            
            
               M.
               MAn, what he is cōcernyng the body.
               xlv.ii.
               MAnhode, what it is.
               xix.i.
               MAriage firste ordeined by God.
               xxii.ii.
               Mariage beautified by mir.
               xxiii.i.
               Mariage naturall.
               xxv.ii.
               Mariage emōg trees, and precious stones.
               xxv.ii.
               Mariage betwene the firmament, and the yearth.
               xxvi.i.
               Mariage generally estemed.
               xxvi.ii.
               Matter whereupon an Oratoure muste speake.
               i.i.
               Matters in generall, stande in. poynctes.
               iiii.iiii.ii
               Matters honest.
               iiij.ii
               Matters filthy.
               iiij.ii
               Matters doubtfull.
               iiij.ii
               Matters trif
                     •
                  lyng.
               iiij.ii
               Matters harde to auoyde, should bee past ouer as though we sawe theim not.
               v.i.
               Memorie, how it is preser.
               cxiii.ii.
               Memorie, what it is
               cxii.i
               Memorie, what it is
               iiii.i.
               Menenius Agrippa pacified a rebellion by a fable.
               cv.ii.
               Metall trier, kyndely mocked▪ for his glorious vauntyng.
               xcviii.ii.
               Miserie of this worlde, makes werinesse of life.
               xlii.ii.
               Midas.
               Ciiii.ii.
               Mirthe makyng, good at the beginnyng.
               lviii.i.
               Mirth, how many waies it is moued.
               lxxv.i.
               Mirth, moued by openyng a weightie matter, and not fully knowen.
               lxxix.i.
               Mithridates worthy memo.
               cxiii.i.
               Modestie, what it is.
               xix.ii.
               Mouyng of pitee.
               lxxiii.ii.
               Moūtyng aboue the truth.
               xcvii.ii.
            
            
               N.
               NArracion, what it is.
               iiii.i.
               NArracion, what it is, and how it is diuided.
               lviii.ii
               NArracion, in iudge.
               lix.i.
               Narracion, in praisyng, and counsaill geuyng.
               lix.ii.
               Nature, what it is
               xviii.i.
               Naturall loue, what it is.
               xviii.i.
               Natures worke allowed by Goddes worde.
               xxiii.i.
               Nasica his pretie answer to Ennius, when he asked for hym at his house.
               lxxx.ii.
               
                  Necessarie, two waies takē.
               xvii.i.
               Necessitee enforceth mari.
               xxxii.ii.
               Nero the Emperour.
               xliii.ii.
               Noble personages, how thei shuld be praised.
               vi.ii.
            
            
               O.
               ODious scurrilitee.
               ii.ii.
               OLd tales rehersed, to make sporte.
               lxxviii.i.
               OPimius, pleasaūtly mocked by one Egilius.
               lxxx.ii.
               Order, of what sort.
               lxxxiii.ii.cxi.i.
               Order breakyng.
               lxxxviii.ii.
               Orpheus the Musician, how cunnyng he was in his callyng, and what is ment by his wonderous doynges.
               xxvi.i.
               Oracions in generall consist vpon seuen partes.
               iiii.i.
               Oraciōs, or causes of .iii. kind.
               vi.i.
               Oracion demonstratiue.
               vi.ii.
               Oraciō demonstratiue of a dede.
               x.i.
               Oracion deliberatiue.
               xvi.i.
               Oraciō iudiciall what it is.
               xlvii.i.
               Oraciō cōiectural what it is.
               xlix.ij
               Oracion coniecturall vpon a murther committed.
               l.ii.
               Oracion of righte, or wrong, what it is.
               liii.ii.
               Oracion of righte or wrong vpon ma
                     •
                  slaughter.
               lvii.i.
               Oratours bounde to performe thre thynges.
               i.ii.
               Oratours muste vse delitfull wordes and saiynges.
               ii.i.
               Oratours must haue fiue thynges to make them perfecte.
               iii.ii.
               Oratours of necessitee, must haue three especiall thynges.
               lv.ii.
               Oratour that thought he had moued pitee, mocked.
               lxxxi.ii.
            
            
               P.
               PAcience praise worthye in aduersitee.
               xlvi.ii.
               PArtes of prudence.
               xvii.ii.
               PAssions.
               xxxvii.i.
               Paulus Emilius moste godly desire.
               xlv.i.
               Passage to another matter, what it is.
               xcvii.i.
               Pausanias pleasaunte saiyng to a Phisician.
               lxxxii.i.
               Persians had many wifes.
               xxvii.i.
               Pericles pacience.
               xliiii.i.
               Persones pleasaunt answer, cariyng his woman behynd.
               lxxvii.i.
               Phauorinus wittie saiyng to a young manne.
               ii.i.
               Phisician mocked.
               lxxxii.i.
               Philosophie diuided.
               lxi.i.
               Pitee mouyng.
               xxxv.ii.
               Places of Logique, moste nedefull to be knowen.
               lxii.ii.
               Places to encreace & set furthe the euill of a wicked deede.
               lxxii.ii.
               Places of memorie, how thei must be vsed.
               cxiiii.ii.
               Places of praisyng.
               vii.i.
               Places of exhortacion.
               xxxiiii.ii.
               Places to confirme thynges, gathered by coniecture.
               l.i.
               Places of confirmaciō in matters of right and wrong.
               liii.ii.
               Place of confirmaciō, whē a fault is graunted.
               lvii.i.
               Plain tellyng of the matter, moste nedefull for an Oratour.
               lv.ii.
               
                  Plainesse how it might be v.
               lix.i.
               Plainesse what it is.
               lxxxvi.i.
               Plain words proper vnto an or.
               i.ii
               Platoes saiyng to Antisthe.
               lxxv.ii
               Pleasauntnesse in saiyng.
               lxxvi.i.
               Pleasures largely sette out.
               xvi.ii.
               Pleasaunt sportyng twoo w
                     •
                  yes vsed.
               lxxv.ii.
               Pleasaunt answeres contrary to our lokyng, delite muche.
               lxxvi.
               Plinius counsaill for handelyng of causes.
               xlviii.i.
               Plutarch for encrease of iss.
               xxiiii.i
               Poeticall narracions profita.
               ciiii.j
               Pōtidius how he was dece.
               lxvi.ij.
               Poetes vnder colour shewe muche wisedome.
               ciiii.ii.
               Porcia.
               xxxi.ii.
               Praisyng, and therwithal dispraisyng one and thesame mā.
               lxxii.i.
               preachers what order they vse.
               lix.ij.
               Preachers.
               lxxv.i.
               Preachers not so diligently heard as common Plaiers.
               ii.ii.
               Preachers must sometimes be mery when thei speake to ye peo.
               ii.ii.
               Praisyng a deede.
               xxxiiii.ij.
               Practise maketh all thynges perfecte.
               iij.j.
               Praises parted threfolde, in commendyng a man.
               vi.ij.
               Priestes mariage.
               xxviii.i.
               Preuencion what it is.
               c.j.
               Probable how it might be vs.
               lix.i.
               Profite of Iustice.
               xvij.
               Profite, how largely in exten.
               xvi.ij.
               Profite beareth the name of goodnesse whiche is threfolde.
               xvi.ii.
               Progression what it is.
               cviii.j.
               Pronunciacion, what it is.
               cxvi.ii.
               and
               iiii.i.
               Proposicion what it is.
               iiii.ij.
               and
               xcvii.i.
               Proposicions, what thei are.
               lxi.i.
               Prouerbes alleged, helpe amplificacion.
               lxvi.i.
               Prudence, what it is.
               xvij.ii.
            
            
               Q
               QUestiōs to be spokē
               
               i.j.
               QUestiōs of .ii. sortes
               i.j.
               QUestions infinite.
               i.j.
               QUestions definite.
               i.j.
               Questions definite belong properly to an Oratour.
               i.ii.
               Qestions infinite proper to Logicians.
               i.ii.
               Quintus Martiussuffraūce
               xlv.j
            
            
               R.
               REasonyng a matter, what it is.
               cx.ii.
               REiecciō, what it is.
               xcix.ii.
               REligion, what it is.
               xviii.i.
               Repeatyng of thynges saied before.
               xcvii.i.
               Repeticion, what it is.
               cvii.ii.
               Restyng vpon a poyncte, what it is.
               xciiii.ii.
               Returnyng to the purpose, what it is.
               xcvii.i.
               Reuengement forbidden, and sette out by amplificacion.
               lxv.i.
               Right by custome, what it is .xviii. and
               ii.
               Right by lawe, what it is.
               xix
                     •
                  i.
               Ripe thynges last not long.
               xlvi.i.
               
                  Rimed sentences vsed without reson.
               cviii.ii.
               Rimes made to mocke the symple.
               there.
               Rhetorique, what it is.
               i.j.
               Rhetorique, occupied aboute all lawes.
               there.
               Rhetorique, what ende it hath.
               i.ii.
               Rhetorique, first made by wisemen and not wisemenne made first by it.
               iii.i.
               Rhetorique, for what purpose it is set furthe.
               iii.i.
               Rhetorique, to what purpose it serueth.
               there.
               Rhetorique, what it teacheth for orderyng of thynges.
               lxxxiiii.i.
               Romaine Lawes for Churche dignitees.
               xx.i.
               Roperipe chidyng
               lxxxvii.ij.
               Rouyng without reason.
               xlvii.ii.
            
            
               S.
               SAguntines how faithfull thei were.
               lvii.ii.
               SAincte Christopher what he signified.
               cv.ii.
               Saincte George what he signified.
               Cv.i.
               Salust saiyng to Tullie, and his wittie anfwere to hym again.
               lxxxii.ii.
               Sauegard had by Iustice.
               xv.i.
               Scurrilitee odious.
               ij.ii.
               Sheme what it is.
               xciiii.i.
               Sentences gathered, helpe amplificacion.
               lxvi.i.
               Sergius Galba ouerthwarte answere.
               lxxvii.ii.
               Shape euill fourmed moueth pastime.
               lxxviii.ii.
               Shame foloweth fearfulnesse, whē manhode is nedefull.
               xxxv.ii.
               Shiftyng faultes from vs, howe it is saied.
               lvii.ii.
               Similitude what it is.
               c.ii.
               Simonides first founder of the arte of remembraunce.
               
               Slaunder proued by amplificacion a greater offense then Thefte.
               lxviii.i.
               Snappishe askyng.
               xcviii.i.
               Snudgyng, wittely rebuked.
               lxxvii
               and
               ii.
               Sobrietee what it is.
               xix.ii.
               Socrates.
               xxvii.
               Sorowe nedelesse, when necessitee ruleth.
               xxxviii.ii.
               Sorowe immoderate, not naturall.
               xlii.ii.
               Souldiour mocked pleasauntly of his awne man.
               lxxxiii.i.
               Spanyardes doubte.
               ci.
               Staggues how long thei liue.
               xlv.
               and
               ii.
               State generalli, what it is.
               xlviii.ii
               State in iudgement what it is.
               xl.
               and
               viii.ii.
               State why it is so called.
               xlviii.ii.
               Stomacke grief.
               cvi.ii.
               Straunge thynges nedefull to bee tolde.
               lviii.i.
               Straunge reportes helpe for amplificacion.
               lxvi.i.
               Storkes what nature thei.
               xcix.
               Stoutenesse what it is.
               xviii.xix.ii.
               Surfeityng rebuked by am.
               xlvii.ii
            
            
               
               T.
               TAcitus.
               Cviii.ii.
               TAntalus.
               Ciiii.ii.
               TEmperaunce what it is.
               xix
               Thankefulnesse what it is.
               xviii.ii.lxi..ii.
               Themistocles memorie.
               Cx.ii.
               Themistocles perswasiō to the Atheniens, by a fable.
               Cv.ii.
               Thynges gathered by a mānes saiyng, otherwise then he ment.
               lxxx.i.
               Thynges notable or straunge help well for amplificacion.
               lxvi.i.
               Thracians lament at birthe, and reioyce at buriall.
               xli.i.
               Tobias pacience.
               xliiii.i.
               Transmutacion of a worde.
               xciii.i.
               Transumpcion what it is.
               xciii.ii.
               Trauaill hard to whom.
               xvi.ii.
               Trees not accurssed, because Apples fall from them.
               xliii.i.
               Trees liue longer then men.
               xlv.ii.
               Tropes how thei wer found.
               xc.ii.
               Trope what it signifieth.
               xci.ii.
               Turnyng of a worde.
               lxxvii.i.
               Tiber
                     •
                  us Ceasar.
               xlv.i.
               Tyme must be obserued.
               v.ii.
               Tyme of departyng life.
               viii.i.
               Tyme a remedy for fooles to putte awaie sorowe.
               xlii.ii.
               Timon an hater of compa.
               xxx.ii.
            
            
               U.
               UErtues .iiii. in nōb.
               xvii.ii.
               UNapte vsyng of apte wordes.
               lxxxviii.ii.
               ULpianus.
               xxiiii.ii.
               Unnaturalnes in man.
               xiiii.ii.
               Uibius Curius pleasauntly mocked of Tullie.
               lxxxiii.
               vipers what nature thei haue.
               xcix.
               Uirginitee.
               xxviii.ii
               Unthankefulnesse rebuked.
               cii.i.
               Unthankfulnes punished.
               cii.ii.
               Utteraunce what it is.
               cxvi.ii.
            
            
               W.
               WAntyng of thynges, make pastyme.
               lxxxii.i.
               WArenesse in speakyng, and forbearing to speak.
               v.ii.
               Wepyng yies.
               lxxii.ii.
               Whisht or warnyng geuen.
               cvi.i.
               Willyam Somer.
               cvii.i.
               Wishyng, right pleasaunt.
               lxxxi.ii.
               Wittie saiyng of a Philosoph.
               xxi.
               Wittes forgetfull.
               cxiii.i.
               Wittie deuised tale.
               lxxvii.ii.
               Wittie lye makyng.
               xcvi.ii.
               Woe of this worlde, declared.
               xli.i.
               Women rebuked.
               lx.ii.
               Wordes doubtfully spokē.
               lxxvi.i.
               Wordes taken and not the.
               lxxvii.i.
               Worde makyng what it is.
               xcii.ii.
               Wrōg dealyng deserueth death
               xl.i.
               Wifes euill, happen to euill.
               xxxi.i.
               Wordes ouerthwart.
               lxxvii.ii
            
            
               X.
               Xerxes.
               xxxi.i.
            
            
               Y.
               YSsue what it is.
               xlviii.ii.
               YNke horne letter.
               lxxxvi.ii.
               YOung Storkes.
               xiiii.ii.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            Richardus Graftonus, typographus
Regius excudebat.
            Cum priuilegio, 2d imprimendum solum.
            
         
      
   