
      
         
            
            
            A Discourse
vppon vsurye, by vvaye of
Dialogue and oracions, for the
better varietye, and more delite
of all those, that shall
reade thys treatise.
            By Thomas Wilson, doctor
of the Ciuill lawes, one of the
Masters of her maiesties honorable
courte of requestes.
            ¶Seene & allowed, according to the Queenes
Maiesties iniunctions.
1572.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the right honorable, hyghe
& myghty Earle, hys most especiall & singuler
deere lord, the lord Robert Duddeley,
Erle of Leycester, Barō of Denbigh, master
of the horse to the Quenes Maiestie, knight
of the noble order of the garter, Chauncelloure
of the vniuersitie of Oxforde, & one
of her hyghenes most honorable preuy counsell:
Thomas Wilson Doctour of the Ciuil
lawes, wisheth perfite health, with encrease
of honor to godds most holy wil & pleasure.
            
               THe Stoike Philosophers
(righte honorable
& my singuler good
Lorde) haue saide both
truly and wysely, that
the worlde is made for
man, and man is made
for god, to thende that
man may haue all pleasure,
and god maye haue
all honour. Seinge
then, that such a creaciō of man, and the world,
is thus framed by the myghtie finger of god, &
man especially made for god: I doubte not, but
your honor beinge goddes liuely image vppon
earth, and fashioned to hys lykenes, concerning
the reasonable soule, as all others suche hys
creatures are: will remember for your parte, to

forsee and to doe your dutie from tyme, to time,
and indeuour youreselfe in all your actions to
haue god alwayes before your eyes, and to exercyse
your mynde all your lyfe longe, with all
godly practises, aswell in aduauncing religion,
to goddes glorye, as in dooyng Justice for mās
benefite, that god alone as hee is alwayes praysed
in Heauen amongst hys aungels, maye euen
so haue hys holy name onely honored here vpō
earth amongst hys people. But because mans
nature, throughe Adames falle, is altered
from that perfection, wherin it was at the first,
and is muche subiecte therfore to great corrupcion
of lyfe and maners: It is to be feared, that
all men will not alwayes be myndefull of their
dutie, excepte they bee often warned and put in
mynde of that they oughte to doe, wherby they
maye consider still what they are. For by wanting
the remēbrance and exercise of wel dooyng:
they may declyne from god, (a thing sone donne
where god is not feared) and so wallowe in synne,
the playne effecte of gracelesse people. For ye
deuill beinge greate aduersarie to all goodnes,
(whom that auncient father of famouse memorie
Hughe Latymer, called the moste vigilant
byshop in hys vocation) is neuer ydle, but still
occupied and busie, in sowing cockle and darnel
amongst the good corne and pure wheate of the
lords haruest. So that yf their be not as quicke
wedyng hookes, & as sharpe yron forkes; readye
at hande to clense the soyle from tyme to tyme,
as the weedes are, and wilbee readye to
spring vp & growe: in the ende all wilbe wedes,
and antichrist hymselfe will be lorde of the harueste.
This muste I saye, that warenes in all

thinges is euermore very wisdome, & of aduised
dealynges comes perfection, and thinges
foreseene do always the lesse harme. For which
cause lawes are enacted, not onely to punishe euill,
when anye is committed, but also to preuēt
euill not to bee committed at all, that men being
warned before hand, may take hede the rather,
how to offende lawes for feare of the sworde, &
lyue in good order, to escape the seueritie, and
sharpe rodde of iustice. I doe wishe therefore
that man were as apte to doe righte, as hee is
readie to speake of right, and to be all together,
as he would seme to bee: least otherwise lawes
stand not in vaine, when great occasion geeues
iust cause of speedie redresse. And in thys behalf
magistrates are to be put in remembrance, that
they hauing gouernement and execucion of iustice
in their handes, maye bee good ryghters of
all wrong doynges, and iust dispensers of gods
lawe, and mans lawe, both to lowe and hyghe,
to ryche and poore, without any respecte or regarde
of parson. For most true it is, that where
iustice is dulie ministred, there is god moste
hyghly honoured, and sweete is that sacrifice to
god, whē the lyues of lewde men are offered vp
to suffer paynes of death for wicked dooynges.
I will not speake to aggrauate execucion for
all mysdeedes, eyther seuerally or generally, because
I thinke it both nedelesse, and a great follie
also, and a thinge almoste impossible for man
to hope by onely demaūding, to haue the amendement
of all thinges preciselye, that presentlye
are amysse: but thys I reache at, that where amongst
a nōber of gawles and great greefes in
thys common weale, there spredeth one especial

mischiefe as yll, nay woorse than anye plague:
my meaning is to sett all other faultes aparte,
and to disclose this one aboue the rest vnto your
Lordship, that by your honorable meanes and
great aucthoritye, it maye at the leaste bee some
what refourmed, yf not all together amēded or
taken away. I do meane that ouglie, detestable
and hurtefull synne of  vsurie, whiche being but
one ī grossenes of name, caries many a mischief
linked vnto it in nature, the same synne beinge
nowe so rancke througout all Englande, not in
London onelye, that men haue all together forgotten
free lending, and haue geuen themselues
wholye to lyue by fowle gayning, makinge the
lone of monye a kinde of merchandize, a thinge
directlye against all lawe, against nature, and against
god. And what should this meane, that
in steade of charitable dealing, and the vse of almose
(for lending is a spice therof) hardenes of
harte hath nowe gotten place, and greedie gayne
is cheefelye folowed, and horrible extorcion
commonly vsed. I do verely beleue, the ende of
thys worlde is nyghe at hande. And the more
is thys euill to bee pitied, because men doe lulle
thēselues with the exercise thereof in such sorte,
as thoughe there were none offense in it at all,
wheras amongst all other offenses next to Idolatrie,
& the renouncing of god, and hys magistrates
vpō earth, there is none more heynous,
none more offensiue, and none more hurtfull, to
anye well gouerned common weale. For besides
that the very sinne of vsurie, is expreslie forbidden
by godds worde, aswel as either thefte,
aduowtrie, or whoredome: the countrey and
realme where thys offense is commonlie vsed,

cannot longe continue in prosperous wellfare.
And sorie I am to saye it, but I see it & knowe
it ouerwel, and therefore I must needes saie it:
I do not knowe anye place in christendome, so
muche subiect to thys foule synne of vsurie, as
the whole realme of Englande ys at thys present,
and hathe bene of late yeares. For men of
wealth are nowe wholy geeuen euery wheare
all together to idlenes, to gett their gaine with
case, & to lyue by lending vpon the onely sweate
& labour of others. Wheras god willeth euerye
man to lyue in hys vocation, and hee that will
not laboure eyther wt body or minde, according
to his callyng rightly, should not eate at al, forbiddīg
men to make lēding a kīde of liuīg. But
these men do not liue in any vocation, but being
the diuels knowē apprentices in earth, & bound
to doe, as hee woulde haue them: seeke when
they are dead to serue hym in hell, as I take it.
For god sayeth by hys prophete Dauid,Psall. 15. that he
shall neuer dwell in hys tabernacle, that hathe
put out hys mony for vsury. And therfore, whether
should suche men looke to goe, when they
are deade, but straighte to the diuell, seeynge in
earth they serue such a master.
            There bee two sortes of men, that are alwayes
to bee looked vpon very narrowly, the one is
the dissemblinge gospeller, and the other is the
wilfull & indurate papistes. The first vnder colour
of religion, ouerthroweth all religion, and
bearing good men in hande, that hee loueth playnesse,
vseth couertelie all deceypte that maye
bee, and for pryuate gayne, vndoeth the cōmon
welfare of man. And touching thys sinne of vsurie,
none doe more openly offende in thys behalfe,

then do these counterfeite professours of
thys pure religion. The wilfull Romaniste, as
he professeth an hatred to thys religion, so hauing
mischiefe boyling within hym, deuiseth by
indirecte meanes to aduaunce his welfare, that
hee maye haue monye in store againste a good
hower, suche as hee loketh for. So that betwixt
the secrete dissembler, and the open blasphemer,
the world is made a praye, and deuided betwixt
them, and god thereby moste hyghely dishonored.
Neyther doe either of these people followe
you for youre persone or vertue, but for youre
fortune and aucthority. Cicero sayethe wiselye,
holsome seueritie, doth greatly excede the vayne
shewe of folish pitie. Clemēcie is good, I deny
not, but that is to bee vsed to good men, or else
towardes suche as of whome there is good hope
of theire better behauioure hereafter. But
where clemencie is altogether abused, and maketh
as it were an open waye to all lowsenes
in maners and carnall libertie of lyfe, there seueritie
must needes stryke a stroke. For to what
ende are good lawes made, yf there bee no execuciō
of them? As good pyke strawes, as make
lawes that want a magistrate, to see them well
kepte obeyed and fulfilled. For the lawe it selfe,
is a dūme magistrate to al men, wheras magistrates
are a speakynge lawe to all people. And
therefore, as gouernours do submit themselues
to lawe, and lyue thereafter: so will the people
submitte themselues to gouernours and theire
doynges: suche force (lo) hath example of life,
especiallie in magistrates. Neyther are gouernours
priuate persons, to lyue honestly to them
selues onelye, but they are publique officers to

do good vnto many, and by wise aduise, to haue
care ouer them, that neyther will, nor can haue
care of themselues. And thys I saye, that like
as one maye bee a good magistrate to the people,
and yet no god man to hymselfe: euen so may
one bee a good man to hymselfe, and proue
no good magistrate to the people. And of these
two, lesse harme doth that man, who priuatelye
offendeth in hys lyfe: than hee that publikelye
offendeth in his charge. Nedeful therfore were
it, that all magistrates were good men in theire
offices, because the common welfare dependeth
vppon their wel doyng. And good it were also
neuer to remitte apparante greate faultes vnto
any person in aucthority. For the magistrate abusing
hys office, deserueth more punishmente
than doth the priuate personne. For as hee abuseth
hys charge, so doth hee deceaue hys trust, &
by example geeuethe great cause of muche euill
But lett no men in any estate presume therfore
to doe euill, because they hope to hyde their euil.
doyngs from the princes knowledge. For tyme
doth discouer all, and god hath graunted thys
priuylege vnto prynces, that wicked attemptes,
shall neuer haue deepe roote. For although
wrong dealings maye be shrowded for a space,
and bee kepte vnder couerte: yet they will oute
at laste, and bee opened with shame, the rather
to set forth gods myghty iustice, and to aduaunce
hys endelesse glorye
            Amongst the Romaynes, there were censores,
appoynted as commissioners, to searche out
the doyngs of such as eyther had borne office, or
were notorious offenders: and finding any such
to bee faultie, they did streighte wayes remoue

them, and punish them with infamie. The same
order is yet vsed in Italie, Spayne, and Portugale,
and good iustice done againste all vniust
magistrates, and euil lawyers. And thus it
is. Such as ouer hastelye haue rysen to great
welth, haue ben sifted for theire life and doings
by commission, and stripped out of all, when
they were taken in a trippe. Now then, needes
must I saye thus at thys time, that amongst all
sortes of men, sinne aboundeth here for wants
of chastisemente, euill men beinge ouer ryfe, &
good men ouer scante, such as shoulde do good.
Or els how is it, that vsurie amongst other synnes
(for I will at thys tyme say nothing of magistrates)
is so vniuersally vsed, whiche ought
in any wise to be weeded out aboue all other fa
                  •
               
               tes.
For as I thinke, and must saye stil, vsurie
onely, is the cheefest cause of the greatest miserie
in thys lande, aswell to geeue occasion of great
waste, as also to make muche wante, and wil be
in the ende, the vndoynge of all, yf it bee not loked
to in tyme. The Romaynes neuer began to
decaye, till vsurie lorded amongst them, for then
priuate gaine thrust oute common profite, luste
was holden for lawe, ydlenes more vsed then
labour, ryott in steede of diett, vice better regarded
then vertue, no charitye at all, no loue betwixt
man and man, but euery man for hymself,
and the whorlepole of pride and ryote ouerflowed
in all thynges, and in all places.
            Plato saieth, there must bee three thinges in
euerie good state. A magistrate to gouerne,
lawes whereby to gouerne, and execucion of
lawes for maintenaunce of gouernement. And
Diogenes sayed well, where neither lawes

haue force, nor water hath course: there shoulde
no wise man willingly seeke to dwel. For wher
euill men beare rule, (as it is alwayes, there
where lawes are stopped of theire ordinarie
course) there cannot anye good man haue place,
because they are alwayes contrarie. And thys
I saye, that in al common weales, it is as great
a blame not to cherishe & mainteine the good &
godly, as it is a great shame to suffer the offendor
& wicked man to goe vnpunished. For both
must haue theire desertes, or else yt state is not
iustely gouerned. And as weedes are to be rooted
out of euery gardeine, so are good herbes to
be oftē watred & cherished stil, with good earth
or els they wil perish, and wyther soone away.
And amongest all others, I woulde the religiouse
learned men of thys lande, were so cherished
and esteemed, as they haue well deserued,
and together with theire good cherisinge, I
would theire good warninges were throughly
folowed. Yea I woulde they were better holden
vp, in that which they haue mainteined and
professed in good learnynge: although their liuings
and entertainements were not made muche
greater: The preachers I doe meane, & the
godly ministers of this time, for they still exclaime
maynely against sinne to discharge their
duties, they crie out continually against all vsurers
with open mouth, and in all their sermōs,
and yet, what auailes it? nothing at al. The reason
is, for yt the ciuil magistrate doth not ioyne
with them, and see that executed by censures of
the lawe, whiche they so earnestly rebuke in the
pulpite, and shewe foorth godds threates most
vehemently, for suche synnes so muche suffered,

and so lyttle punished. For what sayeth the lewde
man, when the good preacher hath donne?
See howe properlye hee gyrdes at the matter,
yonder sellie man (sayeth hee) hath saide, but he
can do no more, thankes be to god. And fond is
y• man, sayeth y• vsurer to others, whatsoeuer
hee bee, that will not suffer a poore simple preacher
to haue his wordes, when others haue the
deedes, and lyue in all wealth and iolytye in
thys world. Lorde god send to Englande some
Solon, for thys redresse, who toke away the vsurers
bookes and their gaynes from them, & forbadde
such filthy lucre, & brought in nouas tabulas,
whiche are sayde in greeke to bee Seiuachtheia,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                as
who should say, an easement of a burdeine. For
that all debtours were discharged from all such
creditours that had lent theire money for vsury
and gayne, or at the least wise, were eased from
the vsurie of it. Thus did Solon in the detestacion
of vsury, a sharpe kynde of dealynge no doubte,
and a straunge: but in great diseases, sharpe corrysiues
muste needes bee vsed, when lenitiues
will not serue. And shall I name one, that hath
bene in oure age, and wishe hym now a lyue, to
cure so great a cancre? Woulde god Englande
had a Cromwell, I will saye no more. I doe
reade, that long before the conquest, king Edgare,
that iuste gouernoure and seuere magistrate agaynste
all lewde officers and extorcioners in
thys lande, did amongst hys other good deedes
make proclamacion to haue al the wolfes killed
in Englande and Wales, because they were rauenouse
beastes, and deuourers of sheepe and
other cattell, to the great harme and hynderaunce
of hys subiectes. And to haue thys the better

done, hee appoynted manye to paye for theire fines
and reuenues, wolfes heades yerelye: some
moe, and some lesse, and such as could not bring
wolfes heades in, payed theire fines and reuenues
in mony. Now suche force toke thys good
order in this lande, that within a while, there
was not a wolfe to be had, neyther in Englād▪
nor yet in wales. And Laudvvallus prince of Wales
brought in 300. wolfes heades in one yeare
for hys tribute, which hee was bounde to pays
yerely. And afterwardes when no moe wolfes
heades were to bee had, hee payd to the kynge a
certayne yerely reuenue. Thys was a good deede
surelie, and a gracious proclamacion: for since
that tyme, whiche is sixe hundreth and odde
yeres past, no wolfes haue troubled this land.
            Nowe yf youre lordeship, with others could
procure by your good meanes, that in your tyme,
there mighte bee neuer an vsurers heade in
England: I doe thinke you shoulde doe a greater
good deede to thys lande, then euer was
doone by kyllinge of wolfes. For these bee the
greedie cormoraunte wolfes in deede, that rauyn
vp both beaste and man, who whyles they
walke in sheepe skynnes, doe couertlye deuowre
the flocke of England, vnder coloure of their
wealth & counterfeit honesty. And what if there
were therefore a lawe to searche out these hypocrites,
and to vnuisar these maskinge minyons,
and suche as they bee, that make warre of sett
purpose against god and hys lawes, that stryue
so maynelye againste hys holye will and commaundementes.
And the same lawe to be so executed,
that as wolfes haue bene ridd out of thys
lande, they shoulde all likewise either suffer the

paynes of death, or be banished thys realme for
euer, that there myght herafter no moe vsurers
bee found in Englande, than are wolfes to bee
had here at thys daye? I do thinke surely, this
woulde bee as swete a smelling sacrifice in the
sight of god, as euer was offered since Englād
was firste conuerted to the faithe. Kynge Dauid
praiyng god to sende vnto his sonne Salomon iudgement
and righteousnes, saieth that hys sonne
being assisted by the myghty power of god, shalbee
honored of all princes vpon earthe, because
hee should deliuer the people frō vsury. A great
good deede no doubt, and worthy of such great
honor as Salomon afterwardes enioied, and a verie
meete example for al princes to followe, that
they mighte haue like honor. And touchinge
a lawe to bee made, I doe not see, but it is as
necessary to haue one against vsurers as against
theues, and a great deale more. For theues steale
manye tymes for necessitie, wheras vsurers
robbe and vndoe all men, for greedy gluttonye.
The one stealeth a crowne in the hyghe waye,
the other robbeth men in the hyghe streate, of al
that they haue: the one stealeth a little, to susteyne
nature: the other scratcheth vp the whole
treasure of England, to serue hys owne couetous
and wretched desire, to the vtter vndoynge
of thousandes. Therfore it were good,
these vsurers were all gone one waye or other,
out of thys realme, for here in Englande they
do no good at al, nay, they doe all the myschiefe
that is donne, and wilbe the cause of vtter ruine
to thys lande, yf they bee not taken vpp in time,
and cutt shorter by the heades. Good men therfore
must haue this care to sifte out lewde men,

and till gouernours geue good example of good
lyfe, euill men will cōtinue to be euill stil. But if
this lawe seeme blodie, although the hanging of
poore wretches for small matters, is counted
nothing blodie at all: then woulde I, that the
olde lawes of England were put in execucion,
such as are called kyng Edwards lawes, or the
common lawes of England, whereof one was,
that the goodes of an vsurer after hys decease,
should turne to the benefite of the prince, when
twelue men had founde by proofe, that the partie
deceased was an vsurer in his lyfe time. For
in those dayes, no enquiry was made by verdict
so long as a man lyued, whether he was an vsurer
or no: but y• matter was referred wholly to
yt ecclesiasticall lawes during mēs lyues. This
I thinke would make the fewer vsurers, when
twelue men shoulde bee triers after their deceases
what trade they vsed in theire lyfe, and
finding them by profe to haue committed vsury
(whiche as Glanuil sayeth,Glann. l
                     •
                  . 7. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 16. & li. 10. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3 is then done when anye
thing is receiued ouer and aboue the principal)
to geeue vp straight wayes the dead mans
goodes from hys heyres, executours and assignes,
to the prince and gouernour of the lande.
But some will saye, yf the lawes were put in
execucion, it would turne to the hurte of all mē,
for that none would lend hereafter to anye bodie,
eyther more or lesse, and nede there wilbee
alwayes, as there hathe been heretofore. I do
aunswere, and saye, that the hungry desyre of
man, dothe enforce neede manye tymes further,
then there is cause of neede in deede, seekynge
for a great deale more in all thinges, than nature
craueth. To whose sufficience, if mans gredy

appetite, could aunswere, and yelde themselues
content, with the blessed frute of this lyttle paradise
of Englande, one man shoulde haue little
cause to borrowe of an other. Or if they had can
se (as I cannot deny but neede may bee, & that
great neede sometymes,) yet yf men were envred▪
with the feare of god, and acquaynted to
lende freely, and to doe to others, as they would
that others should doe to them: I woulde not
doubte, but that charitie would abound vniuersallye,
and the moste would bee as loth to lende
for gayne, as theye would bee loth to kill, or to
murder a man by the hyghe waye side. And I
truste also that men woulde then as fast runne
from a knowne vsurer, as they would flie nowe
from a madde dogge, or rather from the diuell
hymselfe, if they sawe hym in hys likenes. But
what doe these worldlings now a dayes? They
doo not lende to helpe the neede of others, but
to benefite themselues, and wher they finde the
greatest vnthrifte, that hath landes, or other lyuinges
lefte vnto hym: there they wilbe moste
redie, to feede hym in hys ryott and vimecessarie
expences, makynge theire gayne to bee hys
chiefest hurte, yea a greater hurte in deede, then
all hys wilfull and folish charges otherwise, as
maye well appeare in the discourse of thys my
deuised booke. Wheras they that feare god, and
wil bee suche men in deede, as they would seme
to be, should not deale in thys sorte, but following
theire trade, in what vocation soeuer it be,
oughte to helpe the needie and worthie parson,
with some parte of those goodes, that they haue
lawfullie gotten by theire trade and maner
of liuyng, whereby they maye receiue vsurie at

godds handes, who dothe geue an hundred for
one, to all them that geue or lend frely for hys
sake. Thus I haue boldlye, and I trust with
godds spirite moued your honor to loke well
to your charge and calling, desiring you to take
in good parte my good meaninge, for my desire
is, that my naturall countrey, might bee parfite
and blessed, without daunger of euill, or infection
of mischefe, to corrupt this state, or destroy
thys noble land. And the boulder I am to deale
thus with your honor before others, because I
haue knowne you, and that noble race of youre
brethren, euen from theire yonge yeares. And
with your honor, and that famous erle of Warwike
deceased, and your noble brother, nowe
earle of Warwike lyuinge, I haue had more
familier conference, then with the rest: and especially
with your honor (I doe thanke you most
humblie therefore) I haue had sufficient proofe
of youre carefull mynde, euen in reading not onely
of the latyn, but also of the Italian good &
and sounde wryters, to knowe and to vnderstande
the best vsed gouernement, and the chefe
lawes that haue ben made in all ages. And as
youre mynde hath bene thus godly enclyned to
knowe, so it appeareth very wel, you haue euer
had a good mynde, to put youre knowledge in
practise. And this must I saye, that godds prouidence
is greatly shewed in thys behalfe, and
the queenes maiesties blessed estate most euidētly
appeareth to bee the stronger, in that it hathe
pleased her hyghnes, to haue chosen so stayed &
so discrete a noble man, as you are, to deale in
the affaires of the state. For I knowe, and
therfore wil not feare to saye, that you haue ben

next to the Queenes maiesties most mylde and
gracious disposition, a great helpe and meane
of thys most calme and mercifull gouernement,
a thing so ioyfull to all good people as nothinge
can be more: although it hath playnely fallē out
in profe, that both the Queenes mercie & your
nature hath ben greatly abused, and the princes
goodnes especially moste vnthankfully recompensed.
Whereupon her maiestie hath ben enforced
much against her nature, to vse the sworde,
a thinge so needefull when gentle meanes wil
not serue, that without so doing no state coulde
stande, nor man could lyue. And such hath thys
world ben, is, and wilbee euer, that princes vpō
cause must doe, & in reason are bound to do that
whiche they would not of themselues doe, yf it
were not for very necessity, to auoyde a greater
inconuenience. And therefore are counsellours
about a prince, that they might alwayes geeue
the best counsel, and procure thereby the safety
both of prince and state, that when clemencie
will not serue, they maye vse the contrary. But
amongst all other needefull aduertisements, I
do wishe that your honor and others of youre
callinge shoulde neuer at any tyme lett slippe anye
good occasiō offerd for the welfare of Englande,
muche lesse to bee carelesse in that greate
trust, which is committed vnto you. And therfore
as the master of a shippe, hath euer an eye
to keepe a righte course, a phisicion alwayes a
good mynde to heale hys paciente, a capitayne
euermore a carefull heade, to gette the victory:
euen so my good lord, I pray god you may be a
faythfull counsellour to the prince, and a watchefull
magistrate to the people, to the aduauncement

of godds moste holy worde, and for the
welfare of thys lande. And so to care for the
whole bodie of the state, that whilest you take
the defense of some one parte, you do not leaue
other partes of the state vndefended or smallye
estemed. Thus yf you doe, as I pray god you
maye doe, and I hope in god, you will do no
lesse: I do well assure my selfe, that vsurie amongest
other faultes will no more shewe her
face hereafter in Englande, than the starynge
Owle, will loke vpon the bright sunne, or the
fearefull mouse, abyde the wilie catte. And I
hope, that by such good meanes, thys noble real
me will greatly florishe, and the people will become
euery daye better and better: and in might
waxe stronge: in riches, plentiful: in renowne,
famous: in vertue, honest, and in religion
zelous. All whiche blessed and happy welfare,
god graunte for hys sonnes sake Jesus Christ,
in whom your honor, & al others do lyue, moue,
and haue a being, whose name bee therefore
praysed for euer. Amen. From the
Queenes maiesties hospital at
saincte Katherynes, thys
twenty of Julye.
1569.
         
         
            
            ¶A Christian Prologue to
the Christian reader.
            
               SOme wil count me
fond, that of myne
owne fansy vnconstrayned,
haue chosen
rather to hazarde
daunger of
blame, by entringe
to touche this matter
of vsurye, standinge
thereby to other mens curtesies, for pardon
of my faulte: then by sittinge still, as noe
medler in matters of the worlde, to be without
blame or fault at all. One sayeth to me, what
haue you to doe, to wrastle thus with vsurye?
what will you geat by it, not a peny the more
wilbe lent you for making any suche booke,
be you wel assured: nay, you shall the rather
want, when you would haue, trust vnto it vpon
my woorde. In this firste onset, I am thus
iumped withal by some men, for dealinge in
this sorte with matters of vsurye. Well I am
sorie to offende any, and surelye my mynde is
to do good vnto al. For I protest before god I do

not mean euill to any man, but wish the best I
cā, to one & other. And sorie I am, that good
meanyng & wel, should be hurtfull to me, or
offensiue to any body else. And yet such is the
worlde, the galde horse will not be rubde: men
that are most faulty, can least abide rebukes,
and plain men for telling trueth, many times
beshrewe them selues, being wel assured, that
it is as certayn a thing, as it is a common saying,
Veritas odium parit, Trueth purchaseth
hatred. I knowe in deede that playnenesse of
speache, and freedome of tongue, in decypheryng
sinne, and aduancing vertue, are not the
best waies to thriue by, for it is not rare, that
many a man hath com to great wealth, which
neuer knew what vertue nor honesty mēt in al
his lyfe. Yea, ther be some that haue solemply
vowed, neuer to be of that religion, that smelleth
of pouertye, they had rather be riche with
Alexāder, then poore with Christ. A horrible
kind of speache, fyrst money say they, and
then honestie will follow of course: for what is
wisedome, learnynge or honestie? It is money
(man) say they, that makes a man to be taken
for wise, honest, valiant, mightie, yea, and for
a kinges fellowe too. This opynion haue many

men, and I feare it be the creede of the worlde
at this time. And thus I haue lost all my credite,
and shall not bee worth a grote here after,
yf wicked mammon or mans malyce bee
euer of power to keepe me vnder. And then
had it not ben a great deale better for mee, to
haue played and done nothinge, then thus to
take paynes, and lose al thinges? Well, of thys
one thinge I am wel assured, that god will not
forsake them, that put their trust in hym, but
wyll rewarde them more largelye then mans
wil is to geue or his power to get. And I hope
better of their courtesies, then to haue such discurtesy
at their handes. And this wil I saye,
he that wil do as I haue sayd, he shalbe richer
thā the proudest of thē al. And let thē not saye
that I am suche an enemye to vsurie that I
will haue none at all to bee vsed. For I am an
vsurer my selfe so farre forthe as I am able, I
woulde they knew it, and I will teache others
to be greater vsurers then I am my selfe, and
shewe them how to gaine more in a daye, then
others are able to geat in seuen yeres. Do therfore
O ye men of this worlde, as I shall teache
you, and you shallbee suche men, as hereafter
you wil blesse me. Lēd to your poore neighbors

in time of their great neede, for gaine on gods
name, and put out your money to them for vsurie,
in suche sorte of vsurye I meane, as god
hathe commaunded you to vse, and you shall
yerely, daylie, and howerly reape infinit gain.
For as god is better able to rewarde you then
man: so will he for his promise sake, make you
recompēce with encrease infinytely. And as he
saieth, if you geue but a draught of water in
his name, and for his sake, you shall not lose
your reward. The iust man is ful of compassion,
as the Prophet Dauyd sayethe, and dothe
lend. Be you therefore iust men, O ye worldlinges,
and let others haue that to occupye,
which lyeth idle by you, and lend freely, not
hopinge somuche as for the principall agayne,
that you may heape gayn to your selues, from
god plentifullie. For I tell you, this is a spiritual
vsury, which is the right vsurie in dede,
and suche as Christ woulde haue vsed in the
19. chapiter of the gospell after Saint Mathew
where he sayethe. Why wouldest thou not put
out my mony to the banker? that is, why didst
thou not bestowe my grace and my gifts to the
profite of others, by communicating the same
among them? Thus spiritual vsurie is called

the multiplicacion of the giftes, and graces of
god. Thus by a litle trauaile, a man may win
an hundred fold meede in heauē. Who would
not labour in time of haruest to gette in corne?
And what other thīg is this world thē an haruest
for good mē, to gleane the poore into their
barnes. And be it, that the party vnto whom
you haue lēt is poore & not able to repay you,
yet you are sure of this, the partye that borrowed,
will thanke you, if there be any honesty
in him at all, and wyll desire god to rewarde
and prosper your doings, & god will heare his
prayer that is not hable to paye. And is not
this a good recōpence? But be it that some one
being able to pay, is yet not onely vnthākful
in words, but defraudeth you in dede of your
owne: as you maye haue your remedy against
the man, so assure your selfe that god euen in
such cases will reward you, with his grace &
mercie without any asking or prayer made to
him at al. For it is thus written in the booke of
Iesus of Sirach. Qui facit misericordiam foe
nerat proximo. He that vseth pity and compassion,
doth lend vpō vsurie to his neighbor,
and god wil pay that vsurie him selfe. And
therefore it is saide farther in that chapiter.

There be many which are not glad for to lend,
not because of euill, but they feare to lose the
thinge that they did lend. Haue thou paciēce
herein O man with the simple (saith the text)
and withholde not mercie from him, helpe the
poore for the commaundements sake, and let
him not go empty from thee because of his necessitie.
Leese thy money for thy brother and
neighbours sake, and burye it not vnder a
stone where it rusteth and corrupteth. Gather
thy treasure after the commaundements of the
highest, and so shall it bring thee more profite
then golde. Lay vp thy almes in the hande of
the poore, and it shall keepe thee from al euill.
Thus farre Iesus the sonne of Sirache with a
great deale more, full of muche comfort, for al
those that lende their money out, to receiue vsurie
at gods hands. Whiche vsury god grant
all men may vse dayly and howerlye to theire
Christian bretheren: for their rewarde shal be
great in heauen, that for Christes sake lende
freely vnto men vpon earth. Neyther is heare
any losse to him that lendeth in such sorte, but
rather vnspeakable gayne, suche as neyther
hart can thinke, nor tongue can vtter, nor eye
hath seene. If a man in this worlde gayne a

pound for a peny, it is thought a wonder, and
yet god geueth to them, that geue for his sake,
thousandes more then is gayned in thys proporcion.
For he geeueth for transitorie trashe,
eternal treasure: for bryttle mettall, assured
welfare: for money, mercie: for golde, al goodnes:
and for this fraile worlde here, the world
that neuer hath ende hereafter.
            Thus you see, thys vsurye is good and prayse
worthye, suche as will heape more treasure to
man in one moment, then al the golde mounteth
vnto, that all the Banquers haue in the
wide worlde besides. Happye is he therefore,
that is suche an vsurer, and I praye god al
men maye be suche vsurers hereafter in dede.
For whatsoeuer men lose by thys meanes vppon
earthe, they are sure to finde the same againe
in heauen. And what losse I pray you
hathe hee, that when hys debtour faylethe
hym, god receyueth hym? and when the debtour
payethe not, god payethe the debte for
hym? An happye eschaunge no doubte, saye
I, yea and a blessed alteracion. The poore
man is bounde to paye, and god is hys suertie,
and wyll paye the debte hymselfe, yf

the poore man bee decayed, and not able to
aunswere the summe: yea let men bee neuer
so vnthankefull, god wil for his promise sake
paye all mens debtes. And because a manne
maye bee the surer, god layethe in a pawne,
whyche is his heauenly gospel, than the which
no greater nor surer gayne can bee layde oute
for mans behoofe vpon earthe. We see if a man
neede moneye in this worlde, and hath a knowen
riche man to bee his suertie, euerye man
is readye to lende for gaine. And is the lorde
of heauen and earthe, he that made the world
and all that therein is, a poore man in your
sight my ryche masters? wyll you not truste
hym, that made you al of nought? that gaue
you freely all that you haue, and wythoute
whom you can haue nothynge? that suffereth
the Sunne to shyne vpon you throughe hys
mercye, that sendethe rayne in due season,
that rulethe the heauens, and the course therof,
for your onelye benefyte? And doubte you
nowe good sirs, that thys lorde of oures, being
lorde of all lordes, is not a sufficyent suertye
to paye vnto you youre owne agayne, and to
recompence you to the vttermoste farthynge?

If the seruant shoulde mistrust his iust masster,
the tenaunt his good landlorde, the sonne
his louing father, it woulde be thought, that
any of these were lewd folke in their so doing.
And shall wee not thinke them most worthye
of blame, that mistruste the goodnes of god,
who is master, lorde, and father ouer all creatures
liuinge, and the onely creator of mankinde,
by whom all creatures breathe, lyue
and haue their being, and without whom all
flesh is nothing but confusion, shame, and the
verye outcastes of thys wretched worlde?
But now, touching the cōpany that is to talk
in this treatise, you shall vnderstande gentle
reader, that no man, nor yet any profession or
callinge is especially touched in thys reporte
that I haue to make, but onelye a rehearsall
made of speache that hath passed. Whyche I
thought good for the varietie thereof, and for
the better setting forthe of gods glorye, to commit
to writing, and so to the printe, that all
men may see and reade the matter, and thervpon
doe, as god shall geue them grace. Theire
names I haue geuen vnto them in greeke and
Englishe, callinge the preacher, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
whiche I doe englishe, Ockerfoe, as enemye to

vsury. The merchant I do name, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
whom I doe tearme, Gromel gayner, and for
shortnes, write him sometime Gromel, calling
him moste by the name of merchaunte. The
Ciuilian, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and so aduocate or Ciuilian.
The Lawyer, because I knowe temporall
lawe is whollye against vsurie, asmuch
as the Cannon lawe, or scripture it selfe: I doe
christen him, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , counting him heare
in deede not muche better then a petye fogger
in lawe, as one that sometimes hath studied a
litle lawe, beeinge yet neuer allowed in anye
Inne of Court or Chauncery for his learninge,
and assuring my selfe that no vtter barrister,
muche lesse any Counsellor in lawe, wyll allowe
his opinion: callynge hym Lawyer notwithstanding,
for modestie sake, because the
other name is odious, and none woulde wyllingly
in dede be tearmed as they are, especially
when the name concerneth eyther wyt or
learning. And yet to see the worlde, none are
so readye to defend vsurie as those are, that
haue the least vnderstandinge in any profession.
And so I am bolde to vse this name pety
fogger, whom for curtesie sake, and for good
manner, I doe call Lawyer, althoughe noe

lawyer in deede, doth or wil allowe of vsury,
but the vnlearned onelye that presume oftentimes
to deale in higher matters, then the elder
and wiser sorte of men wyllingly doe, or
dare affirme certeinly vpon their knowledge.
God be mercyful vnto vs, & make one and other
of al professions, good vsurers in the lord,
that we may lend plentyfully and freely, and
trusting in gods goodnes maye receiue reward
at his hande in that daye. And thus til then
fare you wel in Christ Iesu, to whom be al honor
praise and glory for euer & euer Amen.
         
         
            The names of the speakers in
this dialogue.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Ockerfoe, the Preacher or enemy
to vsurie.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Gromel gayner, the wrong merchant
or euil occupier.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Aduocate or Ciuilian.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Lawyer, or rather petischoler in
lawe.
            
         
         
            
            ¶A letter founde in the studie of
the right reuerend father in god, and moste
godly pastor of Christes flocke, Ihon late bishop
of Salisburye, within certeine monthes
after his forsaking this earthly dwellynge,
whiche letter was sent to the author of this
treatise by Ihon Garbrande, master of arte
in Oxforde, & Prebendary of Salisbury,
who had by legacy geuen vnto him, by the
foresaid godly father, al his papers, writings,
and notes of all his traueyle in gods
vineyarde, and other deuises of lerninge
whatsoeuer.
            
               I Haue perused your learned and
godlye trauayle touchynge the
matter of vsury, M. D. Wilson,
and haue no doubt, but if it may
please you to make it common:
verie much good may growe of
it. Suche varietie of matter, suche weyghte of
reasons, suche examples of antiquitie, suche authoritie
of doctours both Greekes and latines,
suche allegation of lawes not onely Ciuil, and
Canon, but also prouincial and temporal, such
varietie of cases so learnedly and so clearely answered,
suche learninge, suche eloquence, and so
euident witnesse of gods holye wyl, can neuer
possibly passe in vayne. I wyll not flatter you,
I cannot, it becommeth mee not. I assure you,
I like all notably wel: Si quid mei est iudicij, and
if my liking be worth the liking. But of al other

thinges this liketh mee best. Of the three parties,
you make eche one to speake naturally like
hym selfe, as if you had beene in eche of them, or
they in you. What it shall worke in other I can
not tell, for mine owne parte, if I weare an vsurer
neuer so gredyly bent to spoile and rauine,
vt sunt faeneratores, yet woulde I thinke my selfe
most vnhappye, if such perswasions, coulde not
moue mee. For what man woulde not bee afraid,
to lyue desperately in that state of life, that
hee seeth manifestly condemned by heathens, by
Christians, by the olde fathers, by the auncient
counselles, by Emperours, by Bishoppes, by
decrees, by Canons, by all sectes of all regyons,
& of al relygions, by the Gospel of Chryst,
by the mouthe of god? Ago breuiter, vt vides, non
enim id mihi sumo, vt damnem large hoc tám horrendum
peccatum, id tibi relinquo.
            
            
               vt viuat liber, vsura pereat
               From Salisbury this 20. of
August, 1569.
               
            
         
         
            
            Guilielmus Wickham, Capella
nus serenissimae Reginae nostrae
Elizabethae.
            Doctus es, & pius es, Wilsone, quis abnuat istud?
            Qui vel opus praesens, script due prima legat.
            Nam, nisi doctrina praestante, quis obsecro posset
            Rhetoricae, ac Logicae verba Britanna dare?
            Et, nisi perrara pietate, quis obsecro vellet,
            Vsurae scripto prodere damna libro?
            Ergo nisi indoctus nemo tunc illa notauit,
            Nec nisi perdemens hoc reprehendit opus.
         
         
            ¶Iohannes Garbrandus
Oxoniensis.
            Foenore qui lucrum facit, est homicida Catoni,
            Furti dupla, huius quadrupla mulcta fuit.
            Non facit haeredem, priuatur honore sepulchri
            Qui tenues lucro foenoris auget opes.
            Sermo sacer, patres, pius omnis damnat, at vna
            (quae docet errores) Consuetudo probat.
            
               
Tu, qui a supplicibus stas, vir reuerende, libellis
            Consilio, penna, dexteritate premes.
            Prodeat egregius tuus ensis, praestet acumen
            Et deus, & metuens, regia virgo, deum.
         
         
            ¶In Thomae Wilsoni, hominis
Doctissimi, legúm
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ciuilium Romanarum.
D. ac serenissimae nostrae Reginae
a supplicum libellis, librum
de foenore, Ioannis
Coci carmen.
            Est patriae Wilsonus amans, populi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                salutis,
            Et grauiter patitur publica damna seri.
            Hinc multae populo labes, & crebra ruinis
            Fulmina, communi visa nocere rei.
            Sed mala dum trutina vigili per singula lustrat,
            Nil auido reperit foenore deterius.
            Nam 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                epascit populo cum sanguine fibras,
            Et 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                misero, laethifer, vsque necem.
            Esse Cato 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                homines occidere censet,
            Cum 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , exposito in foenus, ab aere venit.
            Nam nihil, aut fumos locat is, qui tempora vēdit,
            Aut si quid vendit, vendit amicitiam.
            
               
Merx praeclara quidem, vlli si venalis honestè:
            Quae, nisi gratuita est, non sit amicitia.
            Nulla potest virtus nam mercaenaria nomen,
            Naturaeuè not as empta tenere suae.
            Nam proiecta for as, alienos spectat ad vsus
            Vitae hominum cultrix, officij
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                parens.
            Non sua corradit, non mutua conficit atrox,
            Lucra nec ex damno quaeritat alterius.
            Non fugitat lucem, nec vult, obscura latebris,
            Turpia per quaestus aera vocare domum.
            Prodit enim crimen latitans vsura pudendum,
            Horret & infames autor ab arte notas.
            At tam tetra lues, hominum sublata saluti,
            Conuersa rerum, concidat ipsa, vice.
            Dum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                parit, pereat, miserandae bellua plebis,
            Exitio sceleri conueniente suo.
            Sed Wilsonus ouans caedendis floreat hydris,
            Quas alit infandas publica laerna mali.
            Acris & Herculeos exantlet mille labores,
            Vt pariat patriae commoda mille suae.
         
         
            
            ¶Fautes escaped.
            ¶In the Epistel, fol 4 euil lawyers, reade euil
lyuers, In the prologue fo 5. pag. 2. and well,
reade and well doiynge. fol. 53. conueant, reade
couenant, fol. 54. pag. 2. gett, reade geue, fol.
63. images, reade examples, fo. 77. pag. 2. borne,
whiche all, reade borne with all, fo. 97. pag. 2. equall
propertie, reade equall proporcion, fol 12,
delyuerie, reade deliuerer, fol. 122. pag. 2. bering,
reade bring, fol. 123. pag. 2. should sett, reade doe
set. fo. 126. pa. 2. this permission exchange, reade
thys merchandizing exchaunge. In the conclusion
pag. 4. geue my head, reade geue you my
heade.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶A Communicacion or
Speache betvvene the riche
worldly merchant, the godly
& zealous preacher, the temporal
and ciuile lawyers, towchynge
vsurie, or the lone of
money for
gayne.
            
               ABout two yeres
past (as I remē
               ber)
a ioly merchant
of Londō,
after hee hadde
hearde a moste
earnest sermon
agaynste vlurye
in hys paryshe
Churche, dyd in vite the preacher to
dynner, hauynge purposed before to
haue certeyne of his frindes & acquayntaunce
the same daye at dynner also
wyth hym, amongest whome, a gentleman
one towards the law, meanly studied,
and yet of a goodly wytte, & great
boldnes, was a bidden gheast, who hauynge
beene likewyse at the same sermon,

came immediatlye after that the
sermon was donne, to the merchaunts
house, wheare the preacher and he meetynge
togeather, eche desyred other of
more acquaintaunce, and the merchant
in hys solempne manner, as soone as
hee sawe them bothe, sayde thus vnto
them. Nowe in good soothe my masters,
you are hartely welcome, and you
good master preacher are welcome with
all my harte, and I thanke you for your
manyfolde preachynges bestowed amongest
vs, specyallye for thys dayes
sermon: for by Saynt Marye you haue
shotte your arrowe to the marke, and it
cannot bee, but muche good wyll come
of this your preachynge, and therefore
you are welcome hartelye, and I praye
you be couered.
            
               Preacher.
               God graunt
that anye my woordes maye edifie anye
one for his soule health, and then might
I the better reioice in my poore trauail,
but I feare me, there is muche corne sowen
vpon the harde rockes and hyghe
wayes that want moysture.
            
            
               Merchant.
               Well well, all shallbe well I

trust, and god forgeeue vs al.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               As I haue hearde you this daye
master preacher, so haue I geeuen
you an eare heretofore, and haue manye
tymes wyshed that I myght haue
had some pryuate talke wyth you, for
my better vnderstandynge, and more
famylyarity with you.
            
            
               Merchant,
               Nay,
yf you bee dysposed to talke, I pray you
pause the matter tyll after dynner, and
then we will spende time, accordinge to
poyntment, for an hower or two in my
gardeyne, where yee shall haue a pleasant
sweete arbour to sitt in, I thanke
my sweete wyfe heare for it. In the
meane season, let vs bee frendly merye,
and vse oure cheere as god hathe sent it,
for in good soothe you are welcome at a
word. I did looke for mo gheastes, and
amongest others, for master doctour of
the Arches, but he had rather bee at hys
ordinarye in the Arches amongest hys
fellowes my masters the doctors there,
then at thys kynde of dyet, howebeit I
thinke hee will not fayle me in the after
noone, for wote ye what master preacher,

I haue desired hym of purpose to
come and vse conference with vs, if you
be so contēted.
            
            
               Preacher.
               I am well contented
syr wyth your appoyntment.
Hereupon the merchant tooke his place
and called hys gheastes vnto hym, and
as merye as a Pye, made them verye
good cheare. And all the dynner tyme
was passed ouer, with none other talke,
but of the good order of the Cytie, and
what an honorable state it was, and
howe chrystendome through, the lyke
cheere was not at an officers boorde, as
ye lord maiors table caried, for that was
specially the honor of Englād, al which
speache was soothed almoste by euerye
body, & gloriouslye extolled for that present.
The Lawyer amongest all others
at that table, had most talke, as he
that thought himselfe moste woorthye,
for as hee had a good readye wytte, so
wanted hee neyther boldnes, nor vtterance
to set it foorthe, as commonlye lawyers
haue plenty of bothe. The Preacher
hauing his head hammeryng vpon
another steethy, vsed seldom any speach

but lifting his eies often to heauen, seemed
to sitt in some mislykinge wyth the
world, as I take it. Notwythstanding,
hee was remembred by the merchaunt,
master Lawier, and others to be merye
as they were. When dynner was done,
the Lawyer forgate not to put the merchant
in minde of hys gardeyne & faire
arbour, who commaunded his kinsman
& apprentise to prouide cushyns, and to
make all thinges ready. And so the rest
of the gheastes being curteously dispacched,
they three wyth one or two others
of the house being there, and the apprentise
standynge by, after the merchaunt
had saide somewhat of hys comelye arbour
and gardeine, and they also allowed
verye well the beautye of it, the
Preacher, domping in a deepe concept,
as one caried with the zeale of god, and
beynge asked what hee thought of the
worlde, began in thys maner.
            
            
               Preacher.
               It is very certayne as I take
it, the worlde is almoste at an ende.
            
            
               Merchant.
               What is the matter syr? belyke
you are wearye of the worlde.
            
            
               
               Lawier.
               No, not weary of the world, but
I thinke him angry with the worlde, for
he heateth dyuers tymes at it, shewyng
alwayes a merueylous zeale agaynste
synne, as I remember you did this day.
            
            
               Preacher.
               The zeale that moueth mee,
ought to moue you, and all others that
haue anye feare of god, or care of lyfe
to come.
            
            
               Merchant.
               Tush, what amounteth
your care for the worlde? you haue
discharged your duetye, let the worlde
care for it selfe, & let euery one aunswer
for his owne doinges. Lorde god, what
should you be so muche greued inwardlye?
            
            
               Preacher.
               I wyll tell you syr, doctrine
dothe greatly abounde, sinne in al
kind is sharpely rebuked, and yet none
or fewe do amende their liues.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               That is not so, there is greate amendement,
and men are better nowe, then
they haue been, saye you, what you lyst.
            
            
               Merchant.
               You say trueth sir, except thys
man wyll nowe seeke out motes, where
greate beames weare heretofore.
            
            
               Preacher.
               I praye god the beames bee not
greater nowe then euer they were, such

vntruthe, suche extorcion, suche malice,
such dissimulacion, suche vncharytablenes,
such horrible vsury was neuer sene
in any time.
            
            
               Merchant.
               Preachers maye
descant generally at theire pleasures, &
randone in the pulpyt at liberty, to fear
men from sinne, but wyth your leaue, if
you search euery man particulerly, you
shall fynde great chaunge and amendement
of lyfe.
            
            
               Preacher.
               Would god it
were as you saye.
            
            
               Lawier.
               Wherewith
do you charge this worlde moste?
            
            
               Preacher.
               With all kynde of synne, and especiallye
with wante of Charitie.
            
            
               Merchant.
               Naye then you roue ad Ephesios.
I praye you syr, when sawe you a
more charitable or more quyet tyme,
then thys is nowe, sauinge onelye that
beastlye vnquyet storme whyche lately
rose in the Northe?
            
            
               Preacher.
               Peace in
appearance appeareth, and thanks be to
god, and to the Queenes maiestie, wee
are nowe voyde of cyuile debate, and of
outwarde dissention, and yet I saye we
want charytye.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               That is, because
you churchemen haue not so muche

wealth, as you weare wont to haue.
            
            
               Preacher.
               Not so syr, for I thynke the
churche is very well prouyded for, but
I saye generally, charity waxeth colde,
the poore neighbour is not beloued, as
he ought to be, his neede neglected, hys
miserable & wretched estate forgotten.
            
            
               Lawier.
               You woulde haue men geue to
all that aske for gods sake, woulde ye?
so loyterers and vagabonds shoulde be
mayntayned.
            
            
               Preacher.
               None speake
more agaynst idle folke and sturdy beggers,
then the preachers do, but I saye,
the poore housholder, and the honeste
meaninge man (who seekethe by good &
lawfull meanes to lyue) is forgotten.
            
            
               Merchaunt.
               You may say your pleasure,
but I knowe that they are nowe more
relieued by the ryche, then theye haue
been heretofore, aswell wyth money as
wyth frendly counsell.
            
            
               Preacher.
               What
your counsell is, I knowe not, and I
praye god it bee suche, as you ought to
geue, and as you woulde haue geuen to
your selues, yf you stoode in neede, but
touching lendinge of money, I thynke

men rather seeke their owne gain, then
any thing the benifit of theire Christian
neyghbour.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Naye bothe, & who
I praye you woulde lende, but to haue
some benefite of his money, and is that
anye harme, when bothe do gayen?
            
            
               Merchaunt.
               Gods blessyng of your harte
for so saying, for I did neuer lende money
in my lyfe, but for gayne, and whether
my neyghbour gayned or noe, I
knowe not, I wyshed well vnto hym,
but by saynt Marye, I woulde bee sure
firste to doe well my selfe, whatsoeuer
came of him.
            
            
               Preacher.
               Herein you wanted
charitie, and shewed your selfe not
to be a perfect Christian.
            
            
               Lawier.
               I can
not tell what you call a Christyan, they
that will liue in this worlde must do so,
and I warrant you master merchaunt
doth nothing, but he hath lawe for hym.
            
            
               Merchaunt.
               Yea marie haue I, & I thank
you for it. I deale surelye for feare of
clappes, the worlde is nought, and full
of decept, euery man hath an eye to the
ryche man, to take hym at aduauntage.
            
            
               Preacher.
               God graunt your law dealyng

be grounded vppon a good conscyence,
for I feare me, you care not who smart,
so you farewell.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Soft and faire
good syr, better speache were better, but
I pray you, tell me in good faithe, what
meane you to bee so greeued wyth thys
world? Belike you cānot haue that you
woulde, or haue not that others haue,
and therefore you are greeued.
            
            
               Preacher.
               No surely I am contented wyth myne
estate, and a verye litle thyng satisfieth
nature, a kyng cannot haue more then
foode and clothynge to withstande hunger
and cold, whych you see I haue, and
I thanke god for it.
            
            
               Merchant.
               In deede
you haue ynoughe, and what shoulde
you do with more, that professe contēpt
of this world? Plenty belongeth to vs,
that are worldlings, and trauayle for it
to helpe others, yf we lyst, and to enrich
our selues to y• vttermoste, for as I take
it, a merchant should not be stinted.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               In deede your treasure is the
welfare of the realme and countreye
where you dwel, and where merchants
are not cheryshed, that countreye or

realme wyl soone perish.
            
            
               Preacher.
               Lawfull
tradyng and aduenturing to bring
in our want and to carry out our plenty
hathe euer beene allowed, and wythout
suche traffique no countreye, nor kyngdome
can floryshe.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               In deede,
they are the onely merchants, to be estemed
aboue all others, as for such as ingrosse
wares to them selues, which are
brought in by others, because they them
selues woulde haue the sale of them alone,
they are no better then forstallers
and regratours of the market, a maner
of men truelye vnworthye to lyue in a
common weale. And touchynge retaylers
at home, I can not skyll of them,
I place them in a lower degree, as not
worthy the name of merchaunts, but of
huckesters, or chapmen of choyse, who
retayling small wares, are not able to
better their owne estate, but wyth falshode,
lying and periurye, byndinge ofttymes
the vtterance of their petye sales
wyth an huge othe, swearynge to euerye
bodye almoste euerye hower in the
daye, that thys and that standethe them

in so muche, when so muche it cost not,
by very muche,Marchant aduenterer a lordes felowe in dignytye whereas the merchaunt
aduenturer, is and maye be taken for a
lordes fellow in dignitie, aswell for hys
hardye aduenturynge vpon the seas, to
carrye out our plentye, as for his royall
and noble whole sales, that he makes to
dyuers men vpon hys retourne, when
he bryngeth in our want, and therefore
to be highly chearyshed, and worthye to
heare office in any well gouerned common
weale.
            
            
               Merchaunt.
               You saye well
for vs syr, but I praye you for all that,
howe are we cherished, that are so racked
wyth great custome, euen for vyctualles,
and not only that, but for all other
merchandizes.
            
            
               Preacher.
               Trybute
and custome are due vnto the prynce
by gods lawe, and therefore you muste
not grudge to yelde custome, but geeue
willingly and franklye vnto Caesar that
whiche is proper vnto Caesar,
                  Math. ca. 22 and vnto
god, that whiche is proper vnto god. If
you thynke the burden and paiment intollerable,
bee humble suters vnto the
magistrates, and if your demaunde can

be proued & founde reasonable, I doubt
not, hut you shall fynde release or ease:
In the meane season, grudge not to pay
that is appoynted you by order to pay,
and pay it truely, or els god will punish
your thefte and fraude, for by none other
termes can I call them. The taskes
and tallages which are leuyed vpon
other people in strange countreys, if I
shoulde tell them you, what woulde you
saye to them? where in some place the
prynce hath the yerelye fifte parte of euerye
mans goods, in other places the
fowerth, yea & in some places the third,
woulde you not saye thys were a myserable
and pitifull hearing? and therfore
I saye, Englishe subiects lyue in merueylous
exemption and liberty, in comparison
of other nations.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               As
they liue in great freedome, so they liue
most godlye, in comparyson of others,
for I pray you, howe lytle whoredome
is there in Englande, in comparison of
other countreis? the relygyon pure, and
all menne ashamed to synne.
            
            
               Merchaunt.
               Do you not see how vacabonds

are whypped, and whoremongers carted,
whyche is not vsed in other countreys,
yea, and hospitalitie better maintayned
in Englande, then in anye place
els in Chrystendome.
            
            
               Preacher.
               I doe
not denie but religion is truelye taught
openly euery where, vnclenlynesse punyshed
somewhere, and ydlenes whipped
somewhere, and hospytalytie kepte
after a sorte somewhere, but yet I saye,
we are not cleare from other faults that
are greate and horrible ynough, and I
thinke the lyke not vsed in other countreys.
This must I say of other natyōs,
they are more vnwillinge to offende in
those thinges that hurte a comon weale
then we are. As, looke what generallye
is noysome to the state, noe man wyll
seeke to geat by lycence, nor otherwyse
by dealynge agaynst the common welfare,
because they preferre the wealth of
theire countrey, before their owne commoditie:
yea positiue laws and statutes
are better obeyed abroade in all states,
then they are here in England, and the
superiors in other realmes geeue better

example in following yt lawes, of theire
countreye, and lesse offende the state,
then our great men and gouernours in
England do. Theaft is counted so horrible
amongest some nations, that men
cōmonly will rather sterue then steale,
and here in England, he that can robbe
a man by the hygh waye, is called a tall
felowe. Againe, they doe lesse oppresse
theire neyghbours elswhere, theye are
more temperate in their speache, & more
spare of dyett then wee commonlye are.
And, yt which greeueth me most in thys
land, lesse extortioners, and fewer vsurers
elswhere then are here in Englād.
            
            
               Lawier.
               All countreys haue their faults,
and I cannot excuse Englande, but yet
I will not so accuse my countreye, that
I will make it altogeter woorse then others.
The Flemynges and hyghe Almaines
are subiect most to dronkennes,
the Italyan to reuenge wronges by
murder, and otherwyse to synne horribly
in suche sorte, as is not to be named,
although that same haynous filthynesse
is not onelye vsed there. The Frenche

man is charged with furious rashenes,
and ouermuch intermedling in all causes
and states, the Spanyarde wyth
intollerable pryde and disdayne against
all others, the Portyngall wyth ouermuche
supersticion in relygion, & simplicitie
of lyfe, the Scottyshman with
braggynge and lyinge, the Englyshe
man, with glottony, in stede of hospitalitie,
with much theft to sette foorth his
brauerie, and sometimes treason for desire
of innouacion. And as euery one of
these countreys hath his especial faults,
so haue they theire proper vertues & seuerall
qualyties, more excellent then any
other nation.
            
            
               Preacher.
               My desire is, yt England might
be most perfect and without any faulte,
if it were possible, & would Christe there
were none other fault in England then
gluttony in the moste, thefte in manye
meane men, and treason in some greate
folke. But I saye there wanteth charytie,
without which, there cannot be perfection
in anye man: for lette there bee
neuer so greate appearaunce of vertue

otherwise, in whom soeuer charitie ys
wanting, there cannot be any vertue at
all, and therfore saint Paule saith. Valct
fides in Christo,
                  Galath. 5. 
                  quae per charitatē operatur,
That faith in Christ is of force that worketh
by charitie, as who shoulde saye,
where charitie wanteth, fayth is of no
value, let men bragge and talke neuer
so muche of their beliefe. For as saynt
Paule sayth, likewise in an other place.
Though I speake wyth the tongues of
men and angels and yet haue no loue,1. Corinth. 13.
I am euen as a sounding brasse, or as a
tyncling cymball, and though I coulde
prophesy, and vnderstande all secretes,
& all knowledge, yea if I had all fayth,
so that I coulde moue mountaynes out
of their places, and yet had no loue, I
were nothing. And though I bestowed
all my goodes to feede the poore, and
though I gaue my bodye euen that I
burned, and yet had no loue, it woulde
profit me nothing. Loue suffereth long,
and is curteous, loue enuyeth not, loue
doth not frowardly, swelleth not, dealeth
not dishonestlye, seeketh not her

owne, ys not prouoked to anger, thynketh
not euil, reioyseth not in iniquitie,
but reioyseth in the truth, suffereth all
thinges, beleuethe althings, hopethe all
things, endureth all things, Yea though
that prophesyeng fayle, eyther tongues
shall sease, or knowledge vanish away,
yet loue fayleth neuer.
            
            
               Merchant.
               I am
neuer out of charitie, but when I cannot
geate my money in, and then in
deede I do chafe and freate, and thynk
my selfe not well vsed, when they do
breake daye with mee, but at length, I
anger them worse then they anger me,
when I haue dryuen them to an owtlawrye,
for a bargayne is a bargayne:
and I will not forgeue a penye to none
of them all.
            
            
               Preacher.
               Then I see well,
yf you will not forgeue, you will hardlye
geue freelye.
            
            
               Merchant.
               Let them
geue on goddes name that cannot tell
what to do wyth their money, I had rather
haue of myne owne, then borrowe
of another man, and I do not knowe
what neede I may haue another daye,
store syr, is no sore.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               By, my

small honestye syr, you do wisely to bee
your owne frende, and to liue so, that
you neede not the helpe of an other,
and better it is to haue too much, then
too lyttle, and soner may a man take awaye,
then put to: yea and a more blessed
thing it is, euer to bee able to geate
more, then to stande in neede to craue
muche. And I for my parte, doe loue
you for your wealth.
            
            
               Preacher.
               You
go about syr,Math. 6. to perswade the ryche
man that his treasure is his chiefe assuraunce
and best frende,Luc. 12. whereas hee
ought to lay vp his treasure, where neither
mothes, nor rust shoulde corrupte
and consume it, and so he shoulde haue
the rewarde at gods hande, therefore I
saye still, charitable dealing is the most
assured and best wealth that a man can
purchace vppon earth, for where all other
worldlye substaunce fayleth, and
consumeth awaye, this continueth for
euer, and ys a token of perfite christianitye,
when men shewe their faith and
beliefe by their good lyuing and well
doyng.
            
            
               Marchant.
               When I am deade,

I maye perhaps do good, but so long as
I lyue, I will saue one, and be sure not
to want. Lay it vp in heauen quod he?
a merie iest in deede, so longe as I
lyue, I wil keepe it in a chest, and haue
the key about mee.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               In deede
I must needes saye, that wilfull pouertie
is the greatest follye in the worlde,
and for a man to want him selfe by geuinge
to others, is the eygthe deadlye
synne, the whych I call extreme folye,
or madnes.
            
            
               Preacher.
               If you wil not,
when you haue it in your owne possession,
bestowe it vppon others for Christes
sake, because you feare to want,
then be you assured, if you geue your
goods after your decease when they can
do you no good at all, because, then you
are not, as being deade and wythout
sence, god will little esteeme suche almose,
which is not worth grammercie:
for you must perforce leaue all you
haue, and no thankes if you geue them,
when you cannot keepe them, and doe
then, and not before leaue your goodes,
when your goodes leaue you. Therefore

I saye still, vse charitie, whyle you
may, and helpe the needye and poore,
and not onely lende frendly, but also
geue frely to your power.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               
                  Durus
est hic sermo: This is a harde thunder
bolte, and suche a one, as I thinke all
men are afrayde of, for verye fewe followe
that lesson, say you what you wil.
But I see you are muche greued wyth
vsurie, emongest all other synnes, and
in all your sermons and preachinges
you rattle so greatly against this offēce,
that you shake the bloode of some, tyll
they blushe as redde as their cloakes,
and manye do scratche throughe your
bitter speache, where it ytcheth not. I
pray god, that you, who talke so muche
against vsurie, may knowe what vsury
is, for I feare mee you cannot iudge so
well by diuinitie what this offence ys,
as the common lawyers can do, and especially
the Ciuilians, who haue written
largely hereupon, & haue also aucthoritie
to determine what is vsurie,
and who they are, that deserue to be called
vserers: for, not all that receaue

money for money are vserers (thys I
speake least you shoulde bee deceyued)
but they that are byters and oppressors
of their neyghbours wyth extreme and
vnmerciful gayne, they and none other
saye I are vserers. And therefore if
you will saye your mynd in learnyng,
I would gladly hear you, and conferre
with you (if it please you) And when
you haue saide, I will replye, if I thinke
meete, for, I tell you troth, I can for my
parte aswel heare, as I would be heard,
and as gladlye learne of others, as I
woulde teache others, and especiallye I
woulde gladly by arguing knowe your
oppinion, because you professe diuinitie
onely, in whiche all truth is couched vndoubtedly
if it bee well and truelye vnderstoode,
but I thinke, all men do not
truelye at all tymes conceaue the iust
meaning and weight of euery sentence
and controuersy.
            
            
               Preacher.
               None more
desyrous to heare and to learne then I
am: and because you will haue me saye
as muche and as longe as I will, I wil
be bolde with your pacience to vtter my

mynde: And if you will take the lyke
paynes after mee, I will thanke you
moste hartelye, eyther in allowinge or
disallowing of myne oppinion in anye
parte.
            
            
               Merchant.
               In good faith you
shall doe verye well to vtter both your
myndes, and I for my parte, will leane
on my elbowe, and be an hearer of you
bothe: but I promise you I will do as I
thinke meete, saye eyther of you bothe
what you list. I haue hearde ynoughe
if that may serue, eyther to beleue, or to
followe, but by saint Grombolde I
wilbe aduised twise before I do once so
much as they tell mee I shoulde doe.
            
            
               Preacher.
               When goddes will is, your
harte wilbe opened, and before he geue
you his grace, it is not possible for you
to receaue and to followe his woorde,
as hee hath commaunded. I haue knowen
them that haue bene as vntoward
as you nowe are, that haue throughe
godds mightie grace and goodnes bene
wonderfully altered, to the aduauncement
of his glorie, and to their owne

soule health.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Hee that wilbee
good, must firste heare and learne the
knowen trueth of god. And therefore
because wee are agreede to talke of this
matter, I for my parte will take this
resting place in this faire gardeine vnder
this arbour, and heare what you
can saye, and will not speake anye one
worde, but geue as diligent eare, as I
can, vnto you, and make an aunswer
when you haue done.
            
            
               Merchant.
               I see
well, here is some sporte towardes.
There will be snappyng and snarring,
I am well assured before all bee done.
And wote you what, master Preacher,
the worlde calles you by a nyckename,
master Ockerfoe, because you are euer
so sharpe agaynst vsurie.
            
            
               Preacher.
               I do
not muche passe to be so called, for so I
am in deede, an Ockerfoe no doubte,
that ys, an enemy to vsurie. But wote
you what others call you master merchaunt?
they terme you by the name of
master Gromell gayner, because you
mynde nothyng so muche, as gettinge

of money.
            
            
               Merchant.
               Contented wyth
that name, for so I am & still mynde to
bee. And therefore go to it my masters,
and this I promise you, I will not saye
muche, eyther nowe, or yet when you
haue done, because I haue no learning,
althoughe I knowe howe to geate a
pennye, aswell as eyther of you bothe,
and to keepe it also. But I praye god,
if your tale bee longe, that I fall not a
sleepe, for you see the weather is verye
hoate, and it is in the afternoone, in
whyche tyme my pastyme is to nodde a
lyttle, yf frendes or other busynes let
mee not, for the phisician telleth me, it
doth mee good, so I doe not sleepe too
muche, but take a nappe. And to tell
you truthe, I doe loue a dyshe of good
meate well. And wee merchauntes
must fare well by order, because yt is
the honour of the Citie, especiallye yf
wee beare offyce, and truely good meat
ys well bestowed on mee, for I furnysh
wyth it, I haue Corpus cum causa, as
you may see, stuffe and lyning it is that

I carry. With that they all laughed merelye,
and the preacher beginnyuge to
speake, was interrupted by a kinsman
of the merchauntes that stoode by and
hearde this talke, who as he was yong,
and gaue longer eare then hys young
head coulde well endure, so was he verye
gredie and hungrye of the worlde,
and so hee myght geate by bargayning,
hee cared not whyche waye it came,
wherefore makinge no conscyence of
gayne in traffique and bargaynyng,
he sayde thus. I praye you syr, let mee
aske you a question or twoe before you
enter further, for they saye lawyers often
tymes tell longer tales, then wyse
tales, and can better make a collection
in their maner, of another mans talke,
then fashion a good Oration of theire
owne. And some preachers are not
wythout thys faulte neyther, and yet
I do not speake this againste you or others
that be of the wysest, but for that,
seeing you are beginnyng to tell a tale,
I cannot tell howe longe you woulde
in your speache eyther of you remember

my questions, and satisfy my mind
therein.
            
            
               Gromell gayner.
               Lo, will you see
this fellowe howe he choppeth lodgick?
he is my kinsman as you knowe, and
a knauyshe witt he hath, ye and wilbee
quarter master wyth mee I tell you, do
what I can, and I maruayle he hathe
helde his peace so long.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Wel,
saye on my frende, wee will geue you
a lyttle hearynge.
            
            
               Apprentice.
               May not
a man make the moste of hys owne that
hee can.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Yeas, if hee doe it
lawfullye.
            
            
               Apprentice.
               I cannot tell
what you call lawfull. I haue fyue hū
                  deth
pounde lying by mee.
            
            
               Gromell gayner.
               Yea, and if hee had sayde, a good
thousande marke, hee had not lyed, I
may tell you in your eare.
            
            
               Apprentice.
               What shall I do wyth all my money?
aduenture it all in merchaundizes beyonde
the seas? so may I haue a clapp
eyther by shipwracke, or by Pirates, or
by euill factours, that all will come to
nought. Perhappes you woulde haue
mee aduenture at home, I will do so a
lyttle, but because wares ryse and fall

and no man ys certeynlye assured of
gayne: I will vse one trade that shall
wythout all doubte bringe me certeyne
gayne, although I sleepe vppon the one
syde, and that is wyth puttinge my money
forth for interest, and taking good
assuraunce. There is no suche gayne
in tradynge, nor yet so certayne, and
were it not better to haue a great gayne
and a certeyne, wythout trauayle, and
wythout toyle, rather then to stande to
an vncerteyne gayne? which as it will
neuer be so great, as the verye lettynge
out of my money will make it, so ys it
gott with muche hazarde of lyfe, and
greate disquietnes of mynde and body.
I am young and gladlye woulde I
learne of myne elders to gett goodes
with ease, and gayne money with money,
which I take to bee a good gaine.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               Suche gayne will turne one
daye to your losse, if you deale not more
charitablye with your neyghbour.
            
            
               Gromell gayner.
               Well master Ockerfoe,
thus you see that euen young knaues
suche as this is, will seeke to aduaunce

theire lyuinge by ease, as well as olde
folkes. But syr knappe, talke you no
more I charge you, let your elders haue
the handlynge of this matter, and bee
you onely a hearer. Do not you know,
that therfore you haue twoe eares, and
one tongue, because you shoulde heare
more then you speake.
            
            
               Apprentice.
               So
haue you too syr, and the gentlemē that
be heare with you.
            
            
               Gromell gayner.
               Yea,
but you are a boye, and wee are men,
and therefore we haue, or should haue,
more wytt and iudgement by reason of
our experience, then such as you haue,
and therefore holde your prate yet once
agayne, and let vs not haue you malaperte
anye more I charge you. What
I saye?
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Your kinsman will
obey, be you assured, but I will tel you,
this learninge is nowe so well known,
that euen weomen, yea and goodman
hoyden of the countrey, in whome a
man woulde thinke were no crafte or
subtiltie to liue, can aske the shillynge
pennie for a weeke, whiche in a yeare
amounteth to foure shillynges & foure

pence besydes the principall, and in a
tweluemoneth after the lone of a hundred
pounds by the yere, amounteth to
foure hundreth pounde, whiche is merueilous
straunge and vncharitable.
               And the shillinge pennie for a moneth,
yeldeth for the loane of an hundreth
pounde by the yere after that rate, an
hundreth pounde for an hundred. But
because this matter is of great weyght,
and requireth a long discourse, good yt
were at large to talke of it, agaynste
whiche, because you preachers doe in
open pulpite so muche enueyghe, if it
will please you according to our agreement
firste to saye your mynde, I will
aunswere you so well as I can. And
yet I thinke lawyers and diuines do
not in all thinges agree in this matter.
            
            
               Gromell gayner.
               Speake firste who lyst,
and make as fewe vsurers as you can,
the fewer the better, and my gayne ther
by shalbee the greater, for I think neither
of you both will perswade me from
lending my money for gayne.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               Yeas by goddes grace, I doubte not but

you wilbee moued with the threates againste
sinne, and chaunge your lyfe
vppon better aduysement. And if yt
please you master lawyer, I will saye
my oppinion plainlye as the scripture
doth teache vs.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Saye on a
goddes name, wee will geue you the
hearinge. And further, perhaps I will
saye for my parte according to my profession
and knowledge: but looke who
is yonder.
            
            
               Gromell gayner.
               Nowe welcome
hartely master doctor, I beshrewe
you because you came not to dynner,
you shoulde haue beene welcome, but
you doctors of the commons are wedded
to small fare, because you will haue
your wittes freshe to pull money into
your pursses, and to emptye ours, by
sharpe and quicke pleadinge.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               I thanke you syr, our small fare is such,
because our bagges in deede are thynn,
and wee must measure our bellyes by
the waight of our purses, for our gaine
is little, god knoweth, but with your
leaue my masters all, I am gladd to see
this holsome assemblye here.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               
                  
You are welcome syr hartely, and you
come not vnlooked for.
            
            
               Gromell gayner.
               Nowe syr, you come (as they saye) in
puddingtyme, for we are about a matter,
wherein you haue good skill, especially
in this case of vsurie, whereof we
nowe talke, for that aswell your bookes
do plentifullye treate thereof, as your
experience is very greate by the varietie
of cases, that come before you.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               What learning I haue herein,
you may soone heare, but for my experience
in hearing cases of this kynd,
these temporall lawyers doe wholye
drowne our profession, and make vs to
haue the lesse wyll to studie, because
our causes are so fewe, that come before
vs, the rest whereof, your lawe hath
taken from vs, and so made vs almoste
beggers for lack of the vse, and exercyse
of learninge.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               If tyme and leasure
myght serue, I coulde bringe you
infinyte reasons to prooue, that our
lawe ys the best, the worthyest, and
the moste auncient lawe in the worlde.
And fyrste I wyll shewe you.
            
            
            
               Gromelgainer.
               Stay there I pray you sir,
for when with your first reason, you say
you haue infinite reasons, you cloy me
by and by, for what tyme will serue for
the ende of your talke, when your reasons
be infinite.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               This matter requireth
an other daye, & for thys time I
would wishe you both, not to speake further
herein, but to bend both your witts
for the beating down of vsury.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               Contente for my parte, and with youre
leaue master preacher, I am glad to see
you, but to saye the truth, for the tryall
of the lawes, your part is now the stronger,
for that it is no tyme now for vs,
because such as beare aucthoritie, are
moste of all with you: and therefore to
speake without preuailing, weare wast
of wind and tyme.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               I feare not to
encounter with you at any time, but because
we are now in an other matter, I
am contented to geeue eare, and to saye
somewhat to master preacher, eyther in
allowing or disalowing of hys speache,
say you to me, what you wil afterward.
            
            
               Gromelgayner.
               I am glad I haue two

eares (as my boye sayd) to heare any of
you that I thinke wil speake reason. As
for master Ockerfoe, I must heare him
with both eares, & beleue hym also, because
he is godds messenger: and yf god
giue me grace to follow him, thē shall I
be happy, therfore saye on sir.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               Without god, you can do nothing, who
is ye geeuer of all good thinges, & to hym
wil I pray for you & say, as by his mighty
& heauēly spirite, I shall haue grace.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               I am glad, that thys good matter
is thus offred to be talked & disputed
vppon, & althoughe I was not heere at
dinner, yet was I at your sermon master
Ockerfoe, and therefore while I am
best at leasure to giue you the hearyng,
I pray you say on in goddes name, and
this I promise you, I am somewhat armed
to say my minde again, for I haue
often turned my bookes for thys case, &
longed for some-such like conference.
            
            
               Gromelgayner.
               I ā glad to here thus much
and therefore I hope to learne some wit
by you my masters: for we merchantes,
haue little more thē wil serue our turns.

Our wittes are only to get and saue agaynste
a deere yeare, & to haue alwaies
in store, whatsoeuer may happen vnto
vs.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Surely I do longe to heare
master Ockerfoe, because I woulde bee
answering of hym, or at the least wyse,
vtter my simple opinion in this audiēce.
With that, they were all contented to
be quiet, sauing that the merchant tolde
master Ciuilian merely, that he had geuen
vnto the preacher a nickename, calling
him Ockerfoe, & the preacher to hit
hym home agayn, called hym Gromelgayner,
as you haue hearde, whiche names
were agreed vppon for them both.
And where the lawyer was no vtter
Barrister, as one lyttle studyed in the
lawes, scante so good, as a meane attorney:
yet he was to bee named for modesties
sake, temporall lawyer, beeinge in
deede no better than a common pettifogger
in lawe, suche as was neuer allowed
in anie Inne of courte or chauncery,
notwithstanding hys witte, wt his
experience serued hym very well. And
thys being said, thus yt preacher began.
            
         
         
            
            ¶Ockerfoe, or the preachers
oracion.
            
               LOue god aboue all thinges,Deut. 6. and thy
neyghbour as thy selfe.Math. 22 This is the
lawe,Mar. 12. and the prophetes, sayth our sauyour
Christ.
                  Luc. 20. What is hee that in louinge
god as hee ought to doe,Rom. 13. woulde do any
one thing contrarie to his will? or who
esteming hys neighbor as hīself, would
not doe vnto hym, as he would bee done
vnto? so that in loue, is the perfection of
the lawe, and without loue, neither god
nor man is either honoured, or vsed, as
eyther of them ought to bee. I do see god
of hys meare goodnes made heauē and
earthe, and all that therein is, framing
man aboue all other creatures vnto his
owne likenes, making him lord ouer al
earthly creatures, as subiect vnto man,
and man for himselfe. So that we al are
nothing els, but the children of one god
the father, & brethren vnto Christ oure
sauiour. And therfore we should loue &
liue together, as brethren, one helpinge
an others necessitye, and in no wise to
contempne our own fleshe, nor to turne

our own face from the poore and nedy,
My neighbour being knowne to be honest
& of good life, although the worlde
goeth not well with hym, commeth to a
riche man, to borrowe for hys relife, eyther
for compassinge his necessarie affaires,
or els for maintenance of his famelye,
the riche man seing his poore estate,
hathe no compassion of his wante,
but saith, yf he can put in good suerties,
and wilbe content to pay for the lone as
hee may haue of others, and as it goethe
commonlye in the royall exchange, hee
will lende hym thereafter, otherwise he
cannot deale, for his money ys hys lyuinge,
and it shall not come home as it
went oute, for so hee might haue kept it
stil, without all danger or losse whatsoeuer.
The poore man that must eyther
famishe, or take as hee is offered, boroweth
either in mony, which is very seldome,
or in wares, whiche is the cōmon
vse of the moste, to a certein value, & entreth
into good bandes, and often times
laieth a gage better then the goodes borowed,
and payeth without mercy suche

as I am ashamed to name. Thys I saye
is against charity, that any man should
be so farre from loue, as he will not lēd
but for an assured gaine, & most sufficiēt
pawne, wherwith god muste nedes bee
offended, for yt all lendinge for certaine
gaine, vpō most sufficiēt assurance, is directly
agaīst his cōmaūdmēt. For firste
ther is no loue, wher free lēding ys not,
& where loue is not,Iohn 13. ther is not god, because
god is loue,Iohannis 15. & hee that dwelleth in
loue,1. Iohan. 2. dwelleth in god, & god ī him. Now
god cōmaūdeth vs to loue one another,5. Matth.
as he loued vs first,1. Timoth. 1. & therefore if we wil
bee his disciples & follow hym, we must
loue one an other, because he hath commaunded
vs, & geuen vs an exāple so to
do. And who can say, yt he loueth god or
hys neighboure, when hee doth not that
which is commaunded by god, & is foūd
nedefull for his christian brother? First
it is directely againste the lawe of god &
nature in hys tenne cōmaundementes.
For it is sayde. Thou shalt not steale,
thou shalt not desire thy neyghboures
goods,Exod. 20. & yet whosoeuer lēdeth his mony

for gayne, doth steale, and desire the hys
neighboures goodes vnlawfullye. For
what is vsury, otherwise thē a fraudulēt
& crafty stealing of an other mans goodes,
vnder ye colour of law, againste the
owners wil? For I pray you, who doth
willingly borow to pay more then he receiued?
or who is not craftely dealt with
all, yt is thus entrapped wt usury? For
besides yt god hath vtterly forbiddē such
vsury, ye same is also an extreme vndoing
vnto ye poore borower, & the assured
enriching of ye couetus vsurer. But because
some mā may answere & say, why
would they borow thē? they might haue
chosen, & volenti non fit iniuria, yt is, to ye
willing mā, no wrong is done. A prety
answer, as though no harme can be don
to hym, that is willinge vppō necessity.
to receue yt. Well, you shal heare what
god sayeth expresly, aswell in the olde,
as in the newe testament.Exodus 22. In Exodus the
xxij. Yf thou lende money to any of my
people, that is poore by the, thou shalt
not bee an vsurer vnto hym, neyther
shalt thou oppresse hym with vsurye.

In an other place,Leuit. 25. if thy brother be waxen
poore, and fal into decay with the, receiue
him as a stranger, or a soiorner, &
let hym lyue by the, and thou shalt take
no vsurie of hym, nor yet vantage, but
shalt feare thy god, that thy brother may
lyue with the, thou shalt not lende hym
thy money vpon vsurye, or lend him of
thy foode to haue an aduauntage by yt.
For I am the lorde youre god, whyche
broughte you out of the lande of Egipt,
to geeue you the lande of Canaan, and
to bee youre god. The prophete kynge
Dauid saythe. Lord who shall enter into
thy tabernacle?Psal. 15. and amongest other
thinges he answereth thus: he that geueth
not his money vpon vsury, and taketh
no rewarde againste the innocent.
And in the 18. of Ezechiel,
                  Ezech. 18. it is thus. The
soule that sinneth shall dye, yf a man be
godly, and do that is equall and righte,
that takethe not other mens goodes by
violence, that parteth his meat with she
hungrie, that clotheth ye naked, that lendeth
nothynge vpon vsurie, that taketh
nothing ouer, this is a righteous man,

hee shal surely lyue saith the lord, but he
that greuethe the poore and nedye, that
robbeth and spoylethe, that giuethe not
the debtor his pledge agayne, that lendeth
vpon vsurie, and taketh moreouer,
shall this man liue? no, he shal not liue,
seing he hath done all those abominations,
he shall dye, and his blood shal bee
vpon him.Matth. 5. 
                  Christ saythe, giue vnto hym
that askethe, and from him that woulde
borrowe, turne not away thy face. Yea,
lende saithe Christ in an other place,Luc. 6. lookinge
for nothinge therby, or of the
gayne.
               Thus you see how manifeste y• scriptures
are againste all vsurye, and howe
plainely the wordes are vttered, & with
what great threats, because we shoulde
be clene & vndefiled persons in the sight
of ye lord.Hieronimus epist. lib. Saint Hierome saith there is no
differēce, betwixt vsury, fraud & violent
robbinge, as who should saye, he that is
an vsurer is a deceitful false man, an errant
theefe, and an extreame extorcioner,
and at a worde, the worst man that
is to be founde in a countrye, and therefore

saith he, lende vnto thy brother frely,
and receaue that again whiche thou
hast lent, and seeke for nothing ouer &
aboue, for all ouerplus, or excesse aboue
the principal, is counted vsury. For as
sainct Augustyne sayeth,August. an vsurer is thē
said to be, when he doth demaund more
in mony or any other thing els, then he
hath deliuered. S. Hierome also sayethe,
that some do thinke vsury to be onely in
money, but let them well vnderstande,
that vsury is an ouerplus in any thing,
aboue that whiche was lent. As for exā
                  ple.
If a man do lēd vnto his neighbour
tenne bushels of corne in winter, to receiue
at the next haruest fiftene bushels
for the same,Ambrosius libro de bono mortis. thys is flat vsurye. Sainct
Ambrose likewise, sayeth in the booke of
the goodnes of death. Yf any man take
vsury, he doth commit extorcion, rauin,
and pillage, and shall not lyue the lyfe:
as who should say,Chrisosto. super illud. he shal dye therfore.
Saint Ihon Chrisostome saythe, that an vsurers
moneye,Math. 5. & volenti mutuare. is like to the bytinge of
the serpent A
                        •
                     pis, whiche with a swete
pleasant itch casteth a man into a sound

slepe, and so he dieth ther vpon, without
farther sense or feling. Sainct Augustin
saith,Augustinus psal. 36. yf thou lēd thy mony to any body,
& lokest for more, then thou hast lente,
not only of mony, but also of any other
thing, bee yt corne, wyne, oyle, or anye
thinge els whatsoeuer, thou art an vsurer,
and herein to bee blamed and not to
be allowed for it. Thus you see, that by
S. Augustines saiynge, the very hope of
gayne vpon mony lent, maketh a man
to bee an vsurer.Hieronimus in Ezech. c. 6. S. Hierome is of the same
minde in an other place, and wil not
that any thing shalbe taken, ouer & aboue
the principal, saiynge in thys wise.
There bee some (saith hee) that thinke vsury
to bee only in mony, which thinge,
the scripture foreseeinge, doth forbidde
all excesse or ouerplus, that a man must
not receiue more, then he hath layd out.
Some will take for the lone of their mony,
small rewards of diuers sorts, thinking
yt therby they do not cōmit vsury,
not vnderstāding yt the scripture calleth
vsury, al yt is ouer & aboue, if a mā receyue
more again thē he did lēd at the first.

but wholy and vtterly forbid it as a
most wicked & detestable syn, according
to the sayinge of S. Paule.
                  Roma. 2. Man muste
not doe any euill, that good may come
therof. And wherof commeth thys foule
vsury? for sooth of couetousnes, whiche
as S. Paule saieth,Timoth. 6. is the roote of al mischefe.
For they that seke welth gredely,
as it is in ye same place, do fal into tē
                  tacion,
& into snare of the deuil, and into
diuers folishe & wicked lustes, which
driue men to destructiō: & therfore some
seekyng mony greedely, haue erred frō
the faithe, & haue filled themselues with
great sorowes, & much pensiuenes. Alas
what goodnes can bee in them, that are
couetous, who haue made money theire
god,Paul Ephes. 5. & cōmitted therwith idolatry, as S.
Paule saiethe in an other place. What
mind can he haue of heauenly thinges,
yt is wholy drouned in wordly desires, &
will sell hys soule for money? Surely ye
couetous man, hath none other minde
in the worlde, but of hys mony, and hys
care to come by it is so great, that he recketh
not how he haue it, either by hooke

or by crooke. Farewel honesty, farewel
truth, farewell the feare of god, and all
goodnes, wher a couetous man lyueth.
Mark I pray you, to how many things
the couetous man is compared. First he
is like Hell, that is neuer satisfied. Next
he is likened to death, that deuourethe
all things, thē to the Sea, yt neuer swellith
the more, although all the other ryuers
and fluddes do runne into it, after
yt, hee is ressembled to a dog, that lying
in an heymowe, will neyther eate heye
hymselfe, nor yet suffre other cattell to
eat by hym: to a Moul, that casteth earth
vpon hymself, to a spyder, that is entangled
in his own copwebb, & last of all, he
is cōpared to a sack, yt hath no bottō, that
put in it whatsoeuer you wil, ye same stil
goeth out straight wayes, & is neuer filled.
So yt to gether al these together, & to
lap thē vp roūde in one būdle, you shall
here, yt a couetous mā is hel vnsaciable,
ye sea ragīg, a cur dog, a blind moul, a venemus
spider, & a bottōles sacke, where
by you may be well assured, yt the dyuell
dwelleth tabernacled in such a mōstre.

The scripture doth merueilously speake
against couetusnes in diuers places.Exod 28. In
Exodus it is written. Let them be altogether
voide from couetousnes, that beare
rule ouer others: for surely where couetousnes
raigneth, there cannot bee any
Justice ministred. And therefore god defend
this realme from couetous magistrates,
and gredy gouernours. In the
Prouerbes it is writtē.Prouerb. 28. He that hasteneth
to be riche, cānot be honest. And I pray
you who maketh greater hast to aduāce
his welth, then the couetous vsurer? or
who commethe to infinyte riches more
easely, thē the vsurer? And yet the more
he hath, the more he desireth, whose gredye
harte is very hell mouthe as I sayd
before, that wil neuer be fylled. But see
what foloweth of thys. He that heapeth
to hym selfe vniustly,Eccles. 14. dothe gather hys
goods for an other manne, often times
a meere stranger to him, yea and sometimes
hys deadly enemie: so that wt hys
euell gottē goods, an other man, eyther
stranger to him, or els his foe, shalbe
mightely enriched by him much against

his will, yea he shalbee vsed like vnto a
spounge, which when it is ful of water,
is pressed & wrounge in suche sorte, that
the water goeth cleane out: Euen so
shall the ryche man bee stripped out of
all that he hath, to pleasure many times
his enemie therewithall, to hys greate
harte greife, and be made as bare & naked,
as euer he was borne. Therefore
god by his prophet denownceth, wo vnto
suche riche carles,Esai. 5. 
                        •
                     3. saying, wo be vnto
you that ioyne house to house, and lande
to lande, euen vnto the very boundes of
the place. Do you thinke to dwell alone
vpon the earthe? Wo bee to thee that
proulest & takest prayes, for thou shalt
be bereft of all that thou hast. Wo bee
to you ryche folke, that haue your onely
ioye and comfort here vpon earth. Loke
well to your selues therefore, & eschewe
couetousnes, for no mans lyfe (sayeth
Christe) is in the abundance of that hee
hath.Luc. 6. And herken what saint Paule
sayeth,Eph. 5. no whoremonger, no vncleane
person, no couetous man, who is a worshipper
of Images shall enter into the

kingdome of heauen. Christ also sayth,
my children,Math. 19 howe harde a matter is it
for those, that put their trust in money,
to come to heauen. It is more easye for
a camell to go throughe a needles eye,
then for a couetous man to enter into
heauen.Iacob. 5. Therefore go on you ryche
men, as saint James sayth, weepe and
bewaile your miseries, whiche shall fall
vpon you and your riches.Genes. 19. The Sodomites
were wholye destroyed for theyre
couetous and filthy lyues.1. Reg. 15. Couetousnes
was the destruction of Saule, for
the scripture saieth, he more esteemed
spoyle and rauyn, then the word of god.
The richeman that fared deintily euery
day,Luc. 16. was buried in hell.Act. 1. Judas had the
rewarde of his couetousnes, for he hanging
him selfe did brast in the middest.
Diogenes seeing Anaximines seruants
carying great store of siluer vessell, asked
whose plate that was, whiche they
caried, and hearing that it was Anaximines
their masters plate, who was a
verye riche couetouse snudge, he sayde
thus meryly vnto thē: Is it not a shame

felowes for your master to haue so many
thinges alone to himselfe,Maximus sermo. 12. & hath not
yet hymself? meaning that a couetouse
man is rather had of his money, then
hath any money of his owne, beyng as
though it were seruaunt and bond slaue
to his gotten goods, and hydde treasure.
Examples be infinite, aswell prophane
as holy. And marke wel in what
comon wealth that couetousnes once entred,
the same did not long continue after:
as by the Romayne state it dothe
most euidently appeare. And therefore
saieth Pondidius a Romaine (as Tully
maketh reporte,Cicer. offic. 
                        •
                     . who saieth, that in all
men bearing office, & publique charge,
the least suspicion of couetousnes ought
to be eschewed) woulde god (qd he) it
had bene my fortune then to haue bene,
and in that tyme borne, when the Romaines
began first to take brybes, surely
I would not haue suffered them long
to haue borne rule. His meaning was,
that he would haue outbidden them all,
and gott gouernement with money: a
couetous man no doubte, & ambiciouse,

out of measure. But Scipio Affricanus,
and Paulus Aemilius being mightie magistrates,
and the worthiest captaines,
and rulers, that euer were, eyther before
or synce, had cleane, and vncorrupted
handes, and aswell were they continent
as abstinent, bearing them selues
moderatly in all their affaires, and forbearing
to wrong or iniurye any body.
God graunt therfore, that all men, but
especially rulers, be voyde from couetousnes.
For as Apollo Pythius sayde
by oracle that Sparta, otherwyse called
Lacedemon, should not perishe and be
vtterly destroyed by anye thing more,
than by couetousnes, so I pray god most
hartely, that the same be not a prognostication
for Englande, where such horrible
couetousnes raygneth, as neuer
was knowen, eyther in Grece lande, or
in Italie. And of thys couetousnes, vsurie
springeth, as doughter and heire to
so fylthy a mother. And what shall a mā
looke for any other thinge els, but confusion,
& vtter destruction, when lawes
are holden for lustes, priuate cōmoditie

better esteemed then the comon wealth,
poore men euery where neglected, and
god eyther not remembred, whiche ys
euill, or els wholy contempned and despysed,
whych is worse, for how can it be
otherwise, when men haue no regarde
of sinne, and feeding them selues wyth
their owne humors, do think that what
soeuer they do is well done, be it neuer
so farre from god, and all godlinesse,
alacke the pitye therefore, when our
blyndnes & wilfulnes are suche. Some
forsooth, to colour their doynges, wyll
not lende money, but wares, and so of
purpose will set their wares at an hygh
pryce, in consideraciō of tyme, demaundyng
great gayne for the tyme onelye,
whereas if eyther they solde their wares
then, or kept them neuer so long, they
could neuer haue so much money of any
man, to be commonly solde betwixte
merchant & merchant.Exod. 22. But god sayth, if
thou lende money, wyne, oyle, corne, or
any thing els, thou shalt not take anye
tot more, then thou hast lent, in respecte
of tyme, but so much onely, as thou hast

lent, and no more in anye wyse. And
what do these men meane, that seinge
the worde of god so expressely agaynste
them, forbiddynge, and condempnynge
it in suche sorte, as daylye they maye
reade, see, and heare, will so wilfullye
offende agaynste hys holye lawe? will
any man thynk hym a man of god, that
hauynge stolne often, delyteth styll to
steale, and thinketh no goods well gotten,
that are not stolne, or robbed from
other? Or is that man worthye to lyue
emongest men, that wittynglye murdreth
hys deare brother, for whome
Christe hath shead hys moste precious
blood, and delyteth still so to doe, heaping
murther vpon murther? Assuredly,
the vsurer is none other, but a theefe
and a murtherer of his euen christian,
and aswell worthy to dye the death, as
anye other offendor whatsoeuer. There
is no penaltie of death agaynste the aduouterer,
no more then agaynste the vsurer,
and therefore they both do more
abounde, then eyther theefes or murderers.
Wherby this is a manifest reason

that the wicked men of thys worlde,
feare more penall statutes, and positiue
lawes of princes, then the lawe of god,
wherein they shewe them selues to bee
of this worlde, and to haue no regarde
of the worlde to come. And further I
may saye, and iustifie it also, that suche
are they whome god hath forsaken, the
reprobate I meane, and cursed people,
ordeyned for the Diuell and his angels
to be tormented in hell fier for euer, for
what can be worse, then the vserer, who
is without all loue & charitie, and hath
no pitie of his neighbour, in what miserye
or want so euer he bee? The poore
may sterue, and dye in the streates, for
anye mercye or charitie that they wyll
shewe, whereas, if they were of god,
they should remēber the poore & needy,
& not only to lend freely, but also geeue
almose frankly.1. Ioan. epist. 3 For as S. John sayth:
who soeuer hath this worldes good, and
seeth his brother haue neede, & shutteth
vp his cōpassion frō him, how dwelleth
the loue of god in him? Again it is written
in Tobias:
                  Tobias. 4. geue almose of thy goods &

turne neuer thy face away frō ye poore,
& so shall it come to passe, that the face of
the lord shal not turne away frō the. Be
mercifull after thy power: yf thou haue
much, geue plentiously, if thou haue little,
do thy diligēce gladly to geue of that
litle, for so gatherest yu thy selfe a good
reward in the daye of necessitie, for almose
delyuereth from deth, and suffereth
not the soule to come in darkenes.
A great comforte is almose before god,
vnto all them that do it. Of thine own
goods saieth hee, not of goods euil gotten,
neyther by extortion, theft or vsurye,
but of suche goods, as thou halfe
iustly gotten, by sweate of thy browes,
or by anye other lawfull industrie. And
in the lawe of Moses,Deut. 15 god sayth, when
one of thy brethren emong you is waxen
poore, in any of the cities within thy
lande, whyche the lorde thy god geueth
thee, see thou harden not thyne harte,
nor shutt thy hande from thy poore brother,
but open thy hande vnto hym, and
lend hym sufficient for his neede, which
he hath, and let it not greue thyne harte

to geue, because that for that thyng, the
lorde thy god shall blesse thee in all thy
workes, and in all that thou puttest thy
hande to, for the lande shall neuer bee
without poore, wherefore I commaund
thee saying, open thyne hande vnto thy
brother that is needye and poore in thy
lande. Yet all this notwithstandinge
the vserer is as deafe as a doore nayle,
as blynde as a bittle, and as harde harted
as a flynt stone, whose mynde, god
for his great mercye soften. The inhabitantes
of Asia, Macedonia, & Corinthia,
as the apostle sheweth of them,1. Corinth. 16. in hys
epistle to the Romaynes and Corinthians,2. Corinth. 8.
were not harde harted,9. Rom. 15. towardes
their brethren. The apostles them selues,
beyng the true disciples of god, expressely
willed in all their churches and
congregacions, that the poore shoulde
alwayes bee remembred,Act. 6. yea, and did
sende of that poore substance they had,
some portion to the poore brethren that
were in Iudaea.
                  Act. 11. Wee do reade in the old
testament a notable example of that famous
and worthy capytayne Nehemias,
                  
who seeinge the people of Israell,Nehemias li. for
want and neede to runne vppon vsury,
to pawne their landes and goodds,
                     
                        •
                     . Esdras. ca. 5 and
so to paye excessyuely, after they had retourned
from their captiuitie in Babilonia,
called the magistrates and gouernours
before him, and rebuked them
very sharpely, that they exacted tribute
vpon theyr poore brethren. And therefore
he commaunded, that there shoulde
bee landes, vyneyardes, orchardes of
olyues, and also houses allotted vnto
them, wythout paying any vsurie at al,
for that they were wont to paye the hundreth
parte of their landes and goodds
euery moneth, in the name of tribute,
to maynteine the wages and salaries of
their chiefe gouernours & magistrates,
whyche paymentes Nehemias did vtterly
abrogate, because he sawe the people
were verye poore, and therefore saythe
he these woordes vnto them. It ys not
good that ye do, ought ye not to walke
in the feare of god, because of ye rebuke
of the heathen our enemies? I, and my
brethren, and my seruauntes haue lent

them money and corne: but as for vsurie,
let vs leaue it. Suche shoulde princes
and magistrates bee, suche shoulde
landelordes and greate possessioners
shewe them selues to the poore and nedye
tenaunts, when they are ouercharged
wyth excessyue enhaunced rentes.
The wyse man sayeth: Water quencheth
fyre,Eccles. 3. & 4 & mercie reconcileth sinnes,
god hath respect vnto him that is thankfull,
he thynketh vppon hym agaynste
the tyme to come, so that when he falleth,
he shall fynde a strong holde. And
therefore it followeth: My sonne, defraude
not the poore of hys almose, and
turne not awaye thyne eyes from hym
that hath neede: despyse not an hungry
soule, and defye not the poore in his necessitie,
greue not the harte of him that
is helpelesse, and withdrawe not thy
gyfte from the needefull. Refuse not
the prayer of one that is in trouble, and
turne not away thy face from ye needy,
cast not thyne eyes asyde frō the poore,
that thou geue him not occasiō to speake
euil of the, for if he cōplain of the in the

bitternes of his sowle, his prayer shalbe
hearde, euen he that made him shal here
hym.Prouerb. 28. In the prouerbes of Salomon,
thus it is written: Hee that geueth to
the poore shall not want, but hee that
turneth away his eyes frome such as be
in necessitie, shall suffer great pouertye
hym selfe,Psal. 41. and therfore the prophet Dauid
saieth: Blessed is hee that considereth
the poore, the lord shall deliuer him
in the time of trouble.Esai. 58. Esay the prophet
exhorteth all men to do charitie, and to
geue almose, sayinge in this wyse. It
pleaseth not me, til thou breake thy bred
to the hungry, and bring the poore fatherlesse
home to thy house, when thou
seest the naked, that thou couer him, &
hyde not thy face from thyne own flesh.
It is written also, in the gospell of saint
Mathewe:Math. 6. See ye gather not treasure
vpon earth, where rust and mothes corrupte,
& where theeues breake throughe
and steale, but gather thy treasure together
in heauen, where neyther rust nor
mothes corrupt, and where theeues neither
breake in, nor yet steale, for where

soeuer your treasure is, there will bee
your harte also.Luc. 12. And in Luke also hee
saieth: Sell that ye haue, and geue almose,
& make you bagges whiche waxe
not olde, and treasure that fayleth not
in heauen, where no theefe commeth,
neyther mothe corrupteth. But what
will you haue of thornes, other then
thornes?Math. 7. doe you thynke to gather
figges of thistles, or grapes vpon brambles?
suche as the tree is, such will the
fruite be. Besides this, the vserer is the
ydlest man that lyueth, for he doth nothing,
and yet gayneth all thinges, contrary
to saint Paules saying:Paul. 2. Eph. 3 who willeth
that none should eate, that doth not
labour. And these fellowes do not onely
eate, but they out eat all men, and
geate the diuell and all to them, wythout
cause, or any maner of reason in the
worlde. Moreouer, they are so vnmercifull
couetouse, that they mynde nothynge
in the world, but onely money,
and therefore cannot talke willynglye
of any other matter, but of setting forth
theire money for gayne, and desyringe

still that others maye want, that theyre
gayne maye be the greater, for conscyence
they haue none, no more then
dogges. And better for a good meanynge
man, to bee cast headlonge into
prison, & there to bee fast cheyned with
irons, then to come into their bondes:
for a man being imprisoned, maye by
some one meanes or other, gett out,
but beyng once in the vsurers danger,
it is not possible to gete out, but still hee
is assured to bee in, more and more, like
as a birde, beynge taken wyth lyme
twigges, the more shee struggleth to
gett out, the more shee is lymed and
entangled fast, so the poore man, the
more he dealeth wyth vsurie, the more
he is wrapped in Darbyes bandes, as
they saye, and at lengthe vtterlye vndonne.
And thys ys the occasion of dyuerse
bankeruptes, of manye decayed
gentlemen, that are compelled for lyfle
to sell theire landes awaye, and of a
number of honest occupyers, that by
those meanes are vtterly vndone, bothe
they, theire wyues, and their chyldren.

I do knowe, there bee other meanes
that bringes manye a man to pouertye,
as namelye, excessyue fare, gorgeous
apparell, keepynge of ouer manye seruauntes,
playinge at dyce and cardes,
hauntynge of harlottes, and vnnecessarye
liberalitie, more vsed in England,
then elswhere. And yet will I saye, all
these sett togeether, haue not more harmed
some men, and the moste of men,
then thys filthye vsurye hath doone.
And my reason ys thys: A man taketh
vpp a thousande poundes at one tyme,
and payeth for the same, twentye, thyrtye,
naye shal I saye fourtie, in the hundred
sometymes, and still runneth vpon
vsurie, by the space of fiue or sixe yeres,
yea, perhappes tenne yeres, payinge
vsurie vppon vsurie, whych after twentie
pounde in the hundreth pound, commeth
to two thousand pounde, after ten
yeres, wyth the pryncipall, and so fourtie
in the hundred, amounteth to fower
thousand pounde in tenne yeres, wyth
the principall, nowe this borrower triumpheth
for a tyme, but when he shall

come to paye the principall, and the vsurie
vppon vsurie, then he feeleth therevpon
suche a smarte, that he is wroung
to the bones. And then forsooth awaye
goeth hys lande, and all that euer hee
hath, to master vsurer. I knowe a gentleman
borne to fiue hundred pounde
lande, and entring into vsurie vppon
pawne of his lande, did neuer receyue
aboue a thousād pound of nete money,
and within certeyne yeres, ronnynge
stil vpon vsurie, and double vsurie, and
vsurie vpon vsurie: the merchantes termyng
it vsance and double vsance, by a
more clenly name, he did owe to master
vsurer fiue thousand pound eat the
last, borowyng but one thousand poūde
at first, so that his land was clean gone,
beynge fiue hundreth poundes inherytance,
for one thousande pound in money,
and the vsurie of the same money,
for so fewe yeres, and the man nowe
beggeth. I will not saye, but this gentleman
was an vnthrift dyuers waies,
in good cheere, naye in euill cheere, I
may call it, in wearing gaye and costly

apparell, in roystynge wyth many seruauntes
mo then needed, and wyth
mustrynge in monstrous greate hose,
in hauntynge euill companye, and lasshynge
out fondlye and wastfullye at
cardes and dyce, as tyme serued. And
pet I do saye, he loste more by the vsurer,
then hee did by all those vnthriftye
meanes: for his vayne expences was
not much more, then a thousand pound,
because hee had no more: whereas the
vsurer had not only his thousand poūde
agayne, but fower tymes more, whyche
is fiue thousande pounde in the whole, &
for want of this payement the fiue hundred
pounde land was wholy his. And
this gayne onlye he had for tyme. They
saye tyme is precious. Hee may well
saye, tyme was precious to hym, that
payed so deerely for it, or rather the vsurer
maye saye, that tyme was verye
precious to hym that tooke so muche
vnto hym. Nowe lorde god, what a
straunge thinge is this, that god suffering
the sunne to shyne vpon vs freely,
and the ayre to bee comon to all, as well

poore as rych, wythout anye gayne taking,
that we not considering so liberal
a goodnes of god, should so farre be frō
charitie, that we will fell tyme & ayre so
deerely, hauing it of god so freely. Assuredly
suche caterpillers vpon earth, are
accursed of god aboue, because thei haue
no property of god in them belowe. For
god geueth power for yt sunne to shyne,
sendeth rayne in due season, appointeth
the starres to keepe their courses, and al
for the behoofe and benefit of man: and
man onely, I meane the vsurer, is enemie
both to god & man, and will in nothinge
folowe, neyther the example of
god, nor yet his blessed commaundement,
nor feare his bitter threates, nor
yelde to any lawe. Therefore I say stil,
vsurers be diuels and no men, traitors
to theire creator, disloyall members to
his commaundements, caytifes to their
kynde, rebelles to theire countrey, and
enemies to their owne soules. But you
will saye, all vsurers be not of one sort,
some take lesse, and some take more. In
dede (I speake by wordly respect) I may

saye with the philosopher, there are degrees
of comparison in some sinne, and
yet I must saye, he that taketh ouer and
aboue that he lendeth, is an vsurer, and
so a synner before god: as he that stealeth
but a penny by the hygh waye, is a
theefe aswell as he that stealeth an hundreth
pound, & worthy to be hāged therfore,
although the losse is not so greate
to the owner, but that is no matter, the
entent & euill mynde is all one. And so
the vsurer that taketh lesse, because hee
woulde seeme honest, shall go to the diuell,
because he hath wittinglye sinned
against god, aswell as the other that taketh
more, for that the law sayeth plainlie,
thou shalt not take any thyng, ouer
& aboue that thou hast lent. And he shal
dye the death aswell, he that hath killed
one man, as he that hath killed twenty,
because the lawe sayeth:Exod. 20. thou shalt not
kyll. Lykewyse he that offendeth wyth
one maryed woman, and that but ones,
is aswel an aduouterer, as that man is,
that hath offended dyuerse tymes with
many, because the lawe sayth, thou shalt

not cōmytt aduouterie, whiche is then
cōmitted, when any one man offendeth
with another mans wife. Lesse taking
                     •
                  
excuseth no man, when god forbiddeth
all maner of takyng. And often tymes,
he that taketh lesse, woulde haue more,
if he coulde gett it. I must not be wyser
then the holy ghoste, and therfore, what
soeuer I do fynde there, I will folowe it
playnly, wythout any addyng or diminishing.
And so, where Christe willeth
vs not to looke for anye gayne at all,
what gayne shoulde we haue? Let lendyng
be a lending, as it shoulde be, that
is to saye, free, simple, and for charityes
sake, and as the nature of lendynge is,
wythout anye thinge at all, more then
the principall: for if I do take more, I
do not lende, as I am commaunded,
but I do contract, & bargayne for myne
owne couetouse gayne onely, contrarye
to gods good will, & commaundement,
and agaynst all lawe. Ezechiell sayth, if
I do take any thing ouer and aboue my
lone,Ezechiell. 18. I shall not liue the lyfe, but dye.
Therefore I woulde wishe all men, to

take good heede, what they do, and not
to flatter them selues wyth vayne gloses,
and imaginations, as though they
mought in some case, & in some respects
take an ouerplus, with a clere consciēce.
I for my parte, woulde not take a penye
more then I did lende, for all the goods
in the worlde. For I knowe there is no
meane in this vyce, more then there
is in murder, thefte, or whoredom. And
therefore I saye, and maintayne it constantlye,
that all lendyng in respecte of
tyme, for any gaine, be it neuer so litle,
is vsurie, and so, wickednes before god
and man, and a damnable deede in it
selfe: because wee are commaunded to
lende freely, and to looke for nothynge
ouer, and aboue that we lend. But as I
sayed before, this vsurie is the daughter
of couetousnes, a monstrous daughter
I say, of an horrible fowle foster dame.
Seneca saieth wisely, Auarus nil rectè
facit, nisi cum moritur. The couetous man
doth nothing well, but when he dyeth,
whyche sentence may moste aptlye bee
saide of the wretched vsurer, who in his

lyfe time, is the cause of all hurte, for by
leauyng his goods behynde, there maye
some good come by hys deathe, when
his wealth is dispearsed abroade emongest
others, and hys vnmercifull dealyng
brought to an ende. Wee do all
feare the plague merueylously, and desyre,
that bothe citye and countrey may
be cleane rid of it, and yet what a blesse
were it to thys whole realme, if in one
yere, there were an vniuersall murren
of all the vsurers in England. Murren
quod one, why that is a death proper to
beastes. Alacke good man, I haue fayled
in my Rhethoricke, and yet I praye
you, what are these vsurers other then
beastes? for they liue lyke beastes, and
dye like beastes, and why shoulde I not
wyshe vnto suche brute carons a caroniouse
death, meete to theire condicion,
since they will not repent and amende
their sinfull lyuing, by no warning nor
threatning of man nor god, that can be
deuysed.
               To lende freely is a kynde of liberalitie
& bountifulnes, when a man departeth

from his owne, to helpe his neighbours
want, wythout any hope of lucre
or gayne at all, for he is benefited, that
borroweth, and feeleth greate comforte
in his great neede, wheras lending for
gayne, is a chiefe branch of couetousnes
& makes him, that before might haue
ben counted bountifull, to be now reconed
a greedy gayner for him selfe, seeking
his own welfare vpon good assurance,
without any care at all what becometh
of his neighbour, gnawing him
vnmercyfully, to satisfie his own wretched
& most greedy hunger, directly turnynge
a moste bewtifull vertue, into a
most filthy abhominable vyce. Yea vsurie
is a manifest & voluntarye knowen
thefte, which men do vse knowinglye &
wyttingly, for eyther they think they do
euil, & forbeare it neuer a whit, or (that
which is worst of all) they thinke they
do well, and so by oft vsing of this filthines,
do lull them selues in sinne with
out anye sence or feeling of theyr moste
wretched wyckednesse, and horryble
dealynge.
               
                  
Christ for his bitter passion be merciful
vnto vs, and geue vs his feare, that we
may liue after hys lawe, and folowe his
holye will, for surely, as we lyue now,
eyther the byble is not gods worde, or
els we are not of god, such contrarietiis
betwene our lyues, and our lessons.
The scripture commaundeth,Exodus 20 thou shalt
not steale, thou shalt not kyll, thou shalt
not commytt aduoutery, thou shall not
beare false witnesse, thou shalt not lend
out thy money for gayne, to take anythinge
for the lone of it, and yet we doe
all these thinges, as though there were
neyther scripture, that forbad vs, nor
heauen for vs to desyre, nor hell to eschewe,
nor god to honor, nor diuell to
dread. And this laste horrible offence,
which I count greater, or as great, as
any of the rest, is so common emongest
vs, that wee haue no sense to take yt
for synne, but count it lawfull bargainynge,
and iudge them goodlye wyse
men, that hauynge great masses of
money by them, will neuer aduenture
anye iott thereof in lawfull occupying,

eyther to carrye out our plentye, or to
bringe in our want, as good merchants
vse, and ought to doe, but lyuinge idle
at home, will sett out theire money for
profite, and so enrych them selues wyth
the labour and trauayle of others, being
thē selues none other, then droanes
that sucke the honney, whyche other
paynefull Bees gather wyth their contynuall
trauayle of dyuers slowers in
euerye fielde. And whether these men
be profitable, or tollerable to a common
weale, or no, I reporte me to you? Besydes
that, god doth vtterlye forbidd
them, whose commaundement ought to
bee obeyed, yf we be Christians, and of
god, as we professe to be. And therefore
for my parte, I will wyshe some penall
lawe of death to be made, against those
vsurers, aswell as agaynste theefes or
murtherers, for that they deserue death
muche more then suche men doe, for
these vsurers destroye and deuour vp,
not only whole families, but also whole
countreys, and bring all folke to beggerie,
that haue to do wyth them. And

therefore are muche worse then theefes
or murtherers, because theire offence
hurteth more vniuersallye, and toucheth
a greater nomber, the one offendynge
for neede, and thother vpon wilfulnesse,
and that whych is woorst, vnder
the coloure of frendshippe, mennes
throtes are cutt, and the dooers counted
for honest and wyse men amongest
others that haue so vngodlye geathered
goods togeather. What is the matter
that Jewes are so vniuersallye hated
wheresoeuer they come? For soothe,
vsurie is one of the chief causes, for they
robbe all men that deale with them, and
vndoe them in the ende. And for thys
cause, they were hated in England, and
so banyshed worthelye, wyth whome I
woulde wyshe all these Englishemen
were sent, that lende their money or other
goods whatsoeuer for gayne, for I
take them to be no better then Jewes.
Nay, shall I saye? they are worse then
Jewes, for go whither you wil through
out Christendom, and deale with them,
and you shall haue vnder tenne in the

hundred, yea sometimes for sixe at their
handes, whereas englishe vsurers exceede
all goddes mercye, and will take
they care not howe muche, wythout respecte
had to the partye that borroweth,
what losse, daunger, or hinderaunce soeuer
the borower susteyneth. And howe
can these men be of god, that are so farr
from charitie, that care not howe they
get goods so they may haue them.
               O lorde haue mercy vpon vs, and deale
not with vs accordyng to our manyfold
wickednes, neyther rewarde vs accordyng
to our iniquities. Great are our
sinnes that wee haue committed & more
in nomber then are the sandes vpon the
sea shores. Lorde, if thou narrowlye
marke our naughtines and wicked doinges,
who shalbee able to stande before
thee in iudgement? but thou lorde arte
mercyfull, and wilt forgeue them that
call vpon the in faith wyth a repentant
mynde, whiche god graunt vnto vs all
for his deere sonnes sake Jesus Christ,
to whome with the father and the holye
ghost be al honor & glory for euer & euer
Amen.
            
            
               
               Lawyer.
               Euerye man in his facultie,
I see well, ought first to bee hearde.
You haue sayde muche, and verie
godlye, but whether politiquelye, and
altogether aptly, I cannot constantlye
affirme, for that I see all comon weales
in the Christian worlde, are gouerned
otherwyse then you preache. And therefore
I must thinke you take the scriptures
amysse, and do not expound them
accordyng to the very meanynge of the
holy ghost. And I tell you playne, it is
not in you preachers to iudge precyselie
what vsurie is. For as diuynes cannot
tell what hearb is best for euery disease,
but the phisicions that are best practised,
and acquaynted therewyth: so it ys not
in simple diuines to saye, what contract
is lawfull, and what is not, but in skilfull
lawyers to shewe, and in wyse magistrates
to determyne the truth, and
ryght hereof. And such contractes, as
the lawes do allowe for lawful, a good
man may vse the same wyth a safe conscience.
And publique lawes, made accordynge
to good reason, and iustyce,

are the ordinaunces of god, and the magistrate
is the minister of god, to a
good man, for good. I graunt you
maye preache generallye agaynst it, as
you doe, but to saye perticularlye, and
precyselye, what it is, is not wythin
the compasse of your profession. Those
haue best skill in these matters, that are
iudges, to heare the facte done, and by
circumstaunce to consider thereof, accordynge
to theire learnynge, and as
cases haue bene ruled heretofore in the
lyke contractes, and bargaynes, so to
ende matters, as you master doctor can
best tell. You preachers do heare things
a farre of, but you neuer sit in iudgement
of suche matters, neyther it is incident
to your callynge: for a preacher
and a iudge, are two distincte officers,
and of the two, the iudges offyce is the
harder to discharge, & more intricate,
because of the diuersitie of allegations,
and reasons, whyche he must heare,
weygh, and consider depelye, and so resolue
vppon them, accordynge to the
truthe of the matter, alleaged & proued,

& as ye law doth direct him.
            
            
               Gromel gayner
                
I was almost perswaded, neuer to lend
money or wares agayne for interest,
but I will heare farther before I geeue
vp, because it maye bee, there is some
shifte to saue a mans conscience wyth
all. And the rather I doe beleeue it, because
I do here you somewhat begynne
to contrary him.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               Deceiue not
your selfe, neyther yet be you deceyued
of others. Calle your conscience to accompt,
and hearken to gods worde simply,
and he will geue you grace to take
the best way.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               It were good, till
euery mā haue sayd his mynd at large,
that none shoulde by shorte speache affirme
any truth, but staye his determynate
sentence, till hee haue vttered hys
mynde at full, & therefore I would wishe
that you went through with your tale,
master temporal lawyer, and according
to your profession, say your mynd wtout
direct condempning others. And I will
in my learninge, saye after you what I
can.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Content with all my hart.
            
            
               Preacher.
               Saye on I praye you in gods
name.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The Lawyers oration.
            
               AS your professiō is diuinitie, so your
whole sermon soundeth of god, and
doth requyre so muche of man, as man
is not able to perfourme. Happy is the
that commeth nyghest, but assuredlye
he neuer lyued, that either hath done, or
can do, or shalbee able hereafter to doe
that which you haue vttered. You begin
with loue, and make loue the perfection
of the lawe, and here you bring the commaundment,
that man must loue god aboue
all thynges, & his neyghbour as
him selfe. What man euer lyued, that
did, or was able to perfourme this lawnone
surely, sauyng Christe onely, and
therefore, because of our impossibilitie,
Christe came in fleashe in the fulnesse
of tyme, to appease the wrathe of hys
father for synne, and to satisfy the law,
whyche els coulde neuer haue beene
perfourmed, so that in Christe onelye
is our iustification, as I haue hearde
you full often preache.
               
                  
Therefore, whereas you saye, no man
shoulde lende for anye gayne, and that
all men shoulde lende freelye to them
that haue neede wythout anye respects
of profite, I do thynke you do deale ouer
precyselye, and goe about to brynge
men to that strayghtnes, as they neuer
were in, at anye tyme. For as I heare
some saye, vsurie is neuer hurtful, but
when it vyteth, otherwyse, it may be allowed
and suffered. For if I doe lend
                     •
                  
money to hym, that hath neede, and can
proue that for wante of the same money
I haue susteyned greate losse, or if my
debtour do breake daye wyth me, when
I looke to haue it at the tyme apointed,
and so am endaungered to my neyghbour,
for my necessarye payementes,
whyche of ryght he claimeth at yt tyme:
it were good reason, that my debtour
beare my losse, rather then I should sustain
harme or danger for my good will.
And reason it is, yt euery man haue his
own, or els it were better holding fast &
to be sure, then to lend and lose all. For
whatsoeuer you say of loue towards our

neighbour, me thinketh no man should
loue his neighbour better then him self,
which they seeme to doe that lende to other
frely, and want them selues. And I
haue hard say, that Charitas incipit a se.
Charitie beginneth first at it selfe. And
vse we not in common phrase to saye?
Neare is my coat to my skinne, but my
shirt is nerer. As who should say, I wil
be a frend vnto my neyghbor, and help
him so muche as I am able, but I wyll
not so helpe him by S. Marie, as I will
harme my selfe: which is not gods will
that I shoulde doe. You haue heaped a
nomber of scriptures together, alleaged
doctoures, and brought forthe reasons,
for ye detestation of vsurie, wherein you
haue done well, but better you shoulde
haue done, in my mind, if you had weied
vsury more straightely by the rule of
charitie, and not directly to call al those
vsurers, that take any thing more then
they haue lent, for so the case may falle
oute, that he sinneth who hath borowed,
yf he will not make recompence: therfore
in such cases, circumstances ought

to be considered, & so iudgment geeuen
vpon ye mater. Neither ought I to deale
with all men in one sorte, for as there be
three sortes of dealings amongest men,
that is, gift, bargaininge, and lending:
so are there three sorts of men, the stark
begger, the poore houshoulder, and the
rich merchant or gētleman. To the first
I ought to geue freely, not onely to lend
freely, to the second I ought to lend, either
freely or mercifully, with the third
I may deale straightly, and aske myne
owne with gaine, as I take it, without
offence to god, or man: for when I deale
with him that maketh gaine of my money
with his trade and occupyinge, and
is well able to pay me againe, being enriched
by my meanes cheefelye, whye
should not I in reason, haue part of his
aduauntage, when by my goods hee ys
growen riche? for be it that two, three,
or fowr, be in consort, wherof two puts
forth theire money, and the other twoe
vse their laboure and industrye, for encreasinge
the same money, by lawefull
trade, ys it not reasonne that these although

they be idle at home, who haue
disbursed large sommes of money to aduenture
freely with others should haue
reasonable gayne with them: God forbidde
els. But you wil saye perhappes,
this is no vsury. I cannot tell what you
call vsurye, these menne doe lende and
thother doe borrowe, and enter into
good handes, first to restore the principalle,
and nexte to promise and couenante
for such competent gaine, as they
shalbe able to make and shewe vppon
theyre accompte. It is no reason that euery
manne shoulde be an occupier, or
merchant aduenturer, a chopper, or a
changer: but good it is that fewe deale
for money, and then shall many thriue
and not that euery bodye shoulde bee a
doer for him selfe that scant one manne
can liue for another. Therefore I think
it good, that when a man hath iij. or iiij.
thousand pounds liyng by him, to geue
some to the poore & needy beggers, and
in lending frely to help the orphans, widows
& strangers, & with y• rest to make
his own certein gain for his aduācemēt

amongest the riche occupiers & welthy
cobbes of the worlde. For surelye I am
of this minde, that where no bittinge is,
there is no vsurie, and where both parties
do gayne, ther ought to be contentacion
of mynd, and good agrement on
both parties. Some therbe that say, all
vsury is against nature, wheras I thīk
cleane contrarie, for if vsurie weare against
nature, it should be vniuersallye
euell, but god hath said, yt to a stranger
a man may put out his mony for vsury,
but it it had bene againste nature, god
would not haue graunted that libertie.
So that I take it to agree both with law
and nature, that I shoulde do good vnto
him, that doth good vnto me, or els I
shoulde be vnthankefull, than which,
there cannot be a greater or more horrible
fault vpon earth, and rewards geuen
for good turnes done, or pleasures
receiued for benefites bestowed, are so
common, that who so offendith herein,
is pointed at and counted a churle, and
shall after want when he woulde haue.
Moreouer, who may not giue his owne

frely, or what is he that wil not, or may
not take any thing that is geuen? what
is more fre then gift? or what is he that
will shew such discurtesy not to receiue
a gift, when it is freely offred? & what
other thing do they that seke to borrow
money, but entreate merueilouslye and
offer frankelye for the time & vse of money.
Moreouer, it is not against the Romain
lawes of the Emperoures, but rather
allowed, not onely suffered as you
master doctor can best tell, by lawes of
your Code and made by the Emperour
Justiniane, the best prince that euer lyued.
Yea the cannon lawe it self semeth
to suffer it in the title of vsurye, as you
knowe better than I can tell. Euen in
gods lawe if I be not deceiued, vsury is
not forbidden.Luke 19. For is it not in S. Lukes
ghospell that god said, he would come &
aske the mony lent with the vsury, blaming
him that did not put it fourth for
gaine.Deut: 24. And in Deutronomie it is plain.
Thou shalt not lend to thy brother for
gaine, but to a stranger. The common
lawe of England is not against all vsurye

neither in suche sorte, and so precise
lye, as you take vsurye. And Statutes
there haue beene, that haue permitted
vsurie, which I woulde they had
contynued to auoide further euell, for
(as we say) better it is to suffer a mischiefe,
then an inconuenience. But to
reason this matter further, yf I lende
vnto a manne my plate for fiue or sixe
monethes I may lawefullye take gaine
onely for the lone, and no man will say
black is mine eye, and yet if I doe take
for money, by and by they will make
an outcry and call men vsurers therefore,
where at I meruaile greatly. For
a man (as I take it) maye more benefite
him selfe with an hundrede markes in
money, then he canne do withe an other
mans bason or ewer of an hundrede
markes value. And yet lending of money
is called vsurie, and lendinge of
plate for gaine to haue the same plate
againe is no vsurie at all. Yet further, if
I lend one a thowsand pounde in gold,
for pompe sake onelye to shewe at the
banke (as they vse in Italye and other

countreis) or otherwise, to make some
beleue they haue somuch of theire own,
it ys not denied, but I maye receaue
gaine for the same, hauinge my principall
returned vnto mee in the same
fourme and manner as I did lende it:
and yet if I shoulde haue lent so muche
mony of good wil, & suffred the partye
to occupye the same for his own benefyt,
restoringe vnto mee the value thereof
withe some ouerplus or gayne, then by
and by I shoulde bee called an vsurer.
And what yf one I pray you be an occupyer,
& wanting mony come to me, that
am an occupier also, and desire to borow
largelye: if I bargaine with him to haue
parte of his gayne, yf hee make anye,
or otherwise doe couenaunt, that yf the
lendynge of thys shall bee anye hynderaunce
to my occupyinge, to gette some
bargayne, whiche I shall perhappes
mysse, and proue yt playnely, because
my mony ys out of my hande: may not
I in bothe these cases take vsurye wythout
daunger of the lawe, or offence to
god? yes withoute doubte I ma
                     •
                  e.
               
                  
And yet to lend money simplie is counted
vsury, wheras there is no man that
lendith but susteineth losse, for the want
of it, because he might better benefit him
self by empolying it in diuers wais, thē
to suffer it to be in an other mans hāds,
besides the danger that maye happen,
when a mans money is out of his own
handes, for surer it cannot be, then in a
mans own possession. Then away with
this precisnes on godes name, to make
euery lending for gaine to be plaine vsurie
and that on penie ouer is sinne before
god, which neither I, nor yet master
merchaunt here, can wel beleue fully,
for I would haue althings weighed
by reason in matters of contractes and
bargaines, and not so to minse things,
as though there weare no meane, for I
do not take vsury to be, as whoredome
or theft is. In these sinnes there is no
meane to make any vertue, for he that
offendith but once in whoredome, is an
offendour, and he that stealeth neuer so
little, is a theif, and neither of their doinges
in any respect, or by any circumstance

is or can be good, wheras the lendinge
of mony or other goods, for gain
may be verye beneficiall vnto him that
boroweth, as for example. A manne is
bound to pay 300.li. at a certaine day, or
els he looseth perhaps 40.li. good land,
weare it not charitie and a good dede to
helpe this man, that his lande shoulde
not be loste for euer? and none offence
neither, as I take it, to do a good turne,
and to receiue an other. I wil go nerer.
Be it ther were a great dearth of corn &
I haue plenty lying by me, wear it not
better for me charitably to lende corne,
to the poore & nedy for their sustenance
and relief, and so to receiue somewhat
in gaine at the yeres end, then to suffer
them to want and vtterly to perish? Of
two euells, the lesse is to be preferred, y•
is, better it wear to lend for gaine, then
to suffer my euen christian to dy for hunger.
And if I be not deceiued, this is S.
Agustines opinion, who allowethe of
gaine in such time of necessitie, rather
then the people shoulde sterue. Yea the
Emperour Iustinians law is (as I am

enformed) yf I lend one ten bushells of
wheate, and the borrower of him selfe
withoute any stipulation or bargayns
made, doe barelye promise me twelue
bushelles for the same at the next harueste,
I maye lawfullye demaunde the
same, and by action recouer it, if it bee
denied me. And, as I vnderstand, there
bee of your doctours who write vppon
the canon lawe, that affirme the lesse euell
to be chosen before the greater, ye,
euen in that case of dearth and extreme
famine. Therefore I am still of this
mind, when none hath harme but both
receiue benefites: there is none offence
committed, but rather great goodnes vsed.
You talke much of charitie, you begin
with loue: I would you weighed al
causes aswell by the rule of charitie, &
referred al thinges to charitie, by iudgment
& discrecion, as you haue well spokē
of charitie, & then this great talke neded
not. For surely wher charity is not
hindred, there is no vsury cōmitted, such
vsury onely beeing forbidden that breaketh
charitie & decaiethe the loue of my

neighboure by extreame cutting & excessiue
taking. And who wil not be greued
when he is ouerlaid with intollerable vsury,
that, do what he can, ye trauasil he
and trade he neuer so muche, the biting
vsurie wilbe lorde in the ende of all his
gaines what soeuer. And this it is, that
offendith god, whē the idle Epicure and
licencious vsurer doth wholy gain, and
the true dealing trader or occupier doth
begge his breade in the end, notwithstā
                  ding
his greate industry & iust dealing.
Ye I say further, that neither theaft nor
aduowtry, nor yet murther wear to be
coūted sinnes, if yt rule of charity were
not broken. For in all these hainous offences,
charytie ys decaied, and therefore
they are deadly synnes, and so ys
vsury when it biteth and by that means
breakithe charitye: otherwyse yt ys no
vsurye, if my neighbour feele no smart
nor losse, nor yet ys hyndered therewith,
for the end and fulfillynge of the
lawe ys charytye. And where charytie
is kepte, I say still, there ys no offence
made, nor yet synne commytted.
               
                  
Now therfore you must either proue euery
vsury, be it neuer so litle, to breake
charitie: or els I will saye still, yt where
charitie is not broken (as I say it is not
when my neighbour feeleth no harme)
there is no offence cōmitted, before eyther
god or man. You haue saide verye
well against couetousnes, the roote of
all euell, and surelye there cannot bee a
worse man, then ye couetous man, for he
maketh his money his god, and so committeth
idolatry, as S. Paul saith. But
I will not say, that euery vsurer is a couetous
man, but onely the vnmercifull
and cuttinge vsurer, yt hath no loue nor
charitie in him in the world, and careth
not, whoe be vndone, so he may gaine.
This is hee that godd and man abhorrethe,
that scripture and all lawes doe
and euer haue condempned, for moste
wicked & abhominable. And mark wel
the place of Ezechiell the 18. chapter. and
especially the 22. and there you shall see
that the prophete doth expresly crye out
of couetousnes, after he hath condempned
vsury, as who should say, that couetousnes

is the chefest cause, of this horrible
vsurye, because it consumeth & vndoeth,
as many as deale therewith, and
yet what is he, that will saye, that he is
vndon by his neyghbor, because he hath
borowed many hūdred pounds of him,
and hath paide ouer and aboue the principall,
to his creditor for euery hundred
one penye by the yere? or who wil saye
that such a creditour is a couetous man,
or a biter, or an offendour of gods lawe
& mans lawe that taketh for euery 100l.
but one selye penye. This is rather a
Stoiks paradore, & an extrauagant immagination
then any true assertion in
doctrine, as I take it. Let vs go to the
very word of vsury in the hebrue tong.
It is calledde a bitinge, of this woorde
Neshech, whiche is nothinge else but a
kind of bityng, as a dog vseth to bite or
gnawe vpon a bone, so that he that byteth
not, doth not cōmit vsurye: for vsurie
is none other thinge, than a bitinge,
as I saide of the verye Etimologie and
proper nature of the woorde, otherwise
it cannot be called Neshech, as the Hebricians

say, and so call vsury of biting
onely: And the Tigurine translation
hath in Exodus. Non inferes morsum fratri
tuo, Thou shalt not bite thy brother,
where as other translatiōs haue, Non foe
neraberis fratri tuo, Thou shalt not take
vsurye of thy brother: So that where ye
firste translation saithe, thou shalt not
bite thy brother, and the other saith thou
shalt not take vsury of the brother: I
take byting and vsury to be al one. The
Grecians also call it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whiche is a
birth or born creature (as I am enfourmed)
for I haue searched to knowe this
matter, althoughe I knowe neither hebrue,
nor greke, nor latine neither very
wel, but onlye do smatter of broken latine,
as the most of vs lawiers doe, seeking
not for anye deepe skill or sounde
knowledge therin: and in latine it is caled
faenus a faetu, that is to say, of a birthe
or borne creature, likewise as the greke
worde is. And I pray you what a prety
babe is that, when an hundred poundes
bringe fourth one single penye? I here
say some call vsury a monstrous beaste

because she bringethe foorthe monsters
from time to time, by excessiue encrease
of gayne: Alacke what a pretye monster
is this or what biting, or what gain
can it be to any mans hurt, when one receiueth
a single peny, or an halfe penye
or a farthinge, or the fourthe parte of a
farthing, or what you will, be it neuer
so little (for all is one to the deuines &
precise preachers) for the borowinge of
an hundred pounds for a yere? for this
kinde of bytinge is noe greater harme
then is a flea bytinge, nor so much neyther,
and therfore not fit to be spoken of
now. God make al thinges straight and
vpright that are croked or awrye, and
then the truthe may bee knowne and so
lowed, as god hath expresly commaunded
with out this burdening and ouercharginge
of mens consciences, & woundinge
them in such sort, yt a man cannot
almost tel what to do. In dede I wil not
deny but that we oughte rather to geue
then to lende, and rather to lende frelye
then to demaunde gaine for loue: but
thys I saye, as I am not bound to geue

frankely to euery man that askethe, no
more am I bound to lend frely to euery
man, that woulde borrowe, but according
to the circumstances of time, parson,
cause, place, and occasion, I maye
bestowe my goods and distribute suche
wealthe as god of his goodnes hath allowed
me to occupy, and geuen me leue
to vse, as the stewarde of his houshold,
and if some one man pay moderately ouer
and aboue, for that whiche he hath
borrowed, I say it is no offence before
god, as I take it. And recompense is allowed
for beneefites donne, saye what
you will, or at the leaste wyse, no man
ought to fare the worse for his well doinge,
or to be a looser for his lendinge,
which many men shold do, if they were
not considered. You say you will not be
wyser then the holy ghost, I would not
wish you so to be, but rather I pray god
you might be half so wise, as the holye
ghoste is, for I beleue verelye, the holy
ghost neuer so ment, as you speake, or
else surely I must say that the worlde is
in a strange case. Yea I will say further

yf that weare true, the world could not
be as it is, neyther coulde man liue, for
what reason is it, that I shoulde lende
freely to euery man a like? for whereas
ther be three men come vnto me at one
time, as I said before, the starke begger,
the poore housholder, and the great rich
merchant, or great landed gentleman,
lord or knight, and al they three would
haue money, or borrowe money of mee
at one time, shall I vse them all a lyke,
and in one sorte of charitie? I do thinke
no reason, nor lawe of god, or man wil
enforce me to it, and therefore I thinke
you diuines, doe not well obserue circumstances,
when youe will that the
very bare letter shalbe plainelye taken
as it lieth, and in one sorte or manner to
be applied to all men, without regarde
of circumstance, degree, estate, or condicion,
of any one. what? not a penny
of no man whatsoeuer he be? it is strāge
and without the compasse of my vnderstandinge,
and surely in my conscience,
without the meaning of the holy ghost,
for if you will take all texts of the scripture

so precisely, how aunswere you to
this, Omni paetenti abs te dato. Geue to euery
man that asketh of thee. I pray you
whoe euer did, or was able or thought it
meete to geeue to all that aske: For then
whosoeuer goeth abroade, yf he caryed
neuer so much out with hym, hee might
perhappes come home with an empty
purse, if his disposicion were knowen,
and if hee did so from daye by daye by a
certeine space, he might perhaps begge
as fast of those in thend as they did begg
of him at ye beginning. Besides that, in
geuing without discrecion, you shal oftentimes
more offend god in bestowing
almes vpon some, then you shoulde doe
in holding your handes, for that in geuinge
to loyterers & vagabonds, whom
you knowe not whether they haue nede
or noe you do rather maintaine them in
their idlenes, then benefit their pouerty,
& offende god highly because you geue
wtout choise or iudgement, for whiche
you shal aunswer another day. It is writen
in Saint Paule:Paul. ad. Philip. 4. Be alwaies glad &
againe I say be gladde. And lykewyse it

is in Saint Luke.Luke. 18. 
                  Orate semper, praye alwayes.
And what is he I pray you Sir,
that euer prayed alwaies, or what foole
is he, that woulde think he is bounde so
to do, and would indeuor him selfe to be
alwaies pattering, & so throughe supersticion
to be voide of religion? for surely
such fooles are in ye excesse. And amōgst
all people, none go nigher to this vanytie
than doth the supersticious Portingal,
who is as farre from true religion,
as he is ful of this ouermuch supersticiō
and fond worshipping of god, otherwise
then his word & wil is to be worshipped.
Christ sayeth to his disciples, goe your
wayes, beholde I sende you foorthe as
Lambs among Wolues, beare no wallet,
neyther scripp, nor shoes, and salute
no man by the way.Math. 10, And in Saint Mathew,
Christ forbiddethe his disciples to
cary gold or siluer about them, or anye
maner of coin in their purses, in al whiche
speches, I trust you wil grant an in
terpretacion, ouer and besydes the bare
letter, or els preachers are like to bee in
euill steede in this euil worlde.
               
                  
Likewise it is saide by Christe, ye haue
hearde howe it was saide to them in the
olde time. Thou shalt not forswere thy
selfe, but shalt perfourme thine othe to
god,Exodus. 20. but I say vnto you, swere not at al,
neither by heauen for it is godds seate,
nor yet by the earthe, for it is his footestoole
&c. wherin all swearing is forbidden,
and yet to take an othe before a magistrat,
is not against god. The cōmaūdment
saith, Thou shalt not kill, & yet it
is not forbidden to the magistrat, to vse
the sworde and to kill vpon good cause,
neither is any man forbiddē to kil, in his
own defence, rather then to be killed, but
that he may with force withstand force.
Ther be diuers such texts which I could
allege & proue, whiche if they were not
otherwise vnderstoode then the bare
words do beare, would bring great confusion
withe them, and suche inconueniences
also, as no reason nor law would,
coulde, or might allowe in any wise.
               Therfore I say, Christ neuer so ment as
you do vnderstande, say you what you
will. Besides this, such straight and precise

prohibitiōs do great harme, for they
open a way to the euel, who will hardly
be brideled by anye lawe, to doe and to
deale with al men excessiuely, and hinder
the good, that would deale charitablye,
and yet for want of a warraunt in
law, dare not meddle at all, and so the
poore do perish, that else might be holpen
and relieued vpon paiment of moderate
vsance. And see what commethe
of this precise restrainte, men now can
get no money, but after xxx. or xx. at the
lest in the hundred, wheras if ther were
a reasonable stint, all such as haue nede
should fare the better, money would be
more common, and the couetous man,
woulde the soner bee brideled, from takinge
excessiue gaine, but manye men
are of such nicenes, and so far of from
yelding to a good acte, to be made to the
common profite of all, that they had rather
one gained a thousand pound with
out lawe, than get one hundred pounde
with lawe, such as might be made with
a good conscience. You talke that gaine
takinge for lendinge onely is flat vsurie

as though anye manne tooke gaine
for lending onely, and not for other respectes,
as that his moneye is out of hys
hande, which els might be employed, &
being in another mannes keping, is in
daunger of loosing, that otherwise was
safe & sure enoughe when it was in his
own hands. And lastly, such losse or hinderaunce
perhaps might come vnto him
for want of his owne ready money, as
some man at a time would geeue for so
muche moneye, so muche lande vpon a
great extremitie and present neede. As
who is not subiect to suche accidentes by
warre, sicknes, imprisonment, trouble,
and displeasure that maye happen to a
mans vtter vndoing, if he do not auoid
the sodeine harme and present daunger
that hāgeth ouer his head. And whether
shall a man goe or flye, or how shal one
seke to help him selfe yt hath no money.
Therefore that saying is impertynent &
void of reason, that men do commonlye
receyue gayne for onely lending, & not
rather in respect of the harme yt myghte
happen, or the profit that doth cease whē
                  
a man is without hys moneye: or els to
take a neighbourly part of the gain, that
the debtor might geat. Noe surely, wise
men of al ages & times yt haue rated the
proporcion of taking, haue not stinted y•
same, because men onely haue lent, but
because of the interest & gaine that dothe
or might happen to the lender, yf he had
the vse him self & employing of his own
money. And therefore, say as it pleaseth
you, I wil hold with them, that bargain
for moderate gaine, mary in al cōtracs
& bargains I would haue plain dealing
without cheuisance or colourable deuyses,
not as many vse to do. There was
a statute made Anno Henrici septimi 3. to
meete with certaine cheuisaunces, but
the same was repealed, & an other made
in the tenth yere, wher brokers are met
with all, and suche as will haue the benefyt
of mens landes, mortgaged tyll
they be payde suche money as they lent,
where the lent money is forfeyted. But
because it is hard to make any such good
lawes, but the malice & cunning of man
will practise to breake the same, by some

skilfull sleight especialy when it tendith
to the benefitte of man: therfore in my
simple iudgement I doe muche comend
that law, which was made in 37. Henry. 8
where none were suffred to take aboue
10.li. in the hundred vpon lone, eyther
for wares, or for money, and sory I am
that the same law was repealed by ye statute
of Anno 5. Ed. 6. whiche statute although
it bear a colour of godlines, and
seemes to be grounded vppon religion,
yet I doubte muche therof, and I think
verely it is made againste all pollecye, &
therefore yt weare good that a parlyament,
had wyse regard to haue it abrogated,
for the statute seemethe to say, that
all gaine had for the vse of money, in
what sorte soeuer it be, is plain vsury,
& vtterly forbidden. And yet what shall
I say? where charitie is kept, ther is no
vsury cōmitted: for what if I say, I will
freely lend vnto my frend if he wil bere
with me in a certaine aduenture, if any
losse happen, shall I call that vsury? or if
one do brek day with me, & I sue him for
damages, because I haue forborne my

mony a longe time: will anye man call
suche dealinges vsury? god forbid. Or
be it that the most of my goods are abrod
and I doubt of the good successe and spedie
retourne of them, yf he that borroweth
will beare proporcionablye after 10.
or 12.li. in the hundred, for my damages
sustained, yf any such misshap doe fail,
then I shalbe contented to do him good,
otherwise I would be very loth to helpe
him and hurt my selfe, which I should
do, yf I lent my goods and afterwards
being vndone throughe aduenturinge,
coulde haue none to beare my losses, is
this any vsury to make such a couneāt?
I do not thinke so. I will put you an other
case. A merchant dieth and leuethe
to his wife 500.li in nete mony, and no
more of any other substance, and to sixe
yonge children that he had with her 200l
for euery one of them, when they bee of
yeres: how shall this wife liue that knoweth
no trade? how shall these children
be mainteined till they bee of yeares, &
haue ther stock wholy deliuered to them
neither she nor they haue anye arte or

neither she nor they hauing any arte or
knowledge to get their liuinge by? And
is it reasou that the stocke should runne
stil without profyt, and euery one decay
and be vndone thereby? now god forbid.
And surely except they may be suffered
to put forthe their money for reasonable
gaine, I cannot see how it can bee
otherwise with them. And therefore I
would haue all thinges weighed by reason,
and the state of daunger better considered
then it is, without this precise vsage
to forbyd gayne vpon money altogether
vpon paine of deadly sinne. For
I doe not thinke that the wydowe and
her children shoulde offende god, yf others
wil geue reasonably for the vse of
her money, to maynteyne her selfe and
her children. And wel do I allow the vse
of London, for Orphanes money to bee
yerely payd. I wil goe farther.
               A yonge man hath been waytinge on a
gentleman in his Chamber, & seruinge
long gotte a litle money togeather: the
gentleman his master dyeth, the felow
hath no frendes, and master can hee get

none, the worlde is harde and men are
mistrustfull, digge or delue he can not,
and occupacion hath he none, because he
was brought vp only as a seruing man,
and to begge is ashamed, yea and if he
dyd so, hee shoulde haue nothing geuen
hym, but bee whipped for hys labour as
a vagabonde, and if hee shoulde steale,
there is noe mercye but hanging: Now
what shal he doe? spend vpon the stock,
and suffer all goe to waste? so maye hee
soone come to noughte. Better it were
for hym, as I take it, to put out his moneye
for some gaine that his stocke may
bee whole, and hee mighte lyue till hee
espyed a tyme to bestowe hys moneye
vpon some one thinge or other, for hys
better profyte and auayle. I wyll come
to good bargaines that may happen.
               There is is a Shippe wrack, and goods
are to bee solde, where I maye gette 20.
in the hundreth, if I might borow after
10. whoe woulde not geeue lesse to haue
more? Besides this, I haue a suit which
I may gette for a hundreth pounde and
wilbe worth two hundreth poūd to me,

money I haue none excepte I borrowe,
what a foole weare I not to get 20l. in y•
hundred, to gaine almost 200l.? many
suche thinges maye profitably happen
with in the compas of a yeare, but let all
these matters goe. Be it that I haue lent
money my selfe freely, and lookinge to
haue it at my daye, coulde not get it,
but taried three or foure monethes for it
after the daye, and so was disappointed
to satisfye my creditours, is it reason yt
I who lent frely and of good wil, should
sustaine any losse for my free harte and
kinde dealinge? our law granteth good
remedy, and I thinke in your lawe master
Ciuilian there is good redresse, for
suche offences. Again, if I let one kepe
my mony, and yt said man doth employ
the same money without my knowledg
for encrease: is it not reason yt I should
haue parte of his gaine? who will deny
this vnto me? I am well assured, that
you master Ciuilian wil not say the contrarye,
and thus you se, that mony getteth
money, and that lawfully, for loke
what he gaineth in this behalfe, I may

in right demaund for myne owne beehoofe
the encrease that commethe of it.
I praye you answere me in this, what
if the debtour doe faile, and play bankrupte?
in what case am I then, for my
kinde hart and charitable dealing? were
it not good then that vsury might bee yt
price of suche perill as may happen, and
soe I to haue somewhat, rather then to
lose all, as in lending 88.l. to take a bill
for 100l. that y• casualtie of losse may be
recompensed with the certentie of gain,
for a man maye lose all, and therfore it
is good to be sure to gaine somewhat be
fore hand. Ther is a saying in your law
as I haue hard, muche agreeng to this
matter,L. periculi. ff. de nautico foenore. which is thus, Omnis mutuatio
plerum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      damnosa, eo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      meretur recompensationem.
All lending is oftentimes harmfull,
and therfore deserueth a recōpence.
But as I saide before, I woulde there
were a rate appointed or tolerated either
viij. x. or xiil. in y• hundred, aboue which
no man should passe vpon paine of life
or losse of all his goods at the least, and
so the couetousnes of vsurers (againste

which you haue saide very wel, and noe
man doth gayne say it) woulde be stopped
& limitted within reasonable boūds,
whereas nowe they take the deuill and
all, more thē half a great deale, which is
horrible. And our law did neuer allow,
but did vtterly forbid al excessiue vsury,
as al other lawes els do, as your lawe
master Ciuilian, as I thynke, doth permyt
ye hundred part for a moneth, which
is twelue in the hundred for a yere, and
so hath been allowed in diuers prynces
times. But of your lawe, I cannot say
further then I learned by heere saye, &
therefore I would know your opinion,
seeinge I haue vttered my learninge &
saide my conscience, whiche I pray you
take in good part euerye one of you.
            
            
               Ciuilian,
               I woulde not anye manne to
bee blamed for vtteryng his conscience,
so that hee bee not wylfull, to stande ouermuche
in his owne conceipte, when
hee seethe manyfest truethe agaynste
him.
            
         
         
            
            ¶Gromel gayners or the
Merchants oration.
            
               TO saye and doe are twoe thynges. I
will not directlye speake in the fauour
of vsury, but rather if you will
haue mee, I am contented to speake against
it: Mary not to vse my moneye
for my benefyte, call it what you wil, I
can hardly allow therof. You haue said
meetelye well master lawyer, that you
will suffer exchaunge within certayne
boundes, Others talke so much (I wote
not how) that in the end they wil marre
all. Poore marchants can not bee suffered
to thriue amongst them. And I for
my parte, am againste you all that wyll
haue no vsury, or will make the gayne
ouer litle: for I pray you, what trade or
bargayning can there be amongst marchants,
or what lending, or borowinge
amonge al men, if you take awaye the
assurance and the hope of gayne? What
man is so madde to deliuer his moneye
out of his owne possession for naughte?

or whoe is he that will not make of his
owne the best he can? or who is hee that
will lende to others and want him self?
you see all men now are so wise, yt none
will lend for moone shine in the water,
and therfore if you forbid gaine, you destroy
entercourse of marchandize, you ouerthrowe
bargaininge, and you bring
all tradinge betwixte man and man to
suche confusion, as either man wil not
deale, or els, they will say, they cannot
tell howe to deale one with an other. I
haue bene a doer in this worlde these 30.
winters, and as fresh an occupier as an
other, and yet neuer found I better or
more assurede gaine, than by puttinge
out my mony for gaine, the same being
alwaies the beste and easiest trade, that
coulde be in the worlde. And in a dead
time when ther is no occupying, either
by restraint or thorough warres, what
would you haue merchants to do, other
wise then to turne the peny, and to liue
by their mony? for yf they should spend
still on the stocke without lendinge for
gain, or barrattinge any whit at all, I

doe feare the best of vs all (I meane such
as liue by our money) would soone shut
vp our doores, & playe the bankruptes,
which were a most abominable shame, &
a great dishonor to thys realme. Doe
not you knowe, that we are euer called
vpon in time of neede, to lend to ye prince,
for maintenaunce of the state? Haue
not noble men money of vs, & all other
gentlemen of seruice, whensoeuer they
haue neede? And whē is it, that they haue
not neede of vs, great neede god wotes
full ofte, & many a tyme? yea, neede
must alwayes be, & men shall euer haue
neede. And where is money to be had,
in tyme of neede, yf the citie should fayle?
Many men talke of Robbyn Hoode,
that dyd neuer shoote in hys bowe. Is
not London the queenes chamber? Are
not we then chamberlens to her maiestie,
people alwayes ready to spend not
onely our goodes, but also our lyues in
her seruice? So that, if we weare not, ye
state, as I take it, should hardly stande,
or perhaps not bee in so good case, as it
is at thys present.
               
                  
We lend not for vsurie, but for interest,
and by exchange, and I thinke no
man can disalowe eyther interest or exchāge.
I pray you, if an ambassador shal
haue cause to trauayle in the affaires of
the state, or the Queenes agent occasiō
to paye great sommes of money abroade
in other countreys beyond the seas,
what will you haue donne, if the exchā
                  ge
were not? How can greate masses of
money bee carried to farre contries, yf
billes of exchange bee not currante? Or
who wil be so madde to paye thousands
in an other contrie for moone shyne in
the water, to haue nothing for his paynes,
but onely hys labor for his trauayle?
Hope of gayne makethe men industrious,
& where no gayne ys to bee had,
men will not take paynes. And as good
it is to sitt ydle and doe nothinge, as to
take paynes, and haue nothing. Merchants
doings must not thus be ouerthwarted
by preachers and others, that
can not skill of their dealings. And thys
euer great curiositie of some to meddle
in other mens matter. I muste tel you

plaine it is euen the verie right waye to
vndoe al in y• ende. Therfore saie what
you will, I will lyue and amend, so as
I may lyue euery day better & better, by
any meanes, I care not how, yea I wil
make harde shifte with the worlde, and
strayne my cōscience narrowly, before
I will eyther starue or begge both I &
my chyldren after me.
               Prouided always that I wil not come
within the compasse of positiue lawes.
and thys I wote well, that by all lawes
a man may take asmuch for hys owne
wares as he can gette, and it is no synne
for one man, to deceyue an other, in
bargayning, so that it bee not to muche
beyond gods forbode, and a bargaine
is a bargayne, let men saye what they
list. Such your strayte prohibicions and
straunge precisenes, my maisters, doe
make men wery of theire lyues. You
maye as wel forbidde biyng and selling,
as forbidde takyng interest for money:
for I pray you, what difference is there
betwixt the one and the other. I do bye
a peece of lande for 500. li. thys daye, &

sell it to morow, or within sixe moneths
after, for 600. li. And I doo lend likewise
500 li. at the same tyme that I do bye
lande, and do receaue within sixe monthes
after 600 li. agayne for my 500. li.
so lent, what difference is there betwixt
these twoo dealynges. God amende
you my masters of the Clergy, and you
Ciuiliās also.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               Softe sir, you cā
                  not
tell, what I woulde haue sayde, although
you haue hearde the other, and
therfore you doe me wrong to cut me of
before you heare me speake.
            
            
               Gromelgainer
                
I pray you beare wt me, for I was tickled,
here is altogether, titel, tattel, and
all to littell purpose. Thys vnderstande
you all, and trust vnto it, men are loth
to bee comptrolled in theire ordinary &
accustomable trades of geattinge, and
as you may well knowe, gayne is swete,
howsoeuer men come by it, and men
are loth to leaue theire olde wonte, to
begynne a new trade of dealinge, that
will sooner bring men to beggery, then
any whit encrease their liuing. An olde
custome, although it bee badde, muste

not sodeinly be altered, for all innouacions
are dangerouse, although they be
for good. Yf a mā should speake against
your profession, and saye, your lawe is
full of delayes, Lawyers are costly, and
better a man lost hys right, then follow
it by lawe, I thinke you would bee angry,
though in so saiyng, he myght peraduenture
saye truely. And so I that
know both your callings, & haue heard
you both heretofore deale in places iudicials,
and haue felt also some trouble in
eyther your courtes, am not well pleased
to haue my occupacion and liuinge
pincht at, defaced and made woorse, thē
any other vocation is, no more thē you
wolde haue eyther your professions or
tytles ransaked, or called in question.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               I am sory to heare so muche as
I haue heard, wishing amendement, yf
it please god, in al estates: But to your
argumēts master lawyer, I will aunsweare,
and to you also master Gromel
wt master doctours leaue, for I am inwardely
greeued with you both, as a
Christian man ought to bee greeued.
            
            
               
               Ciuilian.
               Although you take my course
from mee, yet will I not thinke amisse
of you, but euer geue place to your profession,
and honor diuinity: for as sainct
Paule sateth, the woorde of God is saluacion
to all beleuers, and therfore necessary
for all mē to heare & so to know:
yea the more wee studie therin and herken
vnto it, the more happie and blessed
euery one of vs shalbee, whereupon the
Preacher replyeth as foloweth.
            
         
         
            ¶The Preachers Replication.
            
               YOur foundation sir, that you firste
laid to proue your matter with all, ys
not good, nor sownde, so that your buyl
dinge can not stande, but must needes
fall to the grounde, for thus you saye:
vsurie ys not hurtfull, excepte it bee byting.
I do aunsweare, whosoeuer stealeth
but one peny from a riche man, is
a theefe before god, and yf hee steale
twelue pence or aboue, hee shalbe hanged
by the lawes of the land, as you best
knowe, and yet you will saye: and all

men knowe, that here is no byting, but
the matter is this. The lawe hath sayd,
thou shalt not steale, for hee that steleth
bee it more or lesse, ys a theefe, because
hee taketh an other mans goods feloniously
against hys will, being forbidden
both by God and man so to do. Euē
so saye I, whosoeuer taketh but one penny
of gayne by couenante ouer & aboue
hys principal, for y• vse only of lending,
& in respect of tyme, he is an vsurer, although
here seemeth no bytinge at all.
For God hath saide. Thou shall not agree
to take by couenaunte, any thinge
ouer and aboue thy principal, and therfore
it is synne, beyng expresly forbiddē
as theafte ys, and so not to bee vsed amongst
christians, for therfore is vsury
called a byting, because creditours
are commonly vnmercifull, & care not
what they geate, and whō they vndoe,
& so they doe byte & greeue poore men
very sore, yea they make riche mē oftē
                  tymes
starke beggers. Whereupō god
to cutte of all byting, & the colour therof
(for yf you geeue then an inche, they

will take an elle) hath altogether forbidden
hys people, to take any gayne at all
for lone, ye rather to induce men to christian
charitye, that is, to lend freely, to
helpe the needy, & to doe as they woulde
bee done vnto, yf the case weare theirs.
Now when you allege that you cannot
haue your money at your dayes appointed,
and therfore in reason you shoulde
haue a recompence: I doe not deny, but
that they who kepe your money longer
from you, than by couenaunte was agreed,
are to aunsweare for it, and in al
lawe and reason, must paye your damages
and interest of your money, for so
long tyme holden from you agaynste
your will, for herein he doth you apparant
wrong: and couenaunte was there
none for gayne to bee reaped vpon the
principall, so that thys is no vsurie, but
hee onely to bee blamed, and to bee punished
by the purse quantum tua interest,
for witheholding your proper goodes
frō you, for so much time, against your
good will & mind altogether: & damages
may iustly bee awarded vnto you after

tenne or twelue in y• hundred, & no vsurie
herein cōmitted at all. Your distinction
of three sortes of men, and three
sortes of dealing, is rather politick than
christian, rather wordely, than diuyne,
although som diuynes be of your mind,
but they speake of their own heades, wt
                  out
warrant, & so theire deuyse can not
holde, for you ought to lend freely vnto
all men, riche & poore, lord & gentlemā,
kyng & Caysar, for that god being the
lord of the ryche, aswell as of the poore,
hath vtterly, & precisely forbidden all vsurie
amongst all men, that are of the
houshold of fayth, except perhaps, you
will saye, yt ryche men are no christiās,
or not godds people, the whych I trust,
you wyll not so muche as think, muche
lesse affirme ye same by speach. And your
example of comfort and felowship, with
others, to lend money to them that haue
none themselues, & so to reape in cōmon
yt gayne, that they might make by their
industrie & trauaile, the same is not law
full yf you deale for assured gayne, by
contracte aforehand, excepte you wil be

aswel contented to beare with all losses
that might happen, as to reape certayne
gayne, for in so doing, where the gayne
is vncertaine, & none assured cōtract made
before hand, I do not take that to bee
vsurie. To do good, I graūt is natural,
& blessed be the good doers: but to make
gaine by lending money is vnnatural,
wicked & monstruous, what gayne, or
profite soeuer come to your frēd by such
borrowing: for your mind & intente of
lending, must be to helpe, & not to reape
benefyte by hym that gaineth by borrowing
of your money: for be it your frēd
were like to lose a 100. li. lād, for not payment
of 300. li. & one vnderstanding hys
neede, & the daunger that hee ys in, do
lend hym 360. li. in money, to saue hys
100 li. lād, that els would bee lost, taking
neuertheles this 60. li. gayne, or more, in
the whole, & hauing his lād in mortgage
for a yere for his own especial profit,
& to ye vtter vndoing in tyme, of yt poore
gentleman: Herein sir, as hee did seeke
his own cōmoditie, so did he deserue no
thankes at all. And where the gentlemā
                  
did owe before 360 li. hauing receiued of
the vsurer no more then 300 li. now you
to shewe your selfe a more merciful mā,
will helpe thys gentleman better cheape,
after 15 li. in the hundred, criyng out
of that other cutte throte (as in deede,
one vsurer cannot abyde an other, and
euery one will crye out againste his felowe
vsurer) and so you will take hys
lande on gods name, for assurance into
your handes, hauing a ful intente with
your selfe to bee Lord of all that he hath
in the end, for except hee paye you when
you see your time, you wil haue it all in
deede. Nowe thys gentleman, hauing
payd 20. li. in the hundred, and to you agayne
15. li. hee is to repaye 105. li. ouer &
aboue the 300. li. that hee borrowed for
two yeares onely, his debte rising after
twoo yeres 105. li. aboue the pryncipall.
And nowe for feare the Chauncerie, or
thexchequer, or any other courte should
remedy thys mischiefe, for takynge so
muche land for so lyttle money, you wil
bee contented, that hee shall still paye 15.
li. by the yeare for euery hundreth, tyll

it come to the quarter, or halfe value of
the gentlemans land, and then you will
lend no more, except you may haue all
your money, which hee is euer the lesse
hable to paye, the longer yt he boroweth
vpon vsurie, and so in effecte, the poore
gentleman loseth hys hundreth pound
lande for euer, for the onely borowinge
of 300. li. in mony, and the forbearing of
the same mony, for fyue or syxe yeres,
or there about. Is thys charitie? is thys
loue? is this godlynes? had it not bē better
for the gentleman to haue solde hys
lād out right at the first, and so perhaps
to haue receyued 2000 li. and vpward at
the leaste for it, than thus to leese if for
300. li. with the vsurie of fyue or sixe yeares?
Thys is the goodnes and naturall
dealinge of vsurers with playne meanyng
men, god turne their hartes, and
send them better mindes. But to colour
your doynges the more, you saye further,
that thys ouerplus takē, is neither
against nature, nor against lawe, for yf
it were agaīst nature say you, it shoulde
bee forbidden vniuersally, wheras god

hath geeuen leue to lend money to the
straunger for gayne. I doe answere,
that vsury in his own nature, is vniuersally
hurtfull and against nature, as all
the morall preceptes are, and yet god
may permit or alowe the vse of it, as he
liked wel, that the Israelites should robbe
the Egyptians, and yet theafte ys
dampnable, and against nature, & vniuersally
forbidden, where god hath not
allowed of it. To worship ymages, is also
forbidden, as a thing agaynst god &
nature, and yet god suffered the Cheru
bins to bee erected, & allowed of the brasen
serpent, but particular Images permitted
by God, must not exclude vniuersall
lawes. And you know, we lyue
by lawes, and not by examples.
               You say further, that thys ouergayne
is a reward geuen, and reward may be
taken for good turnes done. In deede
yf you would stand to the curtesy of the
lender, and not hope for gayne, yf anye
thing came vnloked for, or vnhoped of,
I do thinke you might take some small
present with a safe conscience, but those

rewardes and giftes that you receyue,
are enforced payments, and by former
contracts and couenauntes assured, for
els you would not lend money: & therefore
you geeue a wrong name to youre
vsurie gaynes, to call them giftes or rewardes,
for they are rather compulsorie
debtes, and violent bargaynes made, against
the will altogether (as God knoweth)
of the needy and poore borrower:
for in deede necessitie maketh men oftē
tymes, both to pray hartely, and to paye
dearely, that woulde els full gladly borowe
freely. Yea blame them not, that
beinge dryuen to an extremitie make
greater offers, then they are well hable
to perfourme, or to beare the burthen of
them, because neede maketh the olde
wife to trotte. And what though worldlie
lawes in some respecte, doe allowe
thys cheuisaunces to auoyd further inconueniences,
as single whoredome in
some places is tollerated, yt men might
kepe their wyues to them selues in better
safety: yet god forbiddeth expressie,
aswell the one as the other. And therfore

where Lawes are made against godds
lawes, they are euermore vngodly and
wicked, what colour or glose soeuer you
doe sett vppon them. And what thoughe
charitie bee cold, what though men will
not lend freely, shal therfore men bee alowed
or suffered to lend wickedly? Better
the world were ouerwhelmed, and
mankind wholie destroyed, rather than
synne should openly bee mainteyned, &
god thereby altogether defaced. And
where you seeme to saye, that godds
lawe doth allowe it, in the nyneteene
chapiter of sainct Luke, I woulde you
and all others committed such heauenly
vsurie, and mocked not at those talents,
whiche god lendeth man to bestowe,
for so you shoulde be godds good
seruaunts, yf you bestowed your talentes
committed to your charge accordingly.
And where it is 
                     〈◊〉
                   in Deuteronomye:
Thou shalt lende to a straūger.
In deede doe soe still, that is to an infidell,
to a Turke, and to hym that is
not of the houshould of Christian faith,
for that is the next way to vndoe hym▪
                  
so that as to kyll a Turke, or an infidell
in the quarel of Christs religiō ys lawfull:
so may wee oppresse hym, byte him,
yea and eate hym out with vsurie, the
readiest waye surely to vndoe any man
liuynge. And I doe not thinke, that the
common lawe of England, did euer beare
with vsury, although some statutes
haue tollerated vsurie. I doe know that
kinges in all ages haue banished vsury
out of thys land, aswell before the conquest
as synce, & amongst the rest, king
Edgare did vtterly forbidde all vsurie.
And since the conquest, king Edward
the first, who did send out of this realm,
aswell suche bankers, as came from the
pope Gregorie the tenth, called Caursini
and were brought in by one Stephan,
the popes chapleyne, in the time of hys
father kynge Henry the thirde, as all
maner of Jewes at that tyme, with
whome the Realme was merueslously
pestered and oppressed also with vsurie,
theyr proper arte and profession, whersoeuer
they dwell, who surely doe very
well obserue their lawe, for they taking

al Christians to bee straungers to them
do lende to them for gaine wheresoeuer
they be dwelling, neuer lendyng one to
an other, otherwise then freely, without
hope to receiue any gaine at al of them.
Your argument of plate, is of no force,
for plate weareth & consumeth away, &
commeth oftentimes broken, and is at
his perill that letteth it to hire, & must be
retourned in the same fourme as it was
delyuered: whereas money returneth
without losse in the same kinde onely, &
of the same quantity & value, & hauynge
chaunged the propertie, is at his perill yt
hath borowed it. And likewise, lēding of
diuers coynes of golde & muche money
to a bāker, to receiue the self same form
againe, may bring gain without vsury:
but this is not properly called Mutuum,
a lēding, but rather Commodatum, a letting
to hyer, because the property is not
altered, but abideth still in hym that did
let it to hier, who must abide the peril of
it, if any mishappe doe chaunce otherwyse
then well, without hys faulte that
tooke those goods to hyer.
               
                  
Your couenanting and bargayning to
haue parte of the gayne, by your money
lent: with allegation, that you myghte
lose in a bargayne for not hauinge the
said money, doth shewe that you goe about
nothinge more, then to cloke vsurye,
and to maynteine the practise of it,
by all the shiftinge and colourable meanes
you canne. And if you saye, therefore
you wyll not lende, because you
maye not make your owne gayne, I
saye vnto you, that then you are an vnmercifull
man, and no seruant of god:
in that you tourne your countenaunce
from him, and will not lende him money,
that beinge an honest man doth offer
to put you in good assuraunce for
restitucion. And still you woulde haue
vsury to be a lawfull trade, and for nothinge
will you agree that vsury should
bee simpliciter a sinne, as whoredome,
aduowtry, and theaft are, and yet god
dothe so name it. Agayne, your lending
to an other, to saue his lād, and to benefit
your selfe thereby, is no thank to you
at all, but a deuelish and a couetous act,

directly against god, notwithstandinge
the good whatsoeuer it bee, that youre
neighbour receiueth thereby. And what
though your neighbour bee saued from
famyne, in tyme of extreme dearthe by
lending him corne, then to receyue an
ouerplus at tweluemoneth after, yet
are you wicked that did lend for gayne,
when men had most nede of helpe & free
reliefe. And belike it is you and such others,
that are the cause of such dearth:
for nothinge causeth dearth of al things
so muche as vsurye, for by vsury the prices
of wares are raysed, victualles are
the dearer, and they that would labour
& turn vp the ground, cannot for want:
wheras the welthy folke that haue most
money, liue most idely, wtout doing any
thing els, but making money of money,
an euill dishe of meate for hym to feede
vpon that is an hungred, & yet surelye a
thing most mete for vsurers to eat vpō.
Yea I wold yt al vsurers had none other
foode to nourish their earthly bodies wt
                  al,
when they were most hungry, and to
saye vnto them as was said vnto Crassus
                  
beinge deade, aurum sitisti, aurum bibe,
Thou dyddest thurste to drynke golde:
which golde the Persians in dede moulted
and powred into his mouthe, when
he was dead and slain in battaile. Now
Sir I pray you, who speketh more with
charitie? hee that counselleth all men to
lende freely, or he that wylleth all men
to make gayne of their money? Surely
I will say, when you seeke your owne
gayne cheeflye, there is no charitie nor
loue in you at al, although you take but
moderate gaine: for not onely bytynge
vsury, but all vsury is against charitie,
because it is iniurius, sinful & directly against
god, euen as theafte is, bee it neuer
so lytle. But styll you runne to dyminyshe
thys offence, wyth shewinge
that a peny vpō 100.l. biteth not. Wel,
I saye vnto you it is an iniurye, it is a
wrong, it is a thinge forbidden by god,
and therefore a synful deede, saye you
what you wil. Ther is differēce in dede
betwyxte the byting of a dogge, and the
bytynge of a flea, and yet althoughe the
flea doth the lesse harme, yet yt flea doth

byte after her kynde, yea and drawethe
blood too. But what a worlde is thys,
that men wyll make synne to bee but a
flea bytynge, when they see gods word
dyrectlye agaynste them? And thus you
runne to the propertie of the word, and
so trye it in diuers languages, whyche
in deede signifieth a bytynge.
               And nowe you tryumphe and say your
pleasure, that a manne maye bee a lytle
naughte, so that hee bee not altogeather
starke naught: wel, god gaue this name
in diuers languages after this sort, that
suche vyce myghte bee the more abhorred.
For as spoylynge is forbydden, so
is pyckyng also, and although in mans
iudgement, the one bee lesse then the other,
yet before god hee is a transgressour
of the whole lawe, and as gyltye
of death and dampnation that hath pyeked,
as he that hath spoyled. And so in
vsurye it is to bee sayde, aswel hee shall
dye the deathe and not lyue that hathe
taken lytle, as hee that hathe taken a
greate deale, because the lawe of god
hath forbydden al maner of vsury what

soeuer, and wyll not in anye wise that
anye thynge shall bee taken ouer and aboue
the pryncipall lone. For gods will
is, that lendynge shoulde bee vsed, as it
ought to bee, that is to saye, freely with
out hoape of any gayne at al, that charitie
thereby might be the oftener excercised
betwixt man & man. But you cā not
abide this charitable dealyng, & therfore
comming to the greeke and latin word,
whiche bothe doe signifie a birthe, you
make a iest of the lytle pretye babe that
100.l. bringeth foorthe but a bare peny.
Wel, I wyll tell you, howe litle soeuer
you thynk it to be, it is the babe of darknesse,
and it is inoughe to bringe you to
hell fier. You measure things by the value,
and not by the breach of gods law.
Adam and Eue thought it a small fault
to eate of the forbiddē frute in paradise,
and yet you see what followed of it.
               They lost euerlyuing ioy by it, they felt
the smarte of this miserable world, and
were banished out of gods presence, and
all theire posteritie after them foreuer,
had not Christ of his mercye in the fulnes

of tyme, been our Redemer and appeased
the wrathe of oure heauenlye father.
So that the thynge it selfe, is not
so muche to be respected, as the doynge
of it against gods will and commaundemēt,
who forbiddeth al sinne. And although
it maye be thought, that I am
somewhat nice and minse the matter ouer
finely: yet let men remember what
they ought to doe, and what god requireth
of them, & I doubt not, but they wil
think that I haue said litle inough. And
now you returne to your three sortes of
mē: vnto the which I say vnto you, yt in
gods presence & before his maiesty there
is no respect of persons, that are of one
faith, and as wel do you commit vsurye
in lendynge to a king for gaine, as you
do in lending to a poore wretched man,
although you do not bite so much y• one
as the other, because vsury is forbidden
in al degrees, say what you wil. Neither
are circumstance, time, place, nor persō
to be considered in lending for vsury, no
more thē in the very nature of robbing:
Mary, if you would lēd frely it were an

other matter, for then I would wyshe,
and it is reason also, that euery man had
the chiefest regarde to the poore and nedye
person. Your allegacion of those
textes: Geue to euery body that asketh,
and praye euer, and pray wythout ceassinge,
and be alwaies glad, doe nothing
hynder, but that all vsurye is dampnable:
for althoughe those textes are to be
compassed within certain boundes, and
haue their lymytacion by circumstaunces
as reason woulde, and gods worde
in other places dothe verye well allowe
thereof, yet all manner of vsurye is alwayes
euill, be it neuer so lytle, because
the lorde god hathe playnelye and expreslye
sayde it, and that the contrarye
cannot otherwise be gathered in scrypture.
And so I saye of all your other
textes that you doe afterwards inferre,
theye haue theire proper interpretacion
and restrainte: and yet taking ouerplus
for lending, it is alwaies synful, because
there is noe interpretacyon nor conference,
of any text in scripture to make it
otherwise. But still to maynteyne your

argumēt, you say that men do not take
money for lending, but because they lose
their gaine in the meane season, yt theye
do lend, & sustein losse & harme perhaps,
for that their money is out of their hāds.
Thus I see you seeke to mocke wt god,
for I say plainelye vnto you, you ought
not for any respect put your moneye to
gaine by lendinge it. But accordinge to
your profession, you bring out your statutes
of 37. Henrici. 8. where vsury is tollerated,
if it be not aboue. 10.l. in the hū
                  dred,
& this statute you do lyke wel, but
the statute of. 5. Edw. 6. you like not at
al, wher vsurie is altogether forbidden.
Well I am cleane contrary to you: for
I like king Ed. statut best of al, because
it is agreeyng to gods word, and I can
not in any wise allow or like king Henries
statute, because it is againste gods
worde to haue any such toleratiō in any
Christian common weale, no more then
theafte, aduowtery, or murder are to be
winked at. On you go still, & put thys
case. You haue a great aduēture beyond
the Seas, & stande in hazard of your returne,

as you thinke: as who doth not?
You sai thus to your frēd. If your goods
come home safe, you shalbe in good case
to help a gentleman, or your neighbor
at a pynche, Marye otherwise, if by mishap
your goods do perish, then are you
cast so behynde hand, that you shal scāt
be hable to holde vppe your head, muche
lesse be hable to helpe others. Therefore
yf your frende (say you) will beare wyth
suche losses vppon your aduenture, as
may casually happen after the rate of 12.
or 14. in the hundred, for so muche as he
shall borowe, then will you bee contented
to deale wt hym, otherwise you will
keepe somewhat in stoare against foule
weather, & not depart with that, whiche
you haue in assured possessyon to haue
nothing for your labor. This (as I do remember)
is your speach, wherunto I do
āswer. If you wil aswel take nothing at
al, if no losse doe happen to you in your
aduenture, as bee assured to haue something,
yf any mishap do chaunce, & deale
plainly in your doinges wtout fraude or
couin: then I do think it is no vsury for

you to make such a bargain, because the
gain aswel as y• losse are both vncertein.
After this you put foorthe a matter as
though it weare a pitiful case. A wydow
hath left her by her husbād. 500.l. in money,
& for sixe small children that cannot
help thēselues 200.l. for euery one, to be
payd vnto them when they be of yeres,
& you say what shal y• wydow do? How
shal these children bee kept: neyther she
nor her children hauing any trade, to encrease
or maintain their substance. And
therfore what other thīg should be don,
but to let out their moneye for reasonable
gain, rather then the wydow & chyldren
should perishe, & their goods waste
awaye? I do aunswer still, that noe vnlawfull
trade is to be vsed, to aduaunce
welfare. Neyther doe I allowe of your
order in London for orphanes money,
because it hath no grounde vppon gods
woorde, but rather vtterlye forbidden:
for god hathe no regarde to these circū
                  staunces
and pitifull cases, but wylleth
all men to lyue as he hath commaunded
by lawful trade, and in his feare. And if

the vsurers money is dampnable which
is bestowed for redeeming of captyues
from the infidelles, and marying of fatherlesse
maydens: what shall wee saye
of this money, whiche is geeuen for the
maynteynāce of orphanes & widowes?
Is not the case all one? And is there noe
way I praye you for orphanes and wydowes
to thriue by, but onelye with goynge
alwayes into the deuils dungeon,
and seekyng out these croked corners of
wicked ockre and dampnable vsurye?
Is there noe way to be vsed by frends,
with buyinge or sellyng to doe good to
this widowe or her yong babes? Is ther
no ferme to bee bought for moneye? Is
there no occupying that will doe good,
but onely flatte vsurye, a thinge so vnknowen
heretofore, as nothinge lesse
knowne, and being knowen, so abhorred,
as noe man coulde abide them that
were knowen manifest vsurers.
               Nowe lorde god haue mercy vppon vs,
what a worlde is this?
               You put an other case of a seruing man
that hath no trade to liue by, because he

hath been brought vppe onely to wayte
vpon a gentleman, and to doe nothinge
els, and because his master is dead, and
hee can gette no seruice to liue by, you
will in anye wise, that whereas he hathe
a lytle money lying by him, he may liue
by the gaine thereof, by puttinge it oute
for tyme. I do aunswer, that he oughte
not so to do, because god would not haue
him so to doe. And for this matter I wil
allege vnto you Saint Augustines sayinge
vppon the psalme in thys wyse.
Audet etiam faenerator dicere &c.
                  August. The vsurer
also presumeth to say,Psalme. 128. I haue none
other trade to liue by: so may the strong
theefe saye when he is taken by y• throte
wyth the maner; so maye the burgeler
saye, when he is laide hande on, in commytting
burglarye, so maye the bawde
saye, that sellethe yonge maydes to bee
common harlottes, so may the sorcerer
saye, when he or shee enchaunteth euill
things, and selle their enchauntments.
And whatsoeuer like thyng wee should
go about to forbid, they might all aunswer,
they had none other waye to lyue

by, and to finde them selues, as thoughe
that this were not chieflye to bee punyshed
in them, because they haue learned
the arte or occupacion of lewdnes to get
their lyuing by it, and wil thereby feede
them selues, whereby they offend hym,
by whom wee al are fedde. Thus farre
Saint Augustine.
               For your Shipwrack, thus I aunswer.
That wher you pay ten in the hūdreth,
poore folke shall fare the worse, for whē
you make your sale, they shall paye for
your vsurye to the vttermost, and your
suite obteyned, you shallbee aunswered
your money and your vsury, to the last
farthing by them that shall deale wyth
you: and so poore folke shall alwayes
be racked, and the common weale hereby
shall feele great smart thorough this
wicked vsury. You say farther, if one deposite
his money to an other man, and
the same man doth encrease it, without
your knowledge, that then it is reason
you shoulde haue the gayne. I do grant
this to be true, & verye reasonable also:
For as master Ciuilian knoweth better

then I doe, the moneye that was put in
an other mans hand to keepe, is his that
did deposite it, and not his that had the
keeping of it. So that if the moneye had
been lost by some great mishappe without
anye playne negligence, or knowen
follye of the keeper, the owner shoulde
haue borne the losse, and not the keper
of the sayd money. A good lesson to teache
hym and others, that put suche men
in trust, to make choyse of a better hereafter.
Then if the losse should be his that
was the owner, it is good reason, and
a thynge also agreeable to nature, that
the gayne likewise shoulde be hys, that
was lorde of that moneye, whereof the
encrease dyd growe, and wythoute the
whiche anye gayne coulde not els haue
been made at all.
               But styll to helpe your selfe, you bryng
in a croked questyon, and caste beyond
the Moone, askynge: what if the debtor
shoulde fayle, as manye tymes theye
doe, and then all ys gonne: weare yt
not reason to bee assured of some gayne
before hande, for feare of suche harme?

I do aunswer, that you wilbe sure to do
harme, vpon the casualtie of harme, that
might happen, which is vngodly in you
to doe, for that you witting and willing
do offend against your own conscience.
At last you come to breaking of daies &
forfeyture of obligacions, and thynke
you haue wrong if you may not take vsury,
for wantinge your moneye a moneth,
two or three after the day: I do say
vnto you, as I haue saide before, that in
this case you may lawfullye aske interest,
and god forbid but you shoulde bee
considered for ye time, because you haue
susteined losse through breache of couenāt
& are dysappoynted thereby to your
great hinderaunce, as it maye fall out.
And no reason it is that you should lose
for an others benefit, and feele smart of
your owne goods, when an other shall
repe profit by it against your own good
will, for your great good will erst shewed
vnto hym before. Neyther can this
be any vsury at al, because ther was no
bargaine for any ouerplus to be had for
the receipt of that money, if it were paid

at the daye, but onely a forfeyture of a
bond, for not keeping touche, the benefites
whereof, the lawe doth cast vppon
euery body, where couenauntes be not
perfourmed: and good reason it is, that
it should so bee, so the bondes bee reasonable,
and the forfeyture not excessiue.
At the last you come to a rate, & woulde
in any wise haue ten or twelue vpō the
hūdred, eyther appoynted or tollerated,
aswell for common benefite, in dealing
betwixt man and man, as also for stopping
the couetousnes of greedy cormorantes,
whose insatiable myndes no cō
                  uenient
gaine will satisfie, and thys you
thinke very good for all partes. But I
am not of your mynde, because god is
against you, and therfore I doe abhorre
all toleracion of vsurie: much lesse will
I euer yeld to any allowing of it at all,
but rather I would wishe, that there
were as straite lawes to forbid vsurie,
as there bee to forbid felony or murder,
that charitie the rather by thys meanes
myght abounde vniuersally, and men
myght lend to all men freely, as god

hath commaunded, & nature requireth,
for surelye I doe thinke, that charitye
waxeth coulde in thys age, for want of
knowledge, not but that preachers deale
with thys matter, as much as with any
other offense, but that the hearers do
not perfetlye knowe, or at the leastwise
are not fully persuaded, that all vsurie
is synne, as theaft, murder, and other
offenses are, wythout blaunchyng or
tēpering of it at all, for no doubte, yf mē
did knowe yt in deede to bee so heynous
a synne as it is: I doe thinke verely, yf
there were any feare of God in them at
all, they would not bee so euill as they
are nowe, nor so harde harted, to withdrawe
theire christian charitie, from
theire brethren as they doe, and to runne
hedlonge into so bottomlesse a gulfe
of all wickednes and abhominacion,
the true knowledge and consideracion
of whith offense, I pray god, may enter
into all mens harts, that they maye the
rather amend theire liues, thorough charitable
dealing, with theire deare brethren
in Christ, to the hyghe honor of

god, and to the great aduauncement of
hys moste holy will.
               And now to you, master merchant, I
pray you hartely, remember god in the
middest of your occupiyng, & deale not
willyngly againste hys wyll. Yf one
should call you theefe or murtherer, I
knowe you wold bee very angry, and
yet hee that proueth you an vsurer, maketh
you ten times woorse thē a theefe,
& as euill as a murtherer, yea thys will
I saye, yt weare better to winke at a hū
                  dreth
pickpurses in London, and lesse
harme should they do, then to suffer the
wringing of twentie knowne vsurers,
for a man may keepe hys purse frō pickynge
and cutting, and yf one shoulde
lose it, there were but so much gonne, &
a man would bee wyser afterward, and
others would take heede by hys exāple:
but from an vsurer, none can bee ridde
that hath nede, beinge once entred: for
hee will not leaue a man, till hee haue
gnawin hym, euen to the very bones,
that hee is not woorth the ground hee
goeth on. But to your reasons, you saye

yf the assurance of gayne bee taken awaye,
there can bee no trade nor bargaining
amongst men at all. Sir, I doe
not see that any man forbiddeth you to
make gaine of your own lawfully: Mary
to bee a tyme seller, to gayne for dayes,
monethes and yeares, and to make
the sunne shyninge, which god sendeth
so freely vnto vs to be the frute of your
occupiyng, and to make mony of mony,
for the very acte of lending: these
dealinges I do saye, are most abominable
in the sight of god and mā. Yea with
what face or countenaunce I pray you,
can we looke vpon the sunne, that do so
abuse such a light sent vnto vs frō god?
Or how can we number our dayes and
yeres with a cleare conscience, that doe
thus moste horriblye defile good tyme
with our lewde dealyngs. For wheras
wee shoulde the rather loue one an other,
seing god doth loue vs all, and sendeth
thys bryghtnes to shyne ouer vs
for all our comfortes and welfare, and
many fayre yeres, to enioye gods blessings
vppon erth: we turne the benefite

of thys lyght, and thys tyme, to the vtter
vndoing of thousands our deare brethren,
makynge the sunne shinynge,
and continuance of yeares, dayly to encrease
our cofers moste vnlawfullye, to
the decrease of all others, that haue to
deale with vs: For surely, thys kynd of
lendinge for gayne, is the vndoing of
all occupiers, and the distructiou of trade:
because mē that buy deere, must sell
deare, or els beare the losse themselues,
as they often doe, and so are vndone in
the ende. Besydes thys, there is a great
inequalitie, betwirt the lender and the
borrower, wherein the iust proporcion
of mans conscience ys broken: for why
should one haue more for hys gooddes
than they are woorth, or rather why
shoulde one haue for nothinge, more
than hys pryncipall? For when I haue
borrowed mony, the property is in me,
and I am lord of it, and so much as commeth
to my hādes in money or goodes,
I oughte in ryghte to repaye the value
of yt at a tyme appointed, and no more
than it was woorth at the tyme of deliuering.

For yf one take more than
hys pryncipall, in respect of tyme, he
taketh that, which is none of hys, which
is playne theafte, and a deede contrary
to nature, yea it is both agaynst gods
lawe, and mannes lawe to. Nowe the
harme that ensueth herof, is very great,
for the most parte of men are hereby in
suche sorte oppressed, as the welth of the
world commeth to the handes of a fewe
ydle wretched caterpillers, that doe nothinge
in the world but eate vpp whole
townes, countries and kyngdomes. It
is written.Sap. 11. Sap. 11. Thou O god hast ordeyned
all thinges in measure, nomber
and weight, now then, he that will not
deale iustly, according to measure, number,
& weight, ye same mā is not worthy
to lyue vpon earthe, for that hee doth
wounde hys owne conscience wittinglie,
offendeth god greuouslie, and breaketh
the lawe wickedlie. And what measure
I pray you, doth the vsurer keepe,
that taketh more than he layed out? for
one pecke lent, twoo, for hys owne
agayne, more than hys own agayne,

by a quarter, yea some times, more then
halfe. For a pecke of wheat lēt, a bushel
at the yeres ende: And what reason is
thys, that for one pecke lente, a man
should haue more than one peck again,
which was hys owne before, for more
than a mans one, no man should haue
by all lawe of ryght, conscience, and iustice.
And where you saye, that men wil
not lende freely, and therefore it were
necessarie, men shoulde bee suffered to
lende for gayne, lest otherwise the more
parte of men shoulde sterue for wante:
Firste I saye, yf euery man would liue
in hys trade and calling, as hee oughte
to doe, in the feare of god lawfullye,
there woulde bee moneye ynough, and
men shoulde not wante of other mens
plentye that lyue so godlye. Agayne I
do saye, this is a pitiful hearing amonst
christians, and a great token of vnbelife
and gentilytie, when we are so vnwilling
to lende freely, seyng god hath
commaunded vs so expresly. And surely
yf we lyued, as wee ought to doe, there
woulde bee free lendinge, and great

plentie of money euery where. And touching
the necessitie you speake of, that
men should therfore be suffered to lend
for gayne, lest otherwise the most parte
of them should starue for wante: I tell
you plainely, you speake in this behalf,
rather like a man, that can better deale
with drosse and money, than iudge
of god reason, or anye godlynes at all:
For by such your speache, couetousnes
shoulde bee holden for good, because
the ryche will not bee liberall, and aduowtrie
shoulde bee estemed equall to
chastitye, because many men will not
forbeare theire neighbours wyfe. But
sir, both you and wee all, ought to consider
not what is donne, but what of
ryghte oughte to bee donne, & so farre
to deale, as wee maye, and are allowed
to doe by god, and good lawes. And I
saye further, yf vsury were felonye,
and the prince entituled to the offendors
goodes, and no fauour shewed,
there woulde bee store of money, the rather,
through the great occupiyng that
men woulde vse, hauinge goddes blessing

and ynough, when all vnlawfull
tradinge were vtterly forbidden, vpon
suche paynes. Neyther oughte men to
make the most of theire owne, that they
can, as you saye, otherwise then by
lawe they maye: for soe, the euill woman
maye saye, that because her bodye
is her own, shee maye doe with it what
shee list, and company with whome she
pleaseth for her best profit and auayle,
wheras god hath commaunded, that
euery body should keepe hys owne vessell
pure, vnto holynes, because we are
all the images of god, created to hys likenes.
And thus beinge forbidden to
deale vnlawfullye, yf doth not followe
that buiynge and selling are by thys
meanes taken from you, nor yet exchaunging
one thing for an other, barred
any thinge at all. But to lend contrary
to the nature of lending, whiche
shoulde bee free, and to make an other
contracte, than euer god or nature diuised,
to aduaunce youre gayne thereby
moste vngodlie: surely suche kynde of
dealing, I must needes saye, is vtterlie,

and cheefely forbydden, vpon payne of
dampnacion. But to haue youre vnlawfull
doynges borne, which all you allege,
that you doe lend to the prince, in
tyme of neede, and that the nobility and
gentlemen are much ayded by your lendinge,
and that neede wilbee alwayes,
and men shall euer haue neede: I will
aunswere you, cursed bee that lending,
that maketh y• borrower goe a begging,
that vndoeth the state, that destroyethe
nobilitie and gentlemen, that dryuethe
the prince, to seeke ayde of her subiectes
by parliament, to pay her debtes. For it
is you vsurers, and none other, that
bringe the prince behynd hand, with takinge
twelue and fowrteene in the hundred.
A straunge people, that take vsury
of their prynce, beyng theire assured defense,
theire louinge nurse, and theire
chiefe safegarde. But you will saye,
your merchandize, and your occupiyng
shall decay, if youre money he oute of
your handes, & therfore you must, for
very necessity make mony of your mony,
or els haue it in your own vse, other

wyse you cannot liue. Then I see well,
you wil not losse, for ye prince to gayne,
whatsoeuer charges her maiestie sufteyneth,
as of late her maiesty did, in suppressing
those godlesse traitors, & Romaniste
rebels of the North, to her immortal
fame: you still wilbee gainers vpon
the queenes coste & expēces, vnnaturall
subiectes I must call you, & vnmercifull
citezens, that wil haue such certayn gayne,
vpō mony so well bestowed, for the
welfare & safety, not onely of all youre
goodes, but of all youre lyues And here
you make a great matter of youre lending,
others haue lēt sir, aswell as you,
& more thē you to, & yet were they lewde
men notwithstāding, & banished the
Realme for their vsury. The Jewes I
meane in king Edward the first dayes,
dwelling in the olde Jurie, did lend in a
greater quantity, & better cheape to the
kynge, than the Englishe men did. But
what thāke is yt to thē, or to you either,
that lēd vngodly for gaine & profit onely.
And where you talke of nede & wāt,
that want must be, & men shall alwaies

haue neede: I doe assure you, in myne
opiniō, thys your vnmercifull vsury, is
the cheefest cause of all wāt & nede. And
shal I saye as I thinke? It was one of ye
greatest causes of the last rebelliō, next
after their horrible lothinge of holsome
religion: for had not men payd vnmercifully,
for that which they borrowed, &
growne therby so depe in debt, through
vsury, that they were not hable to paye
theire creditours: they would neuer so
desperately, as I think, haue withdrawē
themselues, some of thē I meane, from
the obedience of theire souerayne ladye
and prynce. And therefore I say, theire
neede, which did growe through vsury,
was after a sorte, ye cause of their naughty
doyngs. And of thys, they may thāke
some of you gredy merchants, & others,
whome no reasonable gayne, otherwise
can suffise, but still are heaping gayne
vpon gayne, thys waye & that waye deuowringe
noble men, and gentelmen,
euen to the very hard bones, till theire
goodes and landes be quyte and cleane
made awaye, and they, as boyd of welfare,

as you are of honesty. You cal this
City, the quenes chamber: yf you cōtinue
still as you doe, you will perhaps
turne it to a chāber in deede, yea a chamber
onely, & no Citie, & a very smal row
me for Englāds welfare. God bee mercifull
vnto vs, and graunte charitie and
loue amongst vs, that wee may saye, as
sainct Ambrose sayeth of Theodosius
the emperour,Ambros. in mortē Theod. in a funeral sermō. Who
feinyng the sayde emperour to bee asked
of the Aungels in heauen, what hee
dyd vpon earthe, made thē aunswere,
no more but thys, Dilexi, I loued, which
loue in deede, is the fulfillyng of the
Lawe. And so I pray god, wee all may
make that reckennyng, when we shall
come to that generall audite in the latter
daye, that euery one maye saye truly
and vnfaynedly Dilexi, I haue loued.
But you saye, thexchange is lawfull,
and that trade, you do vse moste commonly,
in lēding and putting out youre
money, as it goeth vsually in the streete,
and thys you saye, no man can mislike:
I do answere: Would god you vsed

thexchange, as yt should be vsed in deede,
and made it not a cloake for vsurie,
geuing a good name to a naughty dede
for as you doe vse it now, it is none other,
then flatt vsurie, colorably cloked,
vnder the name of exchaunge. I cannot
deny but thexchāge is good, whē euery
man helpeth hys eauen christian, to haue
the same value in an other place, disbursed
to hym here at home, and deale
so truly with his neighbour, as he wold
that hys neyghbour should deale wyth
hym selfe in the like case. But thexchange
is now vsed onely for gaine to themselues,
and not for good to others, to benefite
themselues chefelie, and not to
helpe theire neighbours neede. Yf merchants
weare as they should bee: that is
to saye, freshe occupiers, and aduenturouse
dealers in other countryes, like
merchauntes, they myghte serue princes
necessities, and furnishe theire Ambassadors,
with value for value, at an
equall rate, wythout making merchandizes
of money, the most diuelish diuise,
that euer was inuented by man, to vndoe

all states and countries. The exchā
                  ge
is then offensiue, when more is receiued
in respecte of tyme, than was deliuered,
and therfore to speake how the exchange
ryseth or fauleth, is nothing els
to saye, but that good men must bee forced
to paye, according to the couetous
mans desyre, that regrateth all golde &
syluer into hys hands, to make a scarsetie,
and holding the masse in his power,
will not let go any parte of yt, wythout
excessiue retorne, and so cause men to
pay in respect of the moneth, more than
they should doe to receyue vpon ye sight,
wtin three or fowr daies after ye exchāge
is made. And I pray you, how is measure,
weight & nomber kept in thys kynde
of dealinge, excepte you will saye, yt tyme
must be rekened as a parte of youre
gayne, whiche dealinge is vnlawfull,
and forbidden by god. Therefore lett
euery man geue value for value, pound
for pound, ounce for ounce, as thynges
are woorth, and then iust proporcion is
kepte, as it shoulde bee, and euerye

mans necessitie serued a ryghte without
vnlawfull gayning, in respecte of
tyme. As for example. Yf fowere ounces
of English moneye, whiche is one
pound weight, or twēty shillings tale,
bee worth 23. S. 4. d. flemysh in pounde
weight, or pound tale, then let thexchā
                  ge
haue so muche and no lesse in Flaunders,
and let hym not paye any thynge
ouer and aboue, for any respecte, either
of tyme, charges, or for anye other consideracion
whatsoeuer. But you saye,
that yf trading for money vpon money
bee a hurtefull thing, and an offence to
god, thē is buiyng and selling also vnlawfull.
God forbidde. And thys is my
reason. In buiyng & selling, your gayne
is not alwayes certayne, as it is in
vsurie: for he that buieth lande thys day
for fiue hundreth poundes, shall not alwaies
be sure to gaine a hūdreth poūds
by the bargayne, but sometyme hee loseth,
and can not haue hys own againe,
wheras the vsurer is alwayes suer to
gaine, whosoeuer loseth, hauing good &
sufficient assurance alwayes for hys

money. I graūt yt euery mā may make
the best of that, whiche hee hathe in hys
owne possession, by lawefull trade and
iust dealynge, as the lawes of god and
manne haue ordeyned: but alwayes I
woulde wishe, that charitie shoulde bee
vsed euer in bargayns. And in any wise
I woulde haue thys vngodlye and deuilyshe
deuise to gette money with money,
to bee vtterly banyshed, a thinge so
mōstrous in nature, as if thorns should
beare figges, or stones shoulde brynge
foorthe liuelye creatures. But what
dothe not the vnsaciable greedynesse of
man deuyse, and imagyne wyth hymself,
to encrease wealth, and to heape vp
ryches togeather? And especyally what
do couetous merchants leaue vnsought
or vndone, to get goods into their handes?
a kynde of vermine so wedded to
scrape vppe money, that many of them
oftentymes falle oute with the dearest
frindes they haue, for the value of a peny.
And rather then they will yeeld willinglye
to anye losse, they will take such
paynes, that all worldlye wealth is not

so much worth. I pray god y• some of thē
do not prefer money before god & theire
own soule health. I haue read in an olde
writer vpon ye law, y• thinketh it a thing
almost impossible for these worldly merchants
to be good christians. Belike hee
speketh it be cause merchants are cōmō
                  ly
geuen to vsury, & sunken so deepe in
couetousnes, yt theye are drowned in it.
Which vice in dede, is y• roote of al euil,
y• gredy sercher of al hidden gain, y• bottomles
whurlpoole of al apparāt spoile,
y• gainers thēselues, neuer fortunate wt 
the frute or benefit of the goods they possesse,
but rather being most miserable &
hūgry, by a certain strange gredy desire
to hepe them together, are swalowed vp
wt the vnsaciablenesse therof, & cast hedlong
to hel pit, to liue there wt the deuil
& his angels. An other sayeth, yt a merchāt
occupying vsury,Alex. cons. 46. paucis vtar. volu. 4 is a persō abhominable,
& worthy to be lothed of all men,
for his gaine (saieth he) is most filthy.
I pray you therefore master Gromell,
make this iolye lawyer an vntrue sayer
for your part, sauing the worship of this
company, & with his leaue: & amend you

one, and be a merchant in deede, whiche
is a worshipful calling, & do not so much
harken to the deuils sophistry, that you
wil not allow ye true & almighty logike,
& godly reasons of our heauenly father,
least confusion be your end, both in this
world & in y• world to come. But master
Doctor, it had ben my part to haue geuē
place vnto you, whō we al desire to here
in both lawes aswel canon as ciuill: because
you are a professor in them bothe.
And to say the truthe, your calling and
profession is to deale in these maters by
order, & taking knowledge therof to punish
by censures of yt church, & your skil
herein is better then ours, as master lawier
hath said before me, and somewhat
charged me wt ouermuch intermedling
in ye particuler trial of this offēce.
            
            
               Lawier.
               It is truethe sir, sauinge my quarell
for your gret heat, & now I would gladly
answere you in my heate for manye
thynges, yt you haue said, but perhaps I
should offēd: although to say trueth, all
that hathe beene saide hetherto, shoulde
bee vnder correctyon of master doctor
that hathe in these thynges most skyll,

and can put forthe moe cases in one hower,
then wee are able to assoyle in a
whole yere: Who if he can by hys learninge,
after your diuine preachynge
brynge vs to such certaintie, as to make
master Gromell here to lend euery one
of vs freelye 100.li. before we departe: I
woulde call hym an other Chrisostome,
that is, hee that had a golden mouthe
where wyth to speake and vtter hys
minde.
            
            
               Gromell gayner,
                 my purse is myne
owne, and before I lende, I wyll
knowe howe to come by it agayne, and
in my lendynge I hadde neede to take
good heede, what I did, least I be firste
cryed out vpon in ye pulpit, next brought
into thexchequer, and lastly to appeare
in the Arches before my lorde of Caunterbury
and hys officers. So that I and
my boye here, are bothe beset, god helpe
vs, and long it will be before we gaine
to beare office in London, by such kynd
of oration and preachynge, although I
must needes say, you doe much astonne
me, master Ockerfo, with your terrible
threates and curses from god, whereby

I am somtime at that poynt, y• almost I
cannot telle well howe to turne me.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               Assure your selfe sir, the happiest
vsurie vpon earthe, and the greatest
gayne that maye bee, is to help the needye
and poore: for hee that freelye lendeth
that waye, doth lende to god for vsurye,
who will infinitely rewarde and
sende him great gayne aboue all expectacion.
And therefore, master doctor, we
all nowe desire you to saye your minde,
whom we long al to here, that god may
be praysed, and we all edified according
to your good learning & doctrine.
            
         
         
            ¶The Ciuilians or Doctours
oration.
            YOu looke for more at my hande, then
I am able to perfourme: I woulde bee
gladde to saye what I know, and rather
vtter my learninge plainlye, then seeke
muche to confute any of your opinions
expreslye, although I maye incidently,

& by the way touch some thing perhaps,
that hath been said. And yet thus much
I saye vnto you, you shall rather heare
what I haue read & gathered of others,
then knowe mine opinion directly, touching
the very precisenes of al vsury, so
long as mine oration shal continue, although
I may seeme to shew some heat,
as occasion shal serue in detestation of
wicked doings and excessiue gaine. Afterwardes
it may happen vpon farther
speach, and priuate conference emongst
vs, you shall knowe the verye bottome
of my minde, and the reasons yt mooue
me to affirme, as some of you haue said.
In the meane season, I praye you haue
pacience, and doe not interrupt mee, til
you be more wearye with hearing, then
I shall bee wyth speakynge: for I tell
you, wee professours of learninge, doe
loue oftētimes to here our selues speke,
beynge more tedyous, then frutefull,
better stuffed wyth speach, then freighted
wyth skyll, and more readye oftentymes
rather to talke muche about the

matter, then able to saye muche to the
matter. And yet because a methode or
order ys good: I wil deuide myspeache
into fiue or sixe seuerall partes.
            1 And first I wil shew what vsurye is,
& where, that wee may know certaynly
whereof to speake, and laying our foū
               dacyon
sure, maye the better proceede in
the rest of our talke.
            2 Agayne, I wyl shew that the same
is euill, and by what lawes forbidden, &
for what causes.
            3 Thyrdelye, I wyll vtter dyuers
kyndes of contracts, and trades in bargayning
commonlye vsed, & therewyth
shew what the exchange is.
            4 Fowerthlye, I wyll shewe what
ys not vsurye, and what dyfference
there ys betwyxte interest & vsury.
            5 Fyftlye, I wyll shewe the punyshmentes
for vsurye, and therewyth allege
suche examples of all ages, as shal
come to my remembraunce, in the detestacyon
of vsurye and all vsurers vniuersally.
            
               
6 Lastlye I doe mynde vppon farther
conference, & priuate debating to shewe
myne opynion, what is expedient to bee
donne at this time. Usurie commethe of
the latin worde Vsura, and according to
the nature thereof, it is called so, of the
vse that men haue of thynges borowed.
It is called in greeke a byrthe, because
that moneye bringeth moneye.
            In the Hebrue tongue, it is called a byting,
because they that borowe and pay
ouer and aboue the principall, more thē
they borowed, in the ende shal be bitten,
with suche want and penurye, that the
byting of a serpent, or venemous beast,
cannot bee more hurtfull to a mans bodye,
then the borowing of moneye, for
gayne is hurtful to a mans welfare and
possessions: For as poyson wastethe the
bodye, so dothe vsurie consume a mans
goods. Thus muche for the propertie of
the worde, as in effecte hathe ben sayde
before.
            Nowe,14 q. 3. vsura. touchynge the definition of vsurie
according to the scholemen, it is said
to bee againe that commethe thoroughe

lendinge by couenaunt, or by chiefe entent
or purpose. As for example, I doe
lende to receiue more then I layde out,
I doe couenaunt to haue more, and my
chiefe purpose in laying out my moneye
is, by my principal to ēcrease my stock,
and hoape by my lending, to receiue an
ouer plus: for where these three thyngs
concurre togeather, lending, gayne, & a
pryncipall or chiefe purpose to encrease
welfare, in suche dealings, vsury is alwaies
moste certainly knowen.Imola in Cle ment. 1. de vsuris. 19. coll. vers. querit hic pet. de an char in repet. reg. & pecca ti venia in. 1. 9. principali. Ludou. Roman. cōs. 500. Laurēt. de Ro dolph. in trac tatu de vsuris. Others
doe define vsurie thus.
            Usurye is whatsoeuer is taken for lone
aboue the principall.
            Usurie is a certayne gayne due, or exacted
for lendinge, or by couenant agreed
vpon. S. Barnard saieth, that vsurie
is a lawefull thefte, or a thefte in lawe,
the Ciuil lawe it selfe, or rather the Emperor
Iustinians statute, tellyng before
hand what is entended, that is to robbe
by order & sufferance of lawe. Usurye is
also saide, to be the price of tyme, or of
the delaying, or forbearing of moneye.
Melancthon dothe define vsurye in thys

sorte.
            Usurye or fenorye is a gayne demaunded
aboue ye principal,Bernardus in libro de cura rei familiaris Gl. in L. in fraudē ss. fiscalibus F. de iure fisci, Ioan. de prat. in L. qui procurator de procur. onely for the benefite
or pleasure shewed in lendynge.
Wherein mee thinketh Melancthon hath
very well and playnelye sayde, what is
vsurye: so that, whosoeuer lendethe hys
money, or putteth out the same to haue
gayne onelye for the verye lone of the
said money, is an vsurer vndoubtedly,
and suche a one as ought by good lawes
to be punished. So that by this definition,
euery receiuing aboue the principal,
is not vsury. As if I doe borowe 100.l. of
a merchant that tradeth and occupiethe
and the merchant doe freely lende mee
the same money for a yeare, afterward
yf the merchant do proue vnto mee, that
the want of his saide 100.l. was greatlye
hurtful vnto him, I ought to make him
a recompence. And suche allowaunce of
his losse or hinderaunce, ought not to be
counted vnlawfull and vsurye: when
one dothe not bargaine to receyue more
then he lent, only for yt lēdyng, althoughe
the borower was not any time anyt

euident or effectual hinderer of his gain
or welfare. But of this kinde of lēdings
and other like, we will talke more hereafter
in a more apte place. I truste you
knowe by these fewe woordes, what vsurie
is. It foloweth, that I shew, wherin
vsurye is occupied.
            And I say first, there cannot bee any vsurye,
where lending is not: and lēding
consisteth vpon three things, that is nū
               ber,
weight, and measure. As for example,
money, leade, corne, the first is nū
               bred,
the seconde is weyghed, the thirde
is measured, and so likewise of all other
thynges that are in such sorte vttered.
            Lendynge moreouer is sayd to be, whermy
goods are made thine, called in latin
Mutuum, that is to say, mine, thine, and
so thou arte lorde and owner, and haste
the possession of them, that thou mayest
dispose of them as shal like thee best, restoringe
vnto mee agayne, not the very
selfe same thynge in hys owne propre
nature, without alteracion or chaunge
of the shape, fourme or quality (for so it
weare no lending, but a letting to hier)

but so muche in value of the same kind:
as if I shoulde lende my frende 100.l. in
moneye of diuers coynes, hee may paye
the value in money at the yeares ende,
although not the verye selfe same & proper
coyne. And so likewise I maye saye
of corne, oyle, wyne, spyce, leade, tinne
brasse, or anye thinge els that is eyther
measured, or weighed. And vsury is not
onely in moneye, but also in wares and
merchandises, suche as maye be consumed
or spent by vsinge of them.
            But some to auoid vsury wil say then, y•
they wil not lend, but let to hyer, which
I woulde they dyd in deede, and not say
it onely, for then the perill shoulde bee
theirs, that doe lette it to hyer, and not
the hirers, or els it is nothynge to hier.
For if I doe hyer a horse to iourney for
a seuennight, and the horse without any
fault at all on my parte, doe dye before
I doe retourne: the losse shalbe his, that
did let the horse vnto me for hyer, and
not mine that did take the horse to hier,
excepte an expresse couenaunt bee made
to the contrarye: Whereas in lendinge

it is cleane contrarie. For I being lorde
of an other mans goods, by the vertue
of borowing, must aunswere the general
summe: which neuer dieth whatsoeuer
become of mye perticuler receipt:
no, not althoughe theeues robbed mee
immediately, or that mye house weare
burned, and so I vtterlye vndoone. And
this muste I performe by order of all
lawes, although no couenant bee made
at all to saue the creditoure harmelesse,
for hee must haue hys owne principall,
without anie contradiction. And therefore
let the vsurer saye what hee will, yf
he doe put forth hys money to be sure of
it agayne, he dothe not let it to hyer, nor
yet vseth anye other contract at all, sauing
onely lendinge, let hym colour it
by neuer so manye deuises, as by bargaine
and sale, and vtteryng of wares,
or anye other shift whatsoeuer. And because
you shall fully and perfectly perceiue,
what lendinge is, and what letting
is, knowe you that when a deliuery
is made of goods lent, (for withoute
deliuering there can be no lending) then

he that hath thus borowed the same, is y•
proprietarie, the verie true owner, and
lorde of all, to dispose of them freelye as
hee liste, for his owne vse and benefite:
beynge bounde notwithstanding, to restore
at a tyme appoynted, so muche and
no more in value, as he hathe receyued,
so that these goods seeme to bee lent for
hys benefyte and profite that borowed
them, not for hys gaine or aduauntage,
that did lend them. And hereby common
societie is the rather mainetayned betwixt
man and man, mutuall frendship
better encreased, and christian charitie
much exercysed, when the wealthy man
hathe thys care, to helpe his needye and
poore neighbour, and lendeth freely and
chieflye for his profit and auaile. Nowe
letting to hier, is for gaine, and especiall
profite, and the thinge put forth to hier,
ys styll his that did let it out, called in latine
Locatio, so that if by summe greate
myshap the same bee destroyed, loste, or
cōsumed away through casualty, either
of fier or water: he yt did let those goods
or chatels out to hyer, abideth al ye peril,
not he that tooke them to hyer.
            
               
There is, also Commodatum, a lendinge
without alteracion of the propertie, the
owner remayning still lorde of that hee
did lend, & this lending is free without
any gain at al. Thus you see by my simple
learning & vnderstanding, what lettyng
is for hyer, what lēding is for vse,
to haue the verye selfe same againe, and
what free lending is for charity, to haue
the same kinde, & how euery one of these
should be vsed, & how a man maye dyscerne
lendinge for vse, from lettinge to
hyer, & lending to haue yt same kynde againe,
& what difference ther is betwixt
Mutuum, Locatio, & Commodatum. And besides,
what is the verye naturall and
proper definiciō of vsury, by me set forth
before, according to yt iudgement of lerned
men, in al ages. But now yt I haue
shewed vnto you what vsury is, & wher
in manifestly inough, as I trust, & with
as great shortnes as I could: I will declare
vnto you, yt the same is euil, vngodly
& wicked, & so forbidden because it is
euil, & not therfore euil, because it is forbidden,
& by what laws it is forbiddē, &
for what causes. Where no charitye is,
ther is no vertue.

but in the vsurers harte there is no charitie:Ioan. de ligna in C. nauigati. Bald. in ius de vsuris, et in L. cunctos popu los vers. quae ro primo C. de suma Trinitate.
therefore the vsurer is voide of
vertue. Yf the vsurer had charytye hee
woulde haue compassion of his poore &
needye neighbour and ayde his want to
his power, as by gods law he is bound.
But the remorse of conscience is not in
him, but onelye a desire to enriche hym
selfe, which is a wicked entent and meanyng,
and directly against god: for god
not only by his commaundements willeth
one to help an other, and to relieue
the poore, but also he sheweth his bountifulnes
vniuersally of his mere grace,
sufferynge the sunne to shine ouer all,
sending weather in due season, blessing
the grounde with all kinde of frute and
goodnes for mans behoofe, wherein is
shewed an example for vs to follow: that
as god of his free mercye, is good to all
beinge our creatour, so man shoulde be
charitable one to an other, in frank aydinge
his fellowe creature. And as amongste
all vertues, there is none that
goethe so nyghe to the goodnes of god,
as liberalitie: so no vice is so farre from

god as is couetousnes, wherof sprīgeth
vsurie, and all other myschiefes vpon
earthe. And as these that cannot geeue
with their ease, and yet doe lend freely,
are good members of god, so they, that
wil neyther geeue nor lende freely, are
the verye members of the deuill. Euill
therefore is vsurie, when it hyndreth
charitie, and hathe no sparke of goodes
grace in yt, but onely a desire to vndoe
all, and to diuise that the wealth of the
woorlde myght bee in fewe mens handes:
as what other do thys caterpillers,
and enemyes to all contries, and kyngdomes,
but heape welth to themselues,
from others, without charitye or respect
of man or god? yea both againste man
and god: in all that euer they may. And
therefore, who can saye otherwyse, but
that vsurie is euill, when it bringeth all
myschiefe with it, And therefore it hath
ben forbidden in all ages, and almoste
by all lawes vniuersally.
            First, the woorde of god is directlye
againste all vsurie and vsurers, and
doth not onely forbidde the same synne,

but threateneth deathe and dampnation
to them that vse it, as master Ockerfoe
hath very well declared, in hys godlye
oracion, and therefore I neede not to
make dubble inculcation.
            The canon lawe,14. q. 3. doth straitely and
playnely forbid vsurie, not onely in the
decrees, but also in the decretales in
Serto, and in the Clementynes, and
doth appointe very great punishments,
and dyuers, for them that are notorious
vsurers, as you shall heare more
at large hereafter, when I come to my
laste diuision. And touching the prohibition
by the canon lawe, you shall here,
what the woordes are.
            No man shal enter in to holy orders,33. D. maritū.
or bee of the ministerye, that by lawe is
conuicted and found to haue put his money
to vsury. And in an other place: wee
do ordeyne, that no vsurer shalbee made
one of the cleargie.D. 46. Seditionarios. And the reason is in
the glose, that such mē, because they are
couetous persons, will goe to lawe, and
sue anye bodye, for euerye trifle, and
mynde nothynge more, than greedye,

gettynge, without all mercy, a synne
agaynste god and nature.D. 47. per totum. And in the
next distinction throughout, the forbidding
is playne, with thys reason alledged,
that no couetous man, or suche as
followeth hys owne greedy desire, for
worldlie goodes, should bee of the clergie,
because they do easely fwarue from
Justice, and from all ryghte and well
doyng. And therefore there is broughte
in a decree,Consiliū Nicenum. 18. of the Nicene coūcell, which
ordeneth, that suche of the Cleargie, as
put out their money for vsurie, takynge
twelue in the hundred or lesse, shalbee
degraded from all theire degrees of ecclesiasticall
office, and made irregular,
because they haue sought to lyue by fylthye
gayne, contrarie to the expresse
woord of god. And immediatly after, it
is sayde, that suche as followe greedilye
worldly gayne, cannot serue god faithfully.
And fo throughout, there are diuers
distinctions, directly against vsury
and auarice.
            It followeth in the decrees, by the
aucthority of sainct Augustyne,14. q. 3. sainct

Hierome, and sainct Ambrose, that any
ouertakyng more then hath ben lent, is
vtterly forbidden as playne vsurie. But
because you, master preacher, haue alleged
those doctours, and other holye fathers
of the churche, I will not make any
newe rehersall. In the latter ende of
the same decree is brought in the sentence
of a generall counsell,Cōsilium Agathense. which sayeth,
y• vsury is committed, whē in any thing
is demaunded;14. q. 5. more then was lent. As
for example.Nullus. Yf I lende one 
                  〈◊〉
                shillinges,
and take any thinge for it, or yf
I lende a bushell of wheate to haue a
pecke,14. 9. 3. or anye other measure, bee it neuer
so little ouer & aboue my principale.Vsura est.
In an other counsell,14. q. 4. it ys sayde. Minysters
that doo commit vsurye,Cōsilium Arelatense. shall not

                  •
               eceyue the communion.
            Also hee that buiyeth thinges of one
sorts verie cheape,Consiliū Terraconense. to selle the same goodes
in the same kynde dearer, cannot be
of the clergy.
            Pope Martyn,
               Ex concilio Martini Papae. in the councell that hee
called, sayeth Yf anye man forgettinge
the feare of god, and the holy scriptures,

which doe saye (he that hath not geeuen
hys money to vsury, shall enter into the
tabernacle of god) doe, after knowledge
had of thys generall councell, commyt
vsurie, or take Centesimam vsuram, which
is twelue in the hundred, or by any filthy
trade, doth make hys gayne, taking
for dyuers sortes of thinges, for eyther
wyne or corne, or anye other thinge,
els by buiyng or sellinge, more then hee
hathe layde out, shalbee put oute of the
clergie for euer.
            Pope Leo dothe also forbid the same
offense in the laytie, beinge verye sorys
that any christian should bee an vsurer,
saiynge, that the clergy ought to bee the
more sharply punished for such offense,
because all others shoulde bee the more
afrayde to offend, whē the clergy is not
spared.
            Yea the Decrees do further saye,14. q. 5. that
no almes oughte to bee geeuen, of euill
gotten goodes, which cannot bee worse
gotten, than by vsury: but because you
master preacher haue sayd your minde
herein somewhat largely, I will not

saye anye more.
            And now, that I haue shortly vttered,
what is sayd in the decrees of the canon
lawe, you shall see, that the decretales
likewyse, and Clementynes, are directely
againste vsurie. And therfore, I would
not haue men altogether to be enemies
to the canon lawe, and to condempne
euery thinge there written, because the
popes were aucthours of thē, as though
no good lawe coulde bee made by them,
which god forbid, should eyther bee spoken,
or thought. Nay I will saye playnely,
that there are some suche lawes,
made by the Popes, as be righte godly,
saye others what they list, whome fewe
things can please, although they bee neuer
so well setteled and diuised, that are
not inuented and made first by themselues.
But left them goe, and goe we to
the matter. In the decretales, in the chapiter
of vsury, thus it is written.
            
               Alexander the pope,In Concilio Tur
                     •
                  n̄. doth straitly forbid
all vsury, not onely vnto the clergy,
but also vnto the laitye. And yt none
takynge pawne, whereof encrease or

gayne maye ryse, shall turne the same
profite to hymself, but retourne it in his
principal, when hee receiueth hys owne
agayne.In Conci. Lateren̄. And so thereupon sheweth the
penaltie that they shal susteine, who are
manifest vsurers, as I will then declare
at large, when I come to my last diuision.
And in thys chapiter are diuers cō
               tracts
& bargaynes vttered, whiche you
shall heare a none, in their proper place.
In ye booke called,Sextus Decretalium. 
               Sextus Decretaliū, Gregori,
ye tenth bishop of Rome of y• name,
begynneth thus: Wee being desirous
to stoppe the gulfe, or whorlepoole of vsury
cōmitted, whiche doth deuore soules,
& vtterly wasteth wealth, doe commaund,
vppō the threatnings of goods
curse, that the constitution of the latter
counsell sett fourth against vsurers, bee
wtout any violacion at all, fully & wholy
obserued. And thereupō a prohibition is
made, y• no corporaciō, colledge, or vniuersity,
shal lett any howse or dwelling
place to any straūger vsurer, being borne
in an other countrie &c. As you shall
heare more thereof, in the proper place

of my diuision. And now last in the Clementine
canon, whiche booke hath the
name of pope Clemente,
               Clementine. the fyfth, by
the aduise and allowance of the counsell
at Vienna, doth straigtly forbid vsury,
and abrogateth all lawes made for
the maintenaunce of vsurie, cursing thē
that hereafter will sett forthe, or bee aydors,
abbettours, or counsellours, for
the makinge and allowing of suche vngodly
and wicked lawes, as you shall
heare more at large, when I come to
speake of punishmēt appoynted against
vsurers. Neither shoulde wee so muche
hearken, what worldlie princes or magistrates
haue donne for worldly pollicie,
as to looke, what god and Christe, the
hyghe magistrate of all hath done & forbidden,
and folowe that, as which wee
are bounde to followe, vppon payne of
dampnation. And according vnto that,
I doe reade of a Christian Emperour,
called Leo,
               Hermenopolus, lib. 3. tit. 7. who made a statute (as (Hermenopolus
declareth) agaīst vsury, which
for the woorthynes and godlynes therin,
I thought good to Englishe woorde

for woorde as followeth.
            Although many of our auncestours haue
thought, ye lending for vsury mighte
be admitted, and onely for that the creditours
were so harde, and as men loth
els to lend: yet we haue thought it most
vnworthy amongst christians, & to bee
vtterly abhorred & eschewed, as a thyng
forbidden by the lawe of god. Therfore
our maiesty doth commaunde, that it be
not lawfull for anye man, to take vsury
for anye cause, leaste whyles wee goe about
to keepe the lawes and statutes of
men, wee doo transgresse therby y• lawe
of god, but whatsoeuer anye man doth
take, the same shalbe reconed into the
principall.
            Thus you see thys christiā emperour,
after Justiniā and others, hauing more
respect to god, thā to any polycie of mā:
doth expresly forbidd vsury: & fearing to
blaunche the wrytynge of god, and for
policye, to depraue a veritye, folowethe
the playne woordes of god, neither adding
therto, nor diminyshing anye iot
thereof, as by the lawes hee was commaunded.

Besides thys, the generall
coūselles are directely against vsurers.
The causes that haue moued wyse and
godly men to deteste vsury, besides the
plaine prohibition, are diuers and substancial,
and therefore woorthy to bee
considered most diligently.
            The Jewe, that hath vsed thys horrible
sinne most aboue all others, & might
lawfullye vse the same, before Christs
comming, vpon any straunger, as appereth
plaine in Exodus, hath so robbed
the christians wheresoeuer hee came, y•
his euill lyuinge seene, hee is banished
out of the most places in christendome,
and worthely: for surely that common
weale and country, cannot long stande
in prosperous estate and welfare, wher
merchāts, & all others, become vsurers,
And no better do I call thē, thē Jewes,
yea worse thā any infidel, that wittingly
lyue by the onely gayne of their money.
The causes that moue me, are these
Firste, the vsurer ys an idle man, hee
doth not trauayle, nor labour by sweate
of hys browes, to aduaunce hymselfe,

and hys countrey, but vseth the paynes
and troubles of others, to hys greate
gayne, without anye paynes takyng of
hys parte at all. And therfore, yf all
shoulde doe, as the vsurer doth, y• groūd
shoulde lye vntilled, no trade of merchandize
shoulde bee vsed, nor yet occupiyng
maynteyned, for the vse of mankynde.
For what follye weare it for a
man, eyther to delue, or digge, to passe
the seas with perill, to woorke in anye
mysterye or handie crafte: when hee
maye, with ease liyng on the one syde,
without labour, toyle or daunger, gete
more vnto hym, with ease and certaintie,
than the best labouring man, with
all his trauayle, or the greatest merchāt
liuynge with all hys paynes, throughe
vncertainty, hauing lyke wealth to begynne
as they haue, were euer hable to
geate. For what is hee liuyng that in any
trade, or trafique, can assure himselfe
yerelye, of euery hundreth poundes, to
gayne by his occupiynge twelue poundes,
without anye perill or daunger,
Whereas the vsurer, will be assured of

so much, and more a great deale euery
yere, let y• world goe which way it wil,
to the great hurte and vndoyng, not onely
of those with whome hee dealeth,
but also, to the distruction of the whole
countrey where hee dwelleth. For besides
that hee heapeth muche wealthe to
hymselfe, by such vnlawful meanes, he
bringeth a dearthe also of all thynges,
through hys excessiue dealing. For whē
hee taketh so deare for hys moneye, yt
must needes followe, that as others do
buy, so they muste sell. And therfore,
when one taketh a hundreth poundes,
to paye twentye poundes, ouer or
more than hee borowed, that same man
in vttering of hys wares, must so selle,
that hee must paye hys creditours, and
lyue also, whiche hee cannot doe, except
hee selle hys wares very deare, that hee
maye paye all that hee oweth, and gette
some what ouer, to mainteine him selfe
and hys familie. For yf hee doe not make
of hys wares, the some of sixe score &
tenne pounds at the yeares end, which
notwithstanding are no more woorth,

betwixt man and man, than one hūdred
poundes at the first buiynge, hee is like
to leaue hys occupiynge shortly, and to
shutt vpp hys doores for euer. Therfore
you see, that the vsurer is the occasiō of
all dearth and want, that happeneth to
a common weake. And thys is one of the
cheefest occasiōs of all your bankruptes
nowe a dayes, and decayed gentlemen,
that haue borrowed mony, and taken
wares so deerely, that the very vsury in
time hath wholie eaten them vpp, & vndonne
them for euer. But woe worthe
that man, that hath so oppressed hys brother.
God is not mocked, and his woord
shalbee founde true, to theire dampnation
for euer, except they doe amende in
tyme, and call to god for grace. God ordeyned
lending for maintenaunce of amitye,
and declaration of loue, betwixt
man and man: wheras now lending is
vsed for pryuate benefit and oppression,
& so no charitie is vsed at all, as thoughe
there were no god to iudge, nor lyfe to
come. I doe meruayle, to see so manye
theues hanged, & so many vsurers liue:

For before god, the greatest theefe and
rauener, that can bee in a common
weale, ys the vsurer, and the woorste
man that liueth. And I am of master
Ockerfoes opinion, and thinke it were
better, that all Englande had one thousande
knowen theues, than one hundred
knowen vsurers. For the theefe,
may by diligence be eschued, and lightly
he harmeth but one man at once: but
the vsurer cannot bee auoyded: for the
vsurer bearethe the contenaunce of an
honest man, and is commonly taken, to
bee the best man in his paryshe. Yea hee
is often in aucthoritye, and dealeth as
though it were by lawe, being none other
than a lawful theefe, creepinge into
credite wher
                  •
                gayne is to bee made, &
vse the helpe of brokers, to serue hys
purpose. And thys ys very true, hee vndoeth
as many as hee dealeth with all,
vnder the coloure of amitie & lawe. And
surely, yf a man bee once in the vsurers
net, it is a great grace of god, if hee doe
euer escape hys handes, without vndoyng.
Therfore, vnhappy are they that

fall into the vsurers snares, or haue to
do with them, for as the caterpiller consumeth
the frute of the tree, so doth the
vsurer destroye the substance & credit of
man. And the worst of all is this, that a
man is vndon, before he knoweth he is
euel dealt with all, beynge persuaded,
that all is to hys benefyte, till he be not
woorthe the ground hee treadeth vpon.
And therfore, the dealing of an vsurer,
is compared to the byting of the serpent
called Aspis. For as sainct Chrisostome
sayeth, vpō the fyfty of sainct Matthew,
where mention is made of borrowing,
(as you master Ockerfoe haue partlye
touched): The money of the vsurer, is like
the bityng of the Aspis: for hee that
is stroken by that serpēt, feeleth therof a
certein pleasaunt ytche, wherby hee falleth
a sleepe, & so through ye plesauntnes
of his sleepe, he dieth in pleasure, for thē
the poyson goeth by a lyttle and a little
through all ye partes of ye body. So after
y• a man hath takē mony vpō vsury, & lyueth
plesauntly therwith for a tyme: at
lēgth, ye vsury perceth so throughout all

his goodes moueable & vnmouable, y• al
his lāds, & liuings, are not hable to paye
his debts. As I haue knowē som, & partlye
you, master Ockerfoe, spake of the
like, that hathe borrowed vppon 100. li.
lande, neuer improued onely 300. li. in
money, paiyng deepe vsurie, be you assured,
and at length paide so longe (and
yet in no longe tyme neither) that hys
whole debte, through vsury, came to aboue
2000. markes: and so he lost (to saye
in effect) a hundred pound land, for 300.
li. in mony. A pityful case, and woorthy
to bee punished wyth horrible deathe.
Hereof commeth decay of good houses,
and wracking of the people, throughe
this deuouring caterpillers, which beīg
not many, in respecte of all others: doe
gather the goodes of infinyte persones,
into theire owne handes. And so the cō
               mō
weale is weakened, & whole townes
destroyed, through the couetous vsurer.
For when they haue gotten whole manours
and townes into theire handes,
they are sorye, that anye shoulde dwell
there, but them selues. And so they

rid awaye in time the poore tenauntes
and suffer them to begge, and to dye for
hunger, and for tillage, vse shepegates,
wher no mē are mainteyned, nor house
holden, but all ouerthrowne: & in steede
of houses, desert places to bee seene, and
wilde solytarines for beastes to raunge
in, and to feede vpon, cattaile and shepe
occupyinge the places of manye a good
honest meaninge man. So that by these
twoe idle occupacions, great vsurye and
manye flockes of sheepe and heardes of
beastes, this noble Countrey is made in
a maner a forest, and brought to greate
ruyn and decay, thorough dyspeoplyng
of men, ouerthrowing of townes, and
oppressyng of the poore, wt intollerable
vsury. And I pray you, what is more agaīst
nature, thē yt money should beget
or brīg forth money? which was ordeined
to be a pledge or right betwixt man
& man, in contracts and bargayning as
a iuste measure and proporcion in bargayning,
and not to encrease it selfe, as
a woman dothe, that bringethe foorthe a
childe, cleane contrarye to the firste institution

of money.Aristotle politic. lib. 7. And therefore Aristotle
saieth, that such money as brīgeth
forth money through vsurie, is an vgly
beast, that bringeth forthe mōsters from
time to time, suche as are not in nature.
Likewyse Suydas vpon Aristophanes in
nubibus sayeth, that such money which
bringeth forth money is a swelling mō
               ster,
waxing euerye moneth bigger one
then an other, and so horrible swelleth
from time to time, as no man by wordes
is able to vtter, contrary to nature,
order, & al good reason. And what equalytye
is in bargaynynge I praye you,
when the one partie is famished, and ye
other is hoggesty fed? Justice is none other
thinge then a certeine euenhode or
equalitie, and therefore they that do not
in their dealings, vse an equal property,
do not vse Justice. Now in vsurye, you
may well saye, there is noe euenhode at
all, for the lender receiuethe more then
he lent. As after he hath lēt, he receiueth
his principal againe, which is the equalitie
in law, then he taketh an ouerplus
for nothing, that is to say, gayne aboue

hys pryncipall, yea, and excessyue also,
whiche is a great disproporcion & plaine
inequalitie, for why shoulde anye man
gayne, for the onely lendinge? He hath
hys owne agayne, without any losse, or
hinderaunce at all. And what will hee
haue more? his owne he hath with thā
               kes,
and more then his owne he should
not aske. If hee receiue not as good money
as he lent, and of the same value, he
may wel complaine, but when he hathe
his owne againe, wythoute losse, and
 wt thankes toe, what can he haue more?
In lending he looseth the property, and
vse for the time, and is noe lorde of hys
owne for the season, and what will hee
haue when hee hathe departed with his
owne for tyme? for nothynge, somethinge?
for a shadowe a perfite bodye?
for moone shyne in the water, a mans
whole treasure? I speake of those nowe
that for lendynge of money onelye (all
other respectes and considerations set
asyde) wyll haue moneye for their money,
yea, & a great deale for a litle respiting
of time, in forbearīg their moneye,

a wicked kinde of men, and the vnprofitablest
wretches that liue. Doe not
these worldlinges see, that god of hys
goodnes, hathe freely geuen this world
for man to vse and occupye onelye, to
acknowledge theire creatour, & to loue
their brethren. Doth not ye sunne shyne
vpon vs freelye? the ayre is open to vs
all, and wee breathe, thoroughe goddes
great mercy, the tyme endureth for our
benefite? And wil these idle men sell the
sunne, the ayer, and the tyme for theire
proper gayne? howe can hee bee of god
that so dothe. God geeueth, and the vsurer
withholdeth, god openeth his hāds,
and the vsurer is straite handed, god is
free, the vsurer is harde. God lendethe
life and liuing for loue, the vsurer gaineth
al that he maye for lone, yea hee taketh
mens hartes (as I might saye) out
of theire bodies. So that I maye well auowe,
that lyght and darkenes, whyte
and blacke, trueth and falshood, heauen
and hell: are not so contrarye and so distant,
as god and the vsurer, yea so farre
of is it, that anye man shall take gayne

for money,Cap. sup. ext. de vsuris. 13. q. 1. 2. & ibi Augustinus. as it is forbidden to do anye
good work, for vsurie. As that a stock of
money should run for ye helping of yong
occupiers, to marry poore maydens, to
relieue the poore and afflicted in euerye
towne & parishe that be not able to helpe
thē selues, or to redeeme captiues from
the Infidels: al these good deedes I say,
are forbidden to bee done by the waye of
vsurie. And therfore, whereas there are
in Italy, Montes pietatis, that is to say,
mountes or bankes of charitye, places
where great summes of moneye are by
legacies geuen, for reliefe of the poore,
to borowe vpon gages, and to paye onelye
after three or fower in the hundred
at the most, to mayntayne the officers,
and to beare the charges of such an erected
mount for euer: the law doth plainlye
condempne all suche doynges to bee
vsurye, and therfore much more should
vsurye be abhored, that is excessyue and
lent onely for greedye lucre and priuate
gayne. Then if we loue to liue together
in a common societie, as brethren ought
one with an other, and wyll that couetousnes

the roote of all euil, as you haue
well said master Ockerfoe, bee banished
out of England. Let vs agree, that noe
vsurer maye cary estimacion (as by law
and right they ought not to haue anye)
but he with hart abhorred, and by order
punished as he ought to be, and to pray
that god maye inspyre the magystrates
hartes, to prouide good and holsome remedye
against suche wicked and vngodly
doinges. Thus muche touchinge the
second parte of my diuision: in al which
talke, I haue folowed the course of my
profession, and vsed such speache, as the
authors and writers thereof, haue geue
occasion of such like matter.
            3 In the thirde part I will open diuers
contractes and bargaynes that are vsed
to auoide vsurye.
            I haue neede of money, and deale wyth
a broaker, hee aunswereth me, that hee
cannot helpe me with moneye, but yf I
list to haue wares, I shall speede. Well
my necessitie is great, he bryngeth mee
blotting paper, pakthreede, fustiās, chā
               lets,
haukes bels, & hoodes, or I wote

not what: I desire hym to make sale for
mine aduantage, askyng what he thinketh
willbe my losse, he aunswereth, not
paste twelue pounde in the hundred.
When I come to receiue, I do finde yt I
lose more then twentye in the hundred
(yea, woulde god that none had loste
more) I beinge greeued wt my losse, doe
charge the broaker, and saye, that I wil
not receiue the money wyth suche losse,
the merchaunt aunswereth, that he wyl
not take his wares againe, and hauing
my bille, careth not what become of me
that haue borowed: this is called a double
stoccado, that is to saye, the stycking
blowe, or the double stabbe. For at the
firste, the poore gentleman is borne in
hande, there is no money to be had, but
is promised wares, to auoyde, or rather
to mocke the daunger of the statute (but
god is not mocked) and so wyth thys
cruell blowe of wares, hee is made beleeue
that they will falle out not aboue
twelue pound, or 20. marks at the most,
but when hee commethe to receiue the
nete money, ye merchant & broker being

agreed togeather, he is stabbed at the very
hart, paying somtimes twenty poūd,
nay shal I say thirty pound, I would it
had been noe more with some, a wicked
and a most horrible cruel dealinge: and
once in for a hundred pound, he can neuer
come out cleare againe, til hauynge
mortgaged his landes, (whiche is ye next
parte to be played and practised) hee bee
forced in the ende, to sell the same oute
right. And so betwene the merchaunt &
the broaker, the poore gentleman is
caught in the Cony clapper, to liue with
the losse of thirty pound in the hundred
at the least. And yet if there were plaine
dealyng, in the matter, it were the more
sauourye: but the merchaunt is agreed
with the broaker, to buy his own wares
agayne, and to paye 70.l. for that which
the gentleman must paye him a hūdred
pound for, at the yeres ende. Is not this
vsury? is it not vsurye thynke you, in ye
deuils name? Now surely vnhappye is
hee that dealeth with such diuelish merchaunts
or others whatsoeuer, for of all
cutthrotes in the world, these are the absolute

horrible, and most detestable mō
               sters
that liue. And god kepe all playne
and true dealing men from the dangers
of all suche false and craftie hipocriticall
harlottes, and greedye cormorantes in
a common weale. And yet these fellows
that thus doe, carie the countenance, as
though they were as honest men as the
honestist, and are not ashamed to looke
an honest man in the face, neyther yet
to take office vpon them, because theye
florishe with the goods of thys worlde,
and are wealthye: whereas if theye had
their due merite, they should bee exalted
for their worthines, to hang on the gallowes,
rather then to bee thought meete
of estimation, or to beare office as some
of them doe, in anye good gouerned cō
               mon
weal. Thus master merchāt when
he hathe robbed the poore gentleman, &
furnisht him in this maner to get a litle
apparel vpō his back, girdeth hym with
this frompe in the taile. Lo sayethe hee,
yonder goeth a very strong stowt gentleman,
for he cariethe vpon his backe,
a faire manour, land and all, and maye

therefore wel be standerd bearer to any
prince christian or heathen. Alack what
handling is this? Is here mercye, charitie,
or loue, is this merchantly dealing?
would these merchaunts bee so vsed, as
they vse others? doe they as they would,
be done vnto? These be marmaides, not
merchants, singing sweetely to confusion.
Merchants I saye, that make armony
for the deuill, no better, nor more to
bee esteemed, then ribaldes & common
bawdes, that put forthe yong gyrles to
sale, and make merchaundises of them,
to wynne treasure to theire purses. As
Archidiaconus saieth. An other hath a patente
of fortye pounde by the yeare, and
commeth in time of hys great neede, to
borowe a hundred pounde for the yere,
making a bargaine and sale wyth thys
condicion, if he doe not repaye the same
100.l. within the yere, that then the said
patente shalbe forfeyted for euer: and if
the patentee doe dye within the yere, thē
the merchant to haue his owne moneye
agayne, and so muche of the patent as
was in time runne out, and very strong

bondes and suerties offered therefore.
            The merchaunt seeing the necessitye of
the poore gentleman, will not deale excepte
he may haue the whole yeres profit
of the patente assured vnto him, whether
the patentee die or liue: and farther
couenaunteth that the patentee shal not
within the yeare offer to paye the pryncipall,
to saue anye parte of the annuitie
for that yeare, and to haue it fiue yeres
together, for none payment of the princypall,
and so hee is content, otherwise
hee will not deale. The poore compelled
gentleman beeinge dryuen to thys
necessitie, either for the better aduauncing
him self to serue his prince & countrey,
aswel abroade as at home, & called
perhaps thereunto, or otherwise, for his
necessary affairs at home, to saue hī self
frō presēt misery, yeldeth wholy to thys
cruel contract, & vnmerciful bargayne:
And so hauing done in deede his seruice
abrode, for benefit of ye realm, & welfare
of y• merchāts chiefly, returneth after ye
yeare paste, about one moneth or somewhat
more, at what time offeringe to

paye the principall, and so to be ridde of
thys bytinge vsurie, had muche a doe to
haue that moneth forgeuen vnto hym,
notwithstanding his absence oute of the
land, in the necessarie affaires of ye merchants
them selues, as wel for the safety
of their liues and liberties, as for theire
proper goods and merchandises. A man
woulde haue thought that forty pounde
gayne, had been sufficient for one yeare
and a moneth, for the lone of a hundred
pound. These dealings I do assure you,
are not to be liked, tendyng to the vtter
discreditinge of merchants wholye: for
besides that they are bytynge, they are
vncharitable, vnmercifull, and altogether
wicked, stretching to the vtter destruction
not onelye of whole families,
but also of good common weales.
            I come to an other man, and borrowe
forty pound of him for three monethes,
and do promise to geue his wife a gown
of satine, or an amblyng gelding for his
or her ridinge, without any expresse couenaunt
in writing, this is playne vsury,
although for his lendyng, hee dothe

not receiue anye thinge that is paide by
number, weight or measure. Yet forasmuche
as he receiueth a value aboue the
principall, he is an vsurer.
            I bynde my land woorth twenty pound
by yere to a man for a hundred pounde
in money for a yeare, and doe not passe
it by bargayne and sale: If the creditour
doe take the reuenues of the land at the
yeares ende and his pryncipal, he is an
vsurer.
            Bee it that a man lendethe an hundred
pound freelye, and hopeth assuredlye to
haue some thankfull recompence at the
yeres ende, because he is a man able to
doe him good dyuers wayes, wythoute
which hope he would not haue lent his
money: vndoubtedlye ye same man is an
vsurer before god, and thys is called
Mentalis vsura, an vsurie of the mynde,
when one hopeth for gayne although no
contracte be made.
            What if one lend money in hope to get
an office, assuredlye the same man is an
vsurer?
            What if one lende a man moneye for a

certaine time, because the same manne
should speke a good word for him, or do
hym a certayne pleasure, it is a ruled
case, that for asmuche as a couenaunt is
past, it is vsurie.
            I do lend you 100.l. that you shal doe asmuch
for me, when I shal demaund it of
you: this is vsurye, because a contract is
simply made, without anye addicion of
time appoynted, whereas if I had asked
so much at the yeres end, then it had ben
no vsurye, but permutacion, when one
good turne of lyke value is done for an
other, and the time knowen certeinly.
            A lorde dothe lende hys tenauntes money,
wyth thys condicion, that they shal
ploughe hys lande, whether dothe hee
commyt vsurye or noe? I doe aunswer,
that yf hee doe not paye them for theire
labour, but wil take the benefit of their
labour, for the vse of his money, hee is
an vsurer.
            I woulde borowe, and one sellethe vnto
me wares, for more then they be worth,
(by the halfe) hee is an vsurer that so
selleth.
            
               
I doe bargayne with a man for sixe monethes,
and deale as straitlye with hym
as I can for hys wares: when the bargayne
is done, I doe offer hym his money
presently, so that he will deducte after
ten pound in the hundred pound for
sixe monethes. I am an vsurer in so doynge.
            I do buy tymber, bricke, or stone, of a
man to delyuer the same at suche a time
and place, and to pay hym for the same,
I doe borrowe so muche vppon vsury.
Whether shal the saide man not deliuerynge
my stuffe at my tyme and place
appoynted, paye mee the saide vsurie or
noe? I doe aunswer, that he is bound to
pay it in good right.
            The father in lawe, doth lend his sonne
in law a sume of money & taketh ī pawn
the possessions of the dower, & cōuerteth
the fruites therof to hym self, for ye lone
of money, the father in law is an vsurer.
And yet yf the sonne do passe with him
by bargayne and sale, he may lawefullye
tourne the frute to hys profyte, yf
there bee noe colourable dealynge in

this behalfe, in fraudem vsurarum.
            
            He that buieth before hand, corne, wine
or oyle so good cheape as hee is sure not
to bee a loser, but a great gayner, at the
tyme of the haruest or vintage, the same
man is an vsurer.
            I doe lende a hundred pound to my frēd
for ten yeares freely, not to pay any peny
gayne all that tyme, yf eyther of vs
do dye, but if we both liue togeather tyl
that tyme, then hee to paye me after 12. l.
in the hundred for these ten yeres paste,
whether am I an vsurer or no? The law
sayeth I am an vsurer, and the reasō is:
that the perill whiche may happen, doth
not excuse me from sinne, when I take
more then I ought to doe, for cause of
time not proper.
            A merchant lendeth to a corporation or
company a hundred pound, whiche corporation
hath by statute a graunt, that
whosoeuer lendeth such a summe of money,
and hath a childe of one yere, shall
haue for his childe, if the same childe do
liue till hee be full fifteene yeres of age,
500.l. in moneye, but if the childe dye

before that tyme, the father to lose hys
principall for euer, whether is thys merchant
an vsurer or no? The lawe saieth,
if I lende purposlie for gaine, notwithstandinge
the perill or hazard, I am an
vsurer.
            I knowe an honest artificer, oweth to
a draper forty poūdes, to be payd after
sixe moneths, I come to the draper, and
shewe hym, yf hee will take thirty poundes
in hand, I will paye so muche for ye
artificer, yf hee will turne the debte to
mee: Herein I am an vsurer, because I
doe buye tyme, in seeking to anticipate
the payment of an other mans good
debte, for myne own pryuate gayne.
            One buyeth a paye, of three or fowre
hundreth poundes, deliuering fifteene
shillings for euery twenty shillinges,
wheras the paye is like to bee certayne
at the daye, as aboute three monethes
hence: some thinke because a bargayne
and sale ys past, there cannot bee anye
vsury, for where no lending is, there is
no vsury, but here is a lending, in dede
cloked, vnder the colour of buiyng, and

so hee is an vsurer, because hee onelye
lent the souldiours their mony for hope
of gayne.
            I doe buy a mans bille of 100. pounds,
t
                  •
               ue three monethes hence, and geue vnto
hym in present money 95. li. here allthough
a bargayne, and sale seeme in
shewe, yet it is a lēding, and so the partie
an vsurer that payeth the mony.
            I do make a bargayne, to haue of certayn
poore men, or riche men, after iiij.
monethes, so many kyne and oxen, for
so muche mony payd to them in hande.
Whereas I doe knowe, that at my bargayne
makyng, they haue neither cowe
nor oxe. Herein I am an vsurer, yf I demaund
oxen or kyne, aboue the ordinarie
price, that they are wōte to be bought
and solde for.
            I do buy certayne geldynges, to haue
them deliuered at a certayne fayre, for
lesse thē they were worth at y• bargayne
makyng, I am therein an vsurer, yf I
were sure those geldīgs would be more
woorth, at the tyme of theyr deliuering.
            I do deliuer olde wheate, to receyue

newe: yf I do deliuer ye same for gayne,

                  •
               assuring my selfe of benefite, I am an
vsurer. I doe feare ye fall of mony, and
therfore, doe deliuer my mony to an other
man, to haue asmuche at 6. mōthes
after, according as ye mony was thē currāt
whē I payd it: It is vsury, for yt, ther
is more to be payd, then was receaued.
            A corporacion taketh 100. li. of a mā, to
geue him eight in the 100. li. during hys
lyfe, wtout restituciō of the principall. It
is no vsury, for yt here is no lēding, but
a sale for euer of so muche rente, for so
much mony. Likewyse it is, if a priuate
man haue a thowsand poūdes, liynge
by him, & demaundeth for his life, & hys
wyfes lyfe a 100. li. by ye yere, & neuer to
demaūd ye principall. It is a bargaine of
sale, & no vsury, for ye the prīcipal is not
to bee restored agayn at any tyme. And
therfore no lending can be presupposed.
            In Uenyce, Florēce, & Genua, diuers
heretofore haue had pēsions, some for euer,
some for lyues, for somes of mony
disbursed to the benefite of theire Citie:
In all whiche cases, there is no vsurye,

& yf any one buy their rightes or titles,
hee is no vsurer neyther.
            I seeke an office, whiche I cannot haue,
excepte I doe paye a certeyne some
of money: to auoyde thys paymente, I
doe lend, for two three or fower yeres a
grosse some, because I will not pay the
sayde moneye: In thys doynge is vsury.
            I do pawne an howse, with an orchard
for certayne mony, the creditour hath ye
benefyte of my ground and house: he ys
an vsurer, except hee wil restore the profites,
vppon repaymente of the principall.
            A gentleman, or lorde hath a manor
stocked, with thyrty mylche kyne, and
700. sheepe, valued at 300. markes, or
there about, as they are thē to be bought
and solde: Thys manour hee would let
out, with the stocke, for ten yeares, to receyue
the olde rent of hys manour, & 30.
poundes yerely beside, for his stocke, &
at the tenne yeres ende, eyther to haue
at hys owne choyce hys cattell, of like
goodnes and value, as hee did lett them

out, or els 200. pounds in money for the
cattell: the question is, whether there is
any vsury, in thys kynde of dealinge or
no? First, ther is a lending, because the
farmour hath propertie in the cattell,
and maye alter them, as hee list, for his
best auayle, paiyng hys yearely rente
for them, and restoring so good cattell,
at the tenne yeares ende, as hee before
receyued. Agayne, hee must aunswere
the cattell at the tenne yeares ende, and
paye rente yearelye for tenne yeares,
although the cattell dye all, the very
firste yeare: so that I thinke, thys lorde
or gentleman, that thus seketh hys certayne
gayne, and principall, to bee safelye
retourned vnto hym, is an vsurer
colorably, to the hurte and vndoynge
many tymes of poore farmours. Yet
some saye, that here is locatio, whiche ys
a letting to hyre, and therefore no vsury.
As yf a man should let out his howse
for tenne yeres to haue hys howse agayne,
or hys horse for a seuen nyghte,
to haue hys sayde horse agayne, with
profite, but I am not of that mynde, for

when a thing is lett out, the tenaunt for
the tyme can not alter the property, and
geue an other thing of like value, but he
must returne the same agayne, in the
same goodnes, as hee did receiue it, bee
it eyther house, horse, or any other thing
else. And therefore I saye, thys is vsurie,
because the principal (the losse wherof,
was at the bourowers perill) muste
alwayes bee restored wholly, with a certen
ouerplus and gayne, for the tyme
that it is forborne. And then, if thys bee
true, what saye these gyld halles, these
colleges, these abbotes in tymes paste,
and these bishoppes also, that haue lett
out Lordshippes, with the stocke, for a
yerelye gayne, in suche sorte as I haue
before declared? God bee mercifull vnto
vs: the deuill teacheth the woorld many
wayes, for men to come the sooner
to hym.
            And other tricke I haue to shewe,
whyche is verye straunge: for by thys
newe deuised practise, men will not,
for any thinge seme to be euill, and yet
they wilbee euill in deede, and lyue as

wickedlye as any other, and thus it is.
A Northren gentleman of good welth,
cometh to London, with 1000. li. in hys
purse, & would fayne encrease hys money,
but hee woulde not be knowne for
any thing, to be an vsurer, because he is
a gospeller in shewe, and would not for
hys good wil be takē otherwise, during
thys good tyme. And what doth thys
man? He commeth to a broker, & sayeth,
that one John Clarke hath ready mony
in good store, and woulde put it out for
gayne, yf hee coulde fynde a good man:
Mary sayeth the gentleman, the partye
will not lend to anye bodye, except I be
bound my selfe for his safe receiuing agayne
of hys mony. And thus ye gentleman
is boūd, to hys nyckenamed man,
for hys own mony, who hereupō requireth
(for the more coloring of the matter)
bondes of the borower, to saue hym
selfe harmeles, against thys counterfet
John Clarke. The Broaker bringeth
good men, & good assurance, to saue the
gentlemā harmeles, and thē ye gētlemā
cōmeth to the scriuener & willeth one of

hys men, to take ye name of John Clark
vpon hym, and causeth the wrytynges
to be made in John Clarkes name, and
the money to be repaide, at the sayd scriueners
house, at sixe moneths, or twelue
moneths, as they can agree, after twenty
poundes in the hundreth, and that in
the presence of the sayde gentleman, or
hys attorney in that behalfe appointed.
Here is a tryme fetche, to mocke god, &
the Exchecker with all, if it were possible:
but god is not mocked, howsoeuer
thexchequer is abused: but such cunning
dealinges, in the ende will haue shame
ynough, of suche theire counterfeyt doynges,
and dye in hell fyer at the laste.
            But will you see an other fetche, and
not by the name of John Clarke, but by
one y• in lawe can do nothing? A gētelman,
a lawier, a merchaunt, a yeoman,
or what shoulde I call hym, holdethe of
my ladie, and therefore will not bee
one of these wyse worldly men himself,
but is contented, that my mystres hys
wyfe, shall go to the deuyll, if shee lyste.
And therfore geeueth her leaue, to put

out hys money, in a straungers name,
sometymes more, and sometymes lesse.
And be it neuer so lyttle that is lēt, and
ye partie neuer so poore that boroweth,
yet shall it not go foorth, with her good
will, but with the retorne, many tymes
of ye shillinge peny for a moneth, which
is one hundred for an other by the yere.
Merciful god, who would haue thought
that ye deuill could haue had such power
in a woman: nay, who would not haue
thought it, considering their myserable
and gredie desyres to gett, their aptnes
to supersticion, their greatnes of pryde,
theire lousenes of lyfe, and theire ambicious
desires, without all reason to haue
all souerayntie. God amēde all woomen,
and forgeeue all men, and graunt
that both man and woman, maye agree
alwayes in one harte and mynde, to
feare god, and to lyue vpryghtely, after
the expresse decree of hys holy will, wt
               out
such diuelish, and vnmercifull dealinges.
Excepted alwaies, in all this my
speache against women, all good woomen:
and yet they maye bee spared, for

they all, are very fewe in deede, & maye
bee easely packed vp, al the whole packe
of them, in a very small rowme. What
shyftes are not vsed, for men to goe
streight to the deuill? Thys one I will
tell you, and no more, and yet I feare
me, I haue tolde ouer manye, for some
will learne to bee naught, by the onely
hearing of these sleightes, and therfore
ignorance in euill thynges, is alwayes
good, but the deuill will teache them
euery hower, although I sayde neuer a
woorde.
            A merchant, or an other man, woulde
fayne goe for an honeste man, and yet
woulde needes bee nought in deede, &
therfore, when one commeth, to borow
mony of him, and offreth to paye for it:
mary fye vppon vsury, sayeth hee, but
thys will I saye to you, sayeth the merchaunte:
I haue lent twoo hundreth
poūde to a frende of myne, for a twelue
monethes, and there is not past three
monethes gone, yf hee will lende you ye
same mony frely, I will bee contented,
& I promyse you, I will speake to him,

but I will not take a peny of you. The
party, who is sayde to haue borowed
thys money, hath not borowed one penye,
but setteth countenaunce vppō the
matter, although hee had receaued the
sayde summe, and therfore▪ wil not forbeare
the mony, for the rest of the time,
without cōsideracion, and so the poore
gentelman, shall paye for yt, bee he wel
assured. Here is a tricke, that none wold
teache but the deuill hymselfe, who ys a
longe practysed master, for suche cunnynge
mischiefes. But here an ende, &
now to thexchange.
         
         
            ¶Thexchange, and what it is,
            THexchange, according to the firste
institucion thereof, is very good, &
most necessary, without further talke, if
they bee honeste and good themselues,
that vse it. And as the trade is very needefull,
and the best waye to maynteyne
entercourse betwene merchāt and merchant,
country and country: so is the
playne & opē dealing therein, hyghly to

bee e
                  •
               temed, suche as none can iustlye
mislike, or in any poynte dysprayse.
            The name of Exchange, called in Latine
Cambium, is an auncient and propre
woorde for thys purpose, and doth
in maner importe none other thynge,
then to barter, or change one thing for
an other. In Greeke, ye occupier or minister
thereof, is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that
is to saye, a banker or a keeper of table
and borde, where money is ready for
all persons, that will haue bullion or coine
chaūged, or mony transported. And
in olde time, it was not lawful for any
other man to exercise eyther chaunge, or
exchaunge, but onely the sayde banker,
so admitted by publique aucthoritie.
Some will haue thys worde Cambium,
to signyfie, Collibos, which is a certayne
subtraction, or deduction, that the bankers
and exchāgers make, in the name
of reward for theyr paynes, or els, as it
were a recompence, for the damage and
losse they receue by the money, whiche
they deliuer by exchaunge, being more
profitable for them, to retayne and kepe

it still, considering the variety of mony
and coyne betwen countries. And thys
deduction, was properlye so called, in
some mens opinion, when there is an alteracion
of place in thexchange, frō one
countrie to an other. Whiche kynde of
dealinge, is iust, lawfull, and agreable
to reason and conscience, aswell by the
iudgement of all merchauntes, as in ye
opinion of the best learned lawiers that
euer haue been:Bald. in reg. de consti. pec. & l. 3. ff. de exercit. ibid. Sali. et. Imol. cons. 60. in 2. volum. especially, when the
banckers and exchaungers, doe not excede
in takynge, but are contented with
an ordinarye and competent kynde of
rewarde, confirmed by custome, and allowed
by publique aucthoritie, for keepinge
theire bankes, lending their credite
and mony, to pleasure men withall
at theire neede, and to saue themselues,
from damage and losse. And yf suche
merchauntes and exchaungers, were
not, to helpe men that trauell countries,
how should trauailers do, namely
scholers and studientes, if they had not
theire billes of credite, and thexchange
readie for their most safety, and 
                  •
               ase of

cariage, or how could any man deale betwixt
coūtry & country, to haue hys turne
serued for great masses of mony, yf
such exchaūge were not? As for exāple.
Some great merchaunt, or some other
priuate mā, is forced of necessitye, to make
a present paymēt of 3. or 4. thousand
poūds, in a forrayne countrie, or rather
some prince: vpō ocasiō, for ye atcheuing
of his necessary exploits, in some straū
               ge
and forrayne realme, hath neede of
100000. poundes, how should eyther the
one or the other be furnished and serued
in thys behalfe by any meanes, so well,
as by the waye of exchaunge?
            First the cariage of money, eyther by
sea or lande, were troublesome and dangerouse,
the charges and costes great.
Agayn, what coyne or money might be
prouided that is currante, and starlyng
in al countries. And therfore al such exchange
is necessary, and woorthy to bee
mainteyned, and cherished, if wee will
haue trafique & societie to bee continued
betwixt al sortes of men and countries.
Neyther can this maner of exchaunge

come wtin the cōpasse of vsury, because
there is no lending for gaine, wtout the
which, no vsury can be cōmitted, & it is
ꝓued thus. First, thexchāger or bācker
geeueth out hys billes of credite or exchāge
frely, wtout takīg any couenāted
gaine, more thē is for his indēnite, & perill
of hazard, for such a some, as is agreed
vpō. And perauēture wtout receiuīge
any pēny of ye principall, he geeueth his
billes, till they be payd in ye place appointed,
bearing together wt his lēding, ye aduēture
& perill of hys mony. Whereas
in lēdīg for vsury, it is cōtrary, for ther
ye borower geueth a good assurāce befor
hād, & abideth al ye hazard & perill, yt may
happē, ye creditour susteining no aduenture
or damage at all. Again, in lending
mony by vsury, ye creditour will receiue
the selfe same kynde of mony agayne,
which he deliuered, wheras here in this
exchaūge, ye hāker deliuereth one sort of
moneye & coyne, & is payd agayn wt an
other kinde of mony. Moreouer y• maner
of cōtract is contrary, being like to
buiyng or selling, or els to that contract

which is called contractus innominatus, y•
is to saye. I doe gyue you, vpō cōdiciō, y•
you doe geue me, as for example. I will
geue you at Lōdon, 100. li. of lawful mony
of Englād, so yt ye will deliuer and
paye me at Venice, ye value of y• same in
duckets of Uenice, accordīg to their iust
valuaciō & price. But now, for so muche
as we be in hāde wt mony, I will shewe
y• necessity of mony, & how it is to bee vsed
for y• value, betwixt coūtry & coūtry,
according to ye stādearde, euen in ye price
& sale of ware. And certes money is the
square & rule, wherby all other thinges
should receaue estimaciō & price. And as
Aristotle sayeth. It is ye suerty for mens
dealings: & wtout money no mā doubtlesse
could tel how to trade or bargaine,
for it were impossible alwayes, to geue
ware for ware, or for one to supplie an
others wante, with enterchāgeable deliuering
one stuffe or chaffer for an other.
As if one had clothes, & wanted lether,
to sende hys clothes, to hym that
had lether: or wanting lynen, and had
wollen, woulde sende hys wollen to

haue linnen, or hauing flesh, would ask
bread for it in exchaunge. These things
were straunge, and I saye vnpossible to
be brought to passe: because it may hap
that the thinge I haue in plentye, and
woulde sende for the exchaunge of my
want, an other maye haue the same aswell
as I, and hee want that whiche I
woulde haue. And therfore money was
first deuised to be coyned, of the fynest &
purest mettals, to be the measure wherby
the price of all thinges might bee set,
and to mayntayne a certayne euenhode
or equality in buying and selling, and ye
same to haue his standinge valuation,
only by publique aucthoritie: to the end,
that all things mighte equallye passe by
trade, from one mā to an other. Agayn,
money is vsed for ye passing of exchange
betwene partie and party, countreye &
countrey, as I haue said before, and wil
say more hereafter.
            Thirdlye, money is vsed as a chatell, or
a moueable possession, and to be solde by
the wayght, after so much the ounce, as
commonly all kinde of coyne is solde at

smythes stalles, whiche seemethe to bee
contrary to the natural institucion, and
first inuencion thereof: because it is no
ware or merchandise, and therfore not
to bee prysed aboue hys publique estimacion,
excepte it bee solde as bullion, and
not as currant money or coyne.
            And nowe, woulde god our merchants
that professe trade and exchaunge, were
so skilfull in their calling as they ought
in al good right to be. For surely the ignorance
of them, bringethe kingdomes
and states manye times to great ruyne.
For if they wil be exchangers in deede,
they muste knowe perfitely the value of
our coyne, and compare the same wyth
other foreine moneye. And as they bargayne
with others abrode, so they must
be assured to haue somewhat more then
the value of our curraunt moneye, for
thinges whiche they sell vpon a price, or
els the realme and they bothe shall lose
in the ende. As for example. One buyeth
clothe in Blacwel hall, for. iiij. l. x.s. in
Angels, which holde .xxxvi. carrets fine,
saue three graines of alley, or eighteene
ounces fine siluer. The same cloth to be

solde in Spayne, is to be rated at so many
duckets as hold .xxxvi. carets of fine
golde, saue three graynes of alley, or at
so manye royals of plate, as holde .xviij.
ounces of fine siluer, after twoe carrets
of fine golde to euery ounce of fyne siluer.
And in making sale of thys cloth, it
is wisedome to take so muche ouer & aboue
these carrettes or ounces, as bothe
may beare a mans charges, and bring a
reasonable gayn. And so in al other coū
               tries,
and for euerye prynces coine, the
valuacion of oure commodities shoulde
be made after the like rate, with a reasonable
ouerplus to lyue and gayne by.
And in thexchaunge of coynes, yf oure
men woulde obserue and compare eight
carrettes of fine golde, or fower ounces
of fine siluer for ye pound starlyng here,
with the forein coin beyond seas, eyther
duckets or Philips Caisars, or ani other
straunge coyne, and euer bee well assured
to take sowhat ouer. After this proporcion
and balance once made, Englishmen
no doubt would be Lords of yt
coin in al places, wher they had to deale.

This is by the waye of a glaunce to my
masters the merchants. But now to my
purposed diuision of y• bākers art & their
profession. Thexchaunge is saide to bee
deuided into two kyndes.
            1 The firste wherof is called exchange
real, or thexchāge made to yt last minut.
            2 The second is thexchange by billes,
whiche is after twoe sortes. But first for
thexchaunge reall, you shal vnderstand
yt then it is vsed, when the banker or exchaunger
receiueth money of any persō
in one coyn, to delyuer vnto hī straight
wayes money of an other coyne. As for
siluer, golde: for shillinges, groates: for
groates, pence: for pence, halfe pence:
whiche is called exchaunge to the laste
minut. Or els when bullion is deliuered
for currant money, or when one taketh
vpon him to deliuer coyne, in one country,
to receiue coin of an other straunge
countrie, accordinge to iuste & publique
valuacion equallie of such bullion coin,
or money whatsoeuer, which maner of
exchaunge is nowe quite out of vse.
            Exchange by billes after the first sort, is

when money is deliuered in one countrey
plainly and simply, without colour
or fraud, and billes deliuered and receiued
for the payment againe of the same,
in an other countrey, accordinge as money
is currant, by merchants valuation
betweene those countreis. And this kind
of exchaunge maye properlye bee called
merchandizing exchange, because merchantes
doe onely themselues, sette and
appoint the prices and values of money
to exchaunged. And therfore, when any
man will deliuer in London to any merchant
a summe of lawful money of England,
to receiue in an other forein countrey,
somuch in value as the said sume of
English money shallbe esteemed to bee
worth, by merchauntes valuation after
theire exchaunge from London, in the
money of that countrey, where the partie
which deliuered the money wil haue
it payde againe: there must be first a cō
               posicion
and compacte made, for the value
of the money, and a certain distance
of time agreed vppon, and limitted for
the payment agayn of the saide money,

in a foreine countrey where ye deliuerer
or the borower of the money, wyll haue
it restored and payde agayne. For the
better vnderstandynge and meanynge
hereof▪ thus I saye. A certain man doth
borow here in London of a merchaunt,
a hundred pounde Englishe, to paye the
value thereof againe at Antwarpe, according
as thengshe moneye is currant
and valued by merchaunts in theire exchaunge,
from London to Antwarpe.
Here it is requisite, that the borower do
resorte, and haue accesse to suche as bee
brokers and solicitours betweene party
and partie, for makynge of thexchange,
of whom hee shal learne what thenglish
pound is worth and esteemed from Lō
               don
to Antwarpe in Flemyshe currant
moneye, for what soeuer dystaunce of
tyme, he wil take it vppe. Now graunt
that the Englishe pounde, thus exchanged
from London to bee payde in Antwarpe
at sight, that is, so soone as the
billes of exchaunge shalbe presented at
Antwarp: is esteemed & valued at fower
and twēty shillings Flemyshe, so shall

there be payde in Antwarpe, after thys
reconing and pryce of fower and twenty
.s. Flemyshe for the English pounde,
the somme of a hundred & twenty, poūd
Flemishe, for thenglishe hundred poūd
deliuered at London. And vpon this cō
               pacte
and agreement so concluded, the
money is paide at London, and billes of
exchaunge receiued, for repayment and
satisfaction of y• same again at Antwarp
Now the party comming to Antwarp,
or els sēding his letters of aduise to som
frende of his, willing him to paye 120.l.
Flemish, so soone as his bill for paimēt
thereof shalbe presented vnto him, praying
hym also, for the furnishing therof,
to take it vppe there again by exchange
at sight, and to giue his billes vpon him
to paye the valour thereof at London in
English money: here yt party inquiring
how thexchange at sight passeth frō Antwarp
to Lōdō, fīdeth not aboue 23. s. ix.d
or .x.d. fle
                  •
               ī to pai for a poūd of English
money at Londō. After yt which rate taking
vp so much Fle
                  •
               ī moneye at Antwarp,
as wil pay & satisfie the 120.l. fle
                  •
               ī
               
and so geuing his billes of exchange vppon
his frende at London, his frynde
must paye at the sight thereof, within a
little more or lesse, 101.l. fiue shillings, or
100.l. sixteene shillings eight pence lawful
moneye of Englande, for the value
thereof, paide for him in Flemishe money
at Antwarp. After the whych reconyng
there is loste for the vse of a hundred
pound, for yt spare, not much aboue
twelue or foreteene dayes cōmonly, for
in that space of time, chaunge and rechange
vpō sight may be made betwene
Antwarpe and London) the summe of
sixteene, or fiue & twenty shillings, lawfull
money of Englande, or therabouts
for the hūdreth. Thus the world goeth,
and this is their kinde of exchange. And
now let vs examine whether this bee vsurie
or not. All learned men doe determine
and consent, that vsurie is cōmitted
onely, where lending and borowing
is, and that when anye ouerplus or excesse
is taken, ouer and aboue the pryncipal
that was lent for the verye respect
only of lending, & in consideratiō of forberīg

money for time, in y• 
               
                  •
               ase is vsury.
First it appeareth in this first sort of exchange
by billes, that there was payd at
London, one hundred pound onely, and
no more of good and lawfull money of
England to receiue by exchāge at sight
in Antwarpe, fower and xx. s. Flemishe
for thenglishe pounde, whyche was so
perfourmed and payde by the taking vp
againe of the same money, to be rechanged
back againe at sight, to London. So
that there was payde to the partye that
first l
                  •
               
               ̄t the moneye, about the summe of
a hundred pound sixtene shillings eight
pence or a 101.l. fiue shillinges lawefull
moneye of Englande. Whiche is an encrease
or gayne growynge to the lender
of his money, to ye value of sixteene shillings
and odde moneye, or of twentye
shillings and odde money, onely for the
tarying and forbearinge of his moneye
twelue or foreteene daies. Whiche ouer
gayning, and excessiue takynge in thys
sort, is in my opinion, most biting vsurie.
And yet is thys kynde of exchange,
moste commonlye vsed at this daye amongst

all the merchants of Europe, &
had in great estimacion, and commended,
as a thinge moste necessarie and a
very ready mean to serue mens turnes
with all, at all times, when theye neede.
And yet in deede it is an extreme vsury,
yea, and suche a Moth, as he that vseth
it, will sooner bee consumed that waye,
then by anye meanes els in the worlde,
especially by the rechaunge backwarde,
whiche is euer hurtful, costly, and very
chargeable.
            The seconde kynde of billes or merchā
               dising
exchaunge, maye bee called se
                  •
               ke
and drye exchange, and is practised whē
one doth borrowe money by exchaunge
for a strange Region, at longer or shorter
distaunce of time, to serue his turne
the rather thereby, not myndynge to
make anye reall payment abroade, but
compoundeth with thexchanger to haue
it returned backe agayne, accordyng as
thexchaunge shall passe from thence to
London, for suche distaunce of time as
they were agreed vpō. And yet to colour
this matter, there shall billes of exchāge

be deuised, & sent to some of his frendes
that lent the money by exchaunge, with
letters of aduise, to return the byls back
againe, and a testimoniall howe the exchaunge
commeth from thence, at suche
dystaunce of time, as he aduertised him
of, by his letters. Which retourninge of
billes by testimoniall, doth euer cost the
partye that dealeth with this sorte of exchaunge,
after the rate of sixteene and
twenty in the hundred for the yere. And
oftentimes, such alteracion of exchange
may chance by scarcitie, or aboundance
of money (whereof the banker will take
aduauntage) that it standeth ye borower
sometime aboue fiue and twenty or thirty
in the hundred pound for ye yere. And
bylles by this kynde of exchaunge are
made on gods name, for a colour onelie
to get the parties hand to them, to shew
(if neede be) that suche moneye so lente,
was taken vp for him by exchaunge, the
said billes being neuer sent out of London:
to thende that the party who vseth
his money in this sort, may haue his reconing
geeuen him to paye as the rate &

course of thexchaunge: hathe paste al the
while hee hathe the vse of that moneye,
which shall falle out noe lesse then after
the losse of twenty in the hundred poūd
for the yere: or perhaps (as the drye frostie
charitie of the lender, shalbe moued)
after xxv. or .xxx. in the hundred pound,
because the tasking, and limitting therof
resteth altogether in the bankers hād.
Thys drye kynde of exchange is vtterlye
to bee abhorred, for that it is none other
then a manifest cankered vsurye,
and therefore hath been heretofore forbidden
by actes of parlyament: as may
appeare in the reigne of two noble princes
kyng Henry the seuenth, and kynge
Henry the eight, of most famous memory.
And yet al this notwithstanding, the
merchants wil say, that they commit no
vsurie, by suche kinde of dealinge, although
the lender by exchaunge bee alwayes
for the moste parte a verye great
gayner. And the reason is, the vncertainty
of gaine, and doubtfulnes of profite,
for that thorowe the alteracion of
thexchange, ye deliuerer or lender of money,

maye chaunce to susteyn losse somtimes:
and therfore this aduenture and
hazarde considered in the exchange they
say, there is no vsurie at all. But this is
no sownde reason of theires, but rather
a meere cloake, to colour theire conyng
deuises with al: because that in this seconde
kinde of exchaunge, thexchanger
or lender of moneye, is commonlye hys
owne bayly, and taxethe the borowers
losse, accordinge to his priuate commoditie
and gayne, who wylbe well assured
to be no loser, no more then hee that
putteth forthe his money vppon playne
vsurie, and bargayneth alwayes for present
gaine before hande. And althoughe
the banker perhappes bee not so fullye
assured of his gayne, as the vsurer commonlye
is: yet it is a hundreth to one, yt
by the course and order of thexchaunge
the deliuerer of money, shalbee no loser
in the end, but rather a gayner, because
the price of moneye by exchaunge from
London to Antwarpe, is euer dearer &
higher by three pence or fower pence in
the pound, then it is from thence to Lō
               don,

at whatsoeuer descrepance of time,
the exchaunge be made. And therefore ye
gayne thereby is in deede very certaine
to them, let them saye what theye list. I
graunt stil, that real exchange is honest
and lawfull, where money is deliuered
to be payde againe at sight, or at twoe
or three monethes, accordinge to ye iust
and publyque valuation of moneye, to
what Countreye soeuer thexchaunge ys
made. But this kynd of exchange pleaseth
not merchants, the same hauing no
such sauor of lucre and gayne, as the rechaunge,
and the drye exchaunge haue:
whiche twoe kindes of dealyng, are verye
hurtfull to al occupiers, and destroy
all trade, when suche often returnes are
made of money, eyther the one waye or
the other. And therefore the exchange in
these daies, is no other thing then a certaine
couetouse negotiacion, a greedye
kynde of choppinge, & a colourable maner
of chaunginge, or rather a certayne
deuise of buying and sellynge of coyne
and money, by waye of commutacion &
exchaunge, which maye aptely be called

merchādising exchāge, as I haue declared
before, ye same beīg foūd out by chāce
& fortune, & at length by experiēce reduced
into such an arte, as is altogether against
nature. For y• occupiers thereof
doe geeue and sell moneye for moneye,
whiche was not inuented and ordeyned
to that ende, that eyther it should price it
selfe, by it selfe, or bee valued & estemed
by waye of merchaundise, but that al other
thinges shoulde receiue their prices
and value of it. And the valuation of money
to proceede, and haue alwaies estymacyon
from publique authoritie, and
the same to be perpetual and vnchangeable,
according to a knowne standarde.
Wheras the merchant exchaunger sellethe
as it were, the valuation and rate
of moneye, makynge at all times, what
price he listeth: wherin he transgresseth
publique order, against al equitie & common
iustice, practising vnder the colour
of exchaunge and rechange all the myschiefe
that vsurers can deuise. And for
the closer & more secrete handeling of
the same, the exchāgers haue imagined

certeine distinctions of time, to bleare &
stoppe mens eies from spying their pretensed
vsuries, & counterfeyt dealings.
For when a man wyll borowe moneye
by bill of exchaunge, he is asked and demaunded,
whether hee wyll haue it at
sight, vsaunce, or double vsaunce? which
three varieties of time, bee the three disstances,
chiefly vsed amongst merchāts,
and exchaungers now a daies, although
there be manye other. And then if from
London money go by exchange at sight
for Antwarp, for xxiiij. s. thēglish poūd,
it shal go at vsance, which is a moneths
time, at xxiiij. s iiij.d. and at double vsance,
which is ij. moneths time, at xxiiij
s. viij.d. oftentimes at more, but seldom
times at lesse. So that for the forbearing
of a hundred 
                  •
               . pound for one moneth,
there is gotten fiue nobles, and for the
forbearing of it two monethes, there is
gotten, three pound sixe shillings eight
pence. And therefore it were as good, at
the least it were al one thinge, to say to
him that will borowe moneye by thys
exchaunge: sir, ye shall geeue mee for a

monethes forbearing of a hūdreth poū
               des,
three and thyrtye shillinges and
fower pence, and for twoo monethes,
three poundes sixe shillinges and eighte
pence starlinge. And yf a hundreth
poundes bee taken for sighte, whiche is
commonlye not passing fower or fiue
dayes respicte, betwixt London & Antwarpe,
there is likewise gaine reaped,
more or lesse, or els men will not deale.
All whiche considered, whoe can excuse
this kinde of trade from vsurie? because
the bāker, or deliuerse of mony, maketh
hys gayne before hande: setting seueral
prices vpon hys moneye deliuered for
euery distance of time. And so receiueth
more againe, then hee firste disbursed,
onely for lending of it, and for the delaye
of tyme, in forbearing hys money:
making other mens necessities, to serue
hys greedie couetousnes, coloured with
these straunge, and vnwonted termes
of diuersities of tymes. Wherein ye ignorant
and vnskilfull of thys kynde of trafique,
haue supposed some reasonable

cause, to lye hydden, for takynge suche
gayne and profite, as redoundeth to thē
by the said exchange. But in very dede,
there is no reasonable cause at all, but a
very flatt lending of mony, for luker &
gayne, as all vsurers cōmonly doe. And
therfore, I can not iudge, but both these
sortes of exchaunges, aswell exchaunge
by bylles, as seeke and drye exchaunge,
are the very practises of vsury, vnder yt
colour and tytle of exchaunge: wyshing
that no such cutting exchaunge, shoulde
bee vsed or borne withall, in anye well
gouerned and christian commō weale.
But yet, because merchauntes, whiche
haue an intercourse and trade of occupiynge,
betwene countrie and country,
many tymes, for the furthering of their
busines, or for the benefitinge of some
mans necessitie, seeme to haue neede of
exchange: it is not forbidden, but that
they maye vse reall exchange alwayes,
before specified, so the same bee doone
without fraude, for one to serue an others
turne, leauing that subtill inuencion

of three distances of tyme, bargayning,
as it were, for gredy gayne, and
gaping after profit vnlawfully, by letting
foorth theire money. And surelye
merchauntes should not lyue by gayne
of monye, but by gayne of wares, and
yet not sellynge tyme therein neyther:
but folowing a knowne lawfull trade,
for the maintenaunce of common society,
doynge as they would bee done vnto,
and helping one an other charitably
as neede shall iustly require, and tyme
gyue oportunitie. Thus if merchaunts
would deale plainely, and simply gayne
without seking further aduauntage,
and sellyng for tyme as they could presently,
it wer charitable, it were honorable,
it were profitable for al estates, yea
it would be the vniuersal benefite of Europe,
to shaduauncement of all welfare
& plenty. Wheras now, through theyre
vnmercifull dealings, in this theire biting
& cuttīg exchāge in respect of time,
they destroy many honest men, & vndoe
princes, that borowe mony of thē after

that sorte, & so bering all thinges at last
to vtter confusion. God open the eyes of
christian prynces, to redresse thys euill,
the onely inuencion of the deuill, to destroye
all charitie, that in right shoulde
bee vsed betwixt man and man.
            The yong kyng of Portugale, beeing
about 19. yeres olde, thys January last,
hauing had the absolut gouernement of
hys kyngdome, synce the fowerteene
yere of hys age, according to the cyuill
lawe, doth deale seuerely at thys tyme
against offendors, & especially againste
such as are hurtefull in theire trades to
the publique benefite of hys people.
            And whereas, amongst other gawles
of hys countrie, hys maiestie vnderstandeth
by some godly men, that ye exchange
in hys realme is muche abused, and
practised amongst merchants there, for
gredy gaine onely: hys hyghenes hath
forbidden by proclamacion, vpon great
paynes (as I am enformed) that no banker,
or other whatsoeuer hee bee, shall
geeue anye billes of exchaunge, for any

maner of gayne at all: no not so muche,
as to haue consideration, for the charge
of keeping theire bookes and cassiers.
But yf anye man bee disposed to geeue
hys billes of exchaunge for anye place,
or by anye maner of wayes, hee muste
geeue oute the same freely, without takyng
any one peny for hys paynes, takyng
onely value for value, and no penye
ouer at any hande. For yf he doe otherwise,
hee incurreth straight wayes
a great penalty: the weight whereof, he
shall feele, bee he well assured. For this
must I saye, that I haue not seene better
Justice doone, nor lawes better executed
in anye place in Christendome, then
in Portugal. God graunt Justice els
where in euery place, ye vsury amongst
other offenses, maye be at the last in no
place at all. And would god, that men
would ones leaue crafte, and vse playnnesse,
and gett wealth vnto them lawfully
as they oughte to doe, and in good
conscience. For suerly as men do now
lyue, especially in this matter of exchange,

they doe make the name of exchange,
to serue their wicked purposes, entermedling
in the righte of princes, for
theire owne gayne, beyng lordes of coyne,
to the great shame of all princes and
states. For wheras all kynges and gouernours,
should sett a certayne rate vpon
theire coyne, and no man so hardye
to ouerualue the same: these bankers,
these money men, and these merchants
doe sett what price they list of moneye,
and make it eyther of hyghe value, or
meane value as they please, for theire
owne singuler commoditie and priuate
gaine. A tyme was, when prynces only
did deale with the valuation of money,
and exchaunge of the same. As firste the
coyne was rated in al coūtries, at a certayne
value, by publique order and aucthoritye
from the prince and state. And
then none gayned, by any exchaunge of
monye: for the value beinge knowne,
none would geue more, yea none durst
geue more. And especially in England,
in the fiue and twentye of kynge Edwarde

the thirde capit. xij. Thexchange
was not vsed by anye subiecte, but by
the kynge onelye, vppon payne of forfeiture
of the money so exchanged. The
same lawe was likewise vsed in kynge
Rycharde the seconds dayes, and in the
thirde yeare of kynge Henrye the seuenth,
and then did all states florishe.
For the stranger bringing in hys wares
into thys realme, did firste paye his
custome, by hys ofte trafikynge, and
emploiynge the moneye that he receaued
here vpon the commodities of thys
lande: and so paiynge custome, departed
home to hys country agayne, without
cariyng anye money awaye at all
by exchange, excepte vpon great cause.
For if there were not sufficient commodities
here in wares, hee made hys exchange
then with the kynges officers,
and none others. So that it was knowen
certainely to the prince and officers,
what exchaunge hee made, and vppon
what cause. And then was no fraude vsed,
yea in those dayes, merchauntes

were beneficiall to the prince, profitable
to theire countrie, and wealthye to
themselues, with ofte trading, muche
barattinge, great changing, and speedy
sellynge of theire wares, with the
commoditie and chaffer of other countries.
Synce whyche tyme, the merchants
seyng great gayne before theire
eyes by thexchange, beganne to flatter
prynces, and made offer, to lend them
great summes of moneye vppon theire
neede, if they would suffer them, to vse
thexchange one with an other. And so
they entred into a fraternitye, to haue
the exchange, amongst themselues, and
agreed vppon fower standinge bankes,
to serue the pleasure of all princes.
That is to saye, at Antwarp, Lions, Uenice,
and Rome: who hauing in all these
places certayne priuileges graunted vnto
them, for theire securitie (for otherwise,
it were hyghe treason, to entermedle
with the valuacion of coynes, agaynste
the leaue of prynces) they
gaue newe valuacions to coyne, for

theire priuate gayne, callinge it permission
money, makynge a greater value
of the coyne, then it was in hys owne
nature, & by publike aucthoritie agreed
vppon: takynge occasion vppon discrepances
and distances of tyme, and place,
to make the money dearer or cheaper,
as they pleased amongst themselfes:
and that after three maner of wayes,
at sighte, at vsance, and double vsance,
as is sayde before. And from these
fower places, other cityes tooke example:
as London, Ciuil, Lisbone, Parys,
Roane, and Bridges, and vsed the same
permission exchange, as the other
fower standing bankes did. And thys
is strange, to see a diuersitie of paymēt
from one place to an other of equall distance.
As for example. From Antwarpe
to London, thexchange hath been twoo
and twentye shillinges tenne pence, at
sighte: and from London to Antwarpe
agayne, it was straight wayes three &
twenty shillinges. Likewise the exchange
from London to Roane, for a french

crowne, was fiue shillinges eighte pences
or tenne pence at the moste, and immediately,
from Roane to London, thexchange
was agayne sixe shillinges, or
fiue shillings eleuen pence at the least.
By whyche examples it appeareth, that
one some of moneye, of one sorte and
kynde of coyne, hath twoo pryces, and
twoo valuacions at one tyme exchanged,
for one distance of tyme, differing
onely, by the diuersitie of place & countrye.
Thus wee see, what merchandizes
men make of moneye, and alter coynes,
valued by publicke aucthoritie, to
bee of what pryce they list, for theyre
owne pryuate gayne and commoditie.
And synce thys permission exchaunge
hath ben vsed, playne dealing, and charitable
lendinge hath bene forgotten,
bullion hath not bene brought into this
lande, artificers haue decayed, the princes
custome in all countries hathe been
muche lessened, all lawfull tradinge,
nothinge so muche vsed, good occupiynge
townes haue come to ruyne,

and the great transportinge of wares
from one countrie to an other, nothing
so frequented amongst merchauntes,
as hath bene heretofore. And last of all,
the pryce of all wares by thys meanes,
hath been greatly enhaunced. And
will you see, when thexchaunge is most
vsed. Thus it is. Wher plentie of wares
is to bee solde, and good is to bee done
with the buiynge of them: thyther is
money sent in great abundance to buy
the same, and the same money rysethe
streight to a greater value, when anye
one wyll borowe to paye presente money
for merchaundizes. And thus the
merchauntes paiynge for moneye after
fifteene in the hundreth at the leaste,
although hee make a good market for
hymselfe, yet hys owne country men
shall feele a smart, when hee commethe
to sell the sayde wares at home. For
hee will so hyghten the pryce of hys
wares, that hee will lose nothynge by
thexchange at all. And so the poore chapman,
and the playne meaning man,

shall paye for hys exchange euery penye,
besydes the gayne that the seller
will make for hys owne lyuynge. And
thys is the reason, that wares waxe
deerer in thys age, then they haue done
heretofore, onely through the deuelishe
and wicked merchaundize exchaunge.
Nowe lorde god, what meane prynces
to bee thus abused, to suffer priuate
men, to sett pryce of theire publike coyne,
and to make it oftentymes, to bee
more woorth, by permission exchaunge,
then by nature it is possible to bee:
suffering them, to change the course of
nature, as thoughe a pounde weighte,
should be more weightie then a pound,
or a pounde tale, more than a pounde
tale, or an ynche more than an ynche,
or a barley corne, more than a barley
corne. And thys I vnderstande, that certayne
riche bankers, agreing together,
and takyng vp great masses into theire
handes, can make what value they list,
of money: for moneye must bee had,
what shifte soeuer men doe make, and

paye they neuer so deere, they will haue
it, rather then fayle of theire purpose,
for wāt. And thys is the reason, that
not onelye great merchauntes, but also
great princes and kynges, are manye
tymes bankruptes, through the excessiue
paiynge for money borowed, vnder
the name of exchaunge. But moneye
was not firste deuised for thys ende,
to bee marchaundize, but to bee a measure
and a beame, betwixte man and
man, for the buyinge and sellinge of
wares. And so euerye man to receyue
moneye in value, for the goodnes and
pryce of hys wares, and not that men
shoulde make money of money: a thing
so contrarye to nature, as nothinge can
bee more, and the onelye ruyne of all
trade, throughout the moste parte of
thys knowne worlde. Thus I talke,
and spende wynde in vayne, for you
master merchaunte, stande still vppon
thys, that no order can bee taken for
thexchange, because of the vncertaynetye
of it, whiche ryseth and fallethe, as

the searsetye or plentye of moneye is.
And what is the cause of all thys? surelye
the greedynes of man, and the couetouse
desyre, whiche hee hath to enryche
hymselfe, by hooke or crooke. Nowe
Lord for hys mercyes sake, is there no
waye to temper thys vnsaciable desyre
and gredy couetousnes. Well, howsoeuer
men wilbee euill, it is not good for
others to lulle them in theire euill, or to
allowe of synne: but alwayes to speake
against vice, as god hath commaunded,
and to referre the punishmente thereof
to hys iustice, in due tyme to bee ministred.
But I am afrayde, I haue been ouerlonge,
in thys tediouse cause, and
hyghe mysterye of merchants occupacion:
and therefore I will speake no
more thereof, but shewe you now wher
no vsurye ys at all, and that in dyuers
contractes, and so declare the difference
betwixt interest and vsury.
            I doe buye lande of my frende for a
certayne summe of money, and of like
value to the lande, with thys condicion:

yf hee bringe me the money agayne, at
anye tyme, hee shall haue hys lande agayne.
I beyng lawfull owner of thys
lande by bargayne and sale, maye safely
enioye the frutes and rentes of the
same landes, without anye suspicion of
vsurye committed, and the rather for
that I haue payde the iuste value. And
(as I haue often sayde heretofore) vsurie
cannot bee, but where lendinge is,
& the propertie altered, and the vse also
of the thynge lent, consumed. Nowe
then, hee that hathe gotten landes by
bargayne and sale in thys sorte, althoughe
hee haue promised, to sell backe
agayne the sayde landes, for the sayde
moneye: yet is hee true owner thereof,
and may take the fruites, without daunger
or offense to god or man.
            Alwayes prouided, that these dealings
bee not vsed for colorable cheuisaunces,
to make indentures of bargayne and
sale, onelye for vsurie to bee exercysed,
and to auoyde thereby the daunger of
lawe. Now thys fraude & thys sleyght,

maye bee easelye espied, yf the maner
of dealynge, bee well and aduisedlye
looked vnto. As thus. Yf the man that
buyeth this lande, bee a knowen vsurer,
it is lykely that hee seeketh the
gayne of hys monye, by the rent of that
lande, and hys monye also, when it is
offerde. Agayne, yf the moneye payde,
bee muche lesse than the lande bought:
it is moste like, there was no playne
meanynge of anye bargayne and sale,
but a deuyse, to auoyde the daunger of
lawe, and so to make gayne, by the profite
of the meane yssues of the lande, a
common shyfte vsed nowe of dayes, to
mocke god with all,C. de pactis interempt. & vendit. l. 2. & l. commissoriae & l. cum te feodum. and hys lawe, but
god is not mocked. And suerlye there is
no ryghte or lawfull buiynge, where
very lytle is geuen for that, whiche is
very muche woorth, but a certayn cunninge
vsed (as I haue sayde) to mocke
both god and man.
            I doe freely lende mony to my frend,
for sixe monethes, with thys conditiō, yt
yf he doe not paye me the sayd mony at

the time, he shal pay vnto mee suche damages
as I shal susteyne, for default of
his payment.C. peruenit, & C. constit
                     •
                  
                  tus. De fide iussor. In thys case, if hee breake
day with me I may lawfully demaunde
recompence, and take reasonable vsury
without offence, because he hath hindred
my gayne, in breaking day with me, for
that I purposed vpon the same moneye
at that time, and made iust reconinge to
make then certeine paimentes with the
selfe same moneye. And yet if vpon lending
my money, I demaunde a certein,
as twelue pound in the hundred pound,
more or lesse, for the onely forbearing, &
for time sake, wythout knowinge my
losse that mighte bee afore hande, I am
herein an vsurer.
            I beinge an occupier hauing money lying
by me, whiche perhaps I must shortly
employe, and notwithstandinge, because
my frende hath great neede, I do
helpe him, with an hundred pounde for
sixe monethes, with this condicion, that
if I shal stande in great neede of ye same
money, within the same space, eyther to
pay some necessary debt not yet known

vnto me, or to buy some very good bargaine,
that maye perhappes falle in the
mean season, which I cannot do, without
the saide money: my said frend shall
promise me to paye for me al such vsury
as I shall bee forced to paye, in consideration
of the wāt of my money. Herein
I doe not commit vsury, if for good causes
I doe demaund allowance, wythout
fraud, couine, or any coulorable dealīg
at al, but onelye for mine owne certeine
indempnitie, and to saue my selfe from
an vndoubted knowne harme.
            An other commethe to mee and woulde
borowe a thousand pound in golde, and
as muche in plate, for a shewe to declare
and set forthe his wealthe the more to ye
worlde, when it is seene in his shoppe.
In thys case I maye take vsurye for
my gooddes,ff. commodati L. 3. without offence. For this
is no lending, but a letting out for hyer,
vpon his peril that letteth for a certaine
time, & therfore wher no lending is, nor
property altered, ther cannot bee any vsury
at all.
            The Apothecarie lendeth to ye Phisicion

100.l. by ye yere freely, because he shal sēd
his billes of receipts vnto him & to none
other. In this case is doubtfull aunswering.
But if the Apothecary be a iust dealing
mā, & haue good ware in his shop,
and deale faithfullye wythout slaunder
or hurte, so that neyther the Phisicion
him selfe, nor yet any other for him can
perceiue or iudge, that hee is damnyfied
in any thing: I do thinke y• in thys case,
ther is no vsurie, because the Apothecarie
doth not take any thing, to be valued
or measured, by money ouer & aboue his
principall, but onelye the fauour of the
Phisicion, for the vtteraunce of his good
lawefull and honeste wares. Althoughe
there bee that say, this same is a knacke
of vsurye, by lendynge of moneye to
vtter theire wares better, and to gette
more credite amonge the people, but I
referre it to their consciences that so do.
            A
                  •
               ncightyer man then my self, wythholdethe
throughe force, a porcion of
lande, from mee: I am lothe to trye
the lawe wyth hym, because hee hathe
the lawe in hys hande, and ys a Judge.

And I offer to lende hym fiue hundred
pounde, for a yere or two freely, so that
I maye haue my owne, without farther
trouble or vexation: In this case, I am
no vsurer, because I doe not gaine any
thing, but onely receiue mine own quietly,
without further trouble or charge.
I doe borowe an hundred pounde for a
yere, promisinge at the yeres end to lēd
an other hundred pound to my frende,
of whom I borowe the yere before: thys
is permutacion, when one good turn of
like value is done for an other, and noe
vsurye.
            I take the perill vpon me of the cariage
of a great masse of money, I may lawfully
take portage money for my pains
without offence: for it is no vsurie, because
it is but the reward of my trauail.
I am suerty for one, and pay the debte,
paying vsurie for the same money.Ext. siede iussor. ca. 1. &. 2. The
principal debtor for whom I was boūd,
is bounde to paye vnto mee the vsurye,
and the payment vnto me is no vsurye,
for that I haue nothing but mine owne
againe.
            
               
A man by testament, graunteth a legacie,
and willeth his sonne to paye the legacie,
and so muche (nomine poenae) for not
paying of it: The law saieth, the testator
maye charge his executours or heire, vnder
a penaltie, to pay his legacy, and the
same is noe vsurie. But if the testatoure
shoulde thus saye. I will that my sonne
or executour, shal pay for euery moneth
that they are behynde hande, so muche,
and so from moneth to moneth til it bee
payde: this is vsurie say the lawiers, because
the time is mēcioned and payned.
Baldus rehearseth this matter by a testatour,Bald. L. vnica. col. 6. q. 3.
that charged his executor to paie
vnto Sempronius a hundred pound,De hijs quae poenae nomine after
his decease, or els to paie vnto the legatorie
for euery yere that it were vnpaid
one tunne of wyne, or tenne pounde in
moneye: the executour payde the wine
for three yeres togeather, & afterwards
refused to paye anie penye or legacye at
all. The legatorie had the executoure in
suite, and it was ruled by lawe, that hee
could not haue any thīg, because it was
against lawe yt a testatour should make

any such bequest with a penaltie, beinge
none other then cloked vsury.
            And in this case, Baldus saieth, that he
preuailed for hys clyente thexecutoure,
against the legatarie. Nowe yf the testatour
had simplie saide this, I will that
Sempronius haue tenne pounde yearelye
for these .x. yeres, & at the x. yeres ende,
100.l: It had been noe vsury at all, but a
plaine and lawefull legacie.
            A man hath a summe of money allotted
vnto hym for the dowry of his wife,C. Salubriter extra. De vsuris. Et ibi Pauor. et Ant. de Butr. the
money is not paide at the day of the mariage,
nor yet long after, but some piece
of lande casually bearing frute, or corne
in pawne, allotted vnto her: y• husbande
shall haue the benefyte of that casual
grounde, bee it fruite or corne, vntil the
dower bee fully paide, or hauing no such
land nor pawn otherwise, he shal haue ye
interest of his money dew vnto him, because
he susteineth the burden and charges
in mainteinīg his maried wife freely,
wtout any dowry at al. And so much
interest shal he haue, as he can proue his
certaine charges of the mariage hathe

been. There be also, that thinke, he may
practise before hād, for a certein porcion
mōthly, or yerely, til he be paide ye whole
dowrie, whiche opynion Panormitane amongst
others, doth maintein.
            A riche man dealethe with hys baker, &
saith thus. Neighbor, I knowe you nede
money to buy corne, you shall haue 100.
l. of mee for a yeare, so that I maye haue
wekely, so much manchet, or cheat bred,
as amounteth to a roial, noble or crown
weekely for the whole yere, and then to
put me in good assuraunce for my 100.l.
at ye yeres end. This is vsury in the deuils
name, & he more fit to eate stones
then bread, y• would binde men to such a
bargain, & haue so litle charitye in hym.
A lord saith to a brewer, sirha, you shall
haue ī such a parsonage of mine, an .100.
quarters of barley yerely before hande,
so that I maye haue .20. tunne of double
beare yearlye, for my corne. I doe aunswere.
If the lorde haue more beare, for
lettinge hys corne before hande in respect
of time, then he coulde haue readye
beare to be deliuered vpō sight of ye corn,

I do saye that this lorde is an vsurer, for
he is a time seller, and hathe gayne for
the verye forbearing of his corne.
            One selleth ye greene corn of his groūd,C. in Ciuitate. ext. de vsur.
or the fruite of hys orcharde, before the
trees begynne to flower, and the buyer
hathe a good bargaine, & gaineth greatly:
the buyer in this case, is not bounde
to pay anye thinge backe again, because
of the vncerteintye of his gayne. For so
the yere might haue fallen out, that hee
should neither haue had corne nor frute
to any purpose. An other geueth an hū
               dreth
pound in money, neuer to haue it
agayne, to receiue in steede therof, fyue
pound for euer, or three liues: here is no
vsurie, because there is no lendinge, the
principall beinge gone for euer, and the
seller hasarding his money, for he or his
perhappes maye bee euill payde hereafter.Innocent. & Host. ext. de vsur.
And althoughe the value maye bee
twise or thrise payde, that is no matter,
for so a man may gaine with buyinge &
sellynge, with chopping & changing, wt
lettinge & settynge, wyth purchasinge
of land, and by diuers other contracts,

and ware very rich with such bargains,
and yet no reason that any thing should
be payde backe againe, for then all mēs
estates and welth, should be vncerteyn.
There might diuers other contractes be
named, I wil not be lōg, for al say this.
If a merchant that liueth by his occupying
and trade, shall susteine eyther losse
for wantinge his moneye (in due tyme)
or feele hynderance of gayne, because
hys money is out of his hand: It is euerye
mans parte, to be thankfull, and to
remember ye harme, that the merchaunt
hathe felt, and especyally yf the debtour
doe breake daye in not payinge of that,
which was freely lēt vnto him, he ought
to satisfie the merchaunt to y• vttermost,
or els hee is no good man. And to shewe
last of all, the difference betwixt interest
and vsurie, although it litle needeth, for
that the examples heretofore declare the
matter plainlye inough, for you muste
vnderstande, that vsurie is onely geuen
for the onelye benefite of lendynge for
time. Whereas interest is demaunded
when I haue susteyned losse through an

other mans cause, and therefore inter est
mea, that is to saye, it behoueth me, or it
belongeth to mee, or it is for mine auail,
or it is reason, that I bee aunswered all
losses and dammages, that I haue susteyned
thoroughe an other mans cause,
aswell for the gayne that els I myghte
haue had by my moneye, if touche had
beene kepte, as for the losses susteyned
thoroughe an other mans faulte, that
hathe not paide mee myne owne in dew
tyme. And therefore al lawes do allow,
that men maye haue theire dammages
awarded vnto thē. And in so doynge, an
equalitie and iuste proporcion is obserued
in thys sort, that whereas one hath
had benefite by mee, I shoulde likewise
susteyne no harme by hym, muche lesse
bee vndone for my well doinge, and hee
to waxe riche by my losse, that ment so
well towardes him. Thys ys agreeing
to all lawes and to naturall equytye, to
iustyce and to reason. And the name of
interest is laweful as the whyche seketh
onelye equalytye: whereas the name of

vsurye is odyous, vngodly, and wycked
as ye whych seeketh al inequalitie, wher
by countryes and kyngdomes and all
good gouerned common weales, are often
tymes destroyed and vtterlye ouerthrowne,
when the most doe starue, and
the fewest doe gain. And thus although
a man maye demaund interest in some
respecte, and for cause after the lone of
hys money: yet can hee not certeinelye
expresse ye value before hand, or by anye
former contract, demaūd gayn for lone.
The laste part of my diuision, touchethe
the punishment of vsurers, and the allegatyon
of examples in all ages agaynste
vsurye, wherein I will bee as
shorte as I maye shewe my selfe: for I
feare mee, I haue wearied you all wyth
my tedyous talke, but suche a plentyfull
fielde: howe maye it be lightly ranged
ouer? Wyth that they all said, they
weare rather refreshed then wearyed,
sauinge that the griselye merchant was
put to hys noddes now and then, wherfore
sayde hee, it is good to cutte shorte.

And hereupon I wished bothe hym and
all others, not to geeue occasion, & then
men woulde speake the lesse againste vsurie.
But nowe, as things go, ye hoattest
wilde fier that is, is to litle, and not
hoate inoughe against vsurers, because
they swarme so muche, and are so horrible
in their dealinges euery where. For
if I shoulde deuise to doe one a notable
displeasure, whereby to bringe hym to
vtter confusion: I coulde not set a better
frame for him of mischiefe, then to lend
hym great summes of money, vpon verye
good assurance to pay deepe vsurye
therfore, & to forfeit great bonds therwt
               all,
if the money bee not payde. And I
pray you, hath not this deuise ben practised
with some thriftelesse enheryters,
and wastful gentlemen, of our countrey
to feede them with money vppon deepe
vsurye, and that in statute merchaunt,
vpon excessiue, and almost horrible penalties,
that lands worthe tenne thousād
l. haue ben forfeited for not paying
a thousād in moneye, the breache of the
statute beinge fower thousand pounde,

whereas the simple gentleman neuer
borowed in his life ye nete summe of v.
hundred pound, in al ye world? Beware
therefore how you borow vpon vsurye,
you that woulde thriue, and beware of
bondes: for surely whatsoeuer hee bee,
y• vseth customably to borowe for gaine,
and will easely enter into great bondes,
he cannot thriue or come forward by anye
possible meanes, althoughe hee had
the high fauour of his prince, or ye welth
of a Duke: suche a deuouring beast, and
consumynge woorme is vsurie, where
once it taketh place, & hath made a deepe
entrie. Therefore no maruail if ye laws
do prohibite it vpon great paines, which
I will touch in as few words as I can.
First the woord of god (as master preacher
hath saide very well) forbiddeth the
same expresslly in Deuteronomie, Exodus &
Leuiticus. And the psalme saies. He shall
ēter into gods tabernacle, that hath not
lent his money for vsury. And in ye eighteene
of Ezechiel, all people are forbydden
to take more then theye lende: And
suche are excluded from god that take

any ouerplus. The general counsel called
Nicenum Consiliū
                doth vtterlye forbid
vsurie vpon great paines, but that stretcheth
to the cleargy. The Ciuil law dyd
neuer expresly allowe of vsury, neyther
was it possible by lawe to alter nature.
For vse can not be assygned vnto those
thyngs whiche are wasted wt the onely
occupying of them, as wine, oyle, corne
and money are: and therefore cruell are
they that seeke to seperate thē from the
propertie. For he that hath borowed any
thing, and so is lord of the same, by vertue
of hys borowynge (as all borowers
are) he hath ye vse of the thing borowed,
which doth consume away with the borowing,
& cannot in any wise be seperated
from ye property. And therfore ye Ciuil
law, did rather vse a shift by caution
of bonde or oblygatyon after a certayne
time, for the lord to recouer by, that had
lēt out his goods to an other mā, whiche
stoode him in steede of the property, although
by duitie of nature and right, he
coulde make no clayme at all to receyue
any vse or benefite of that, which he did

lende. In deede the Emperour Iustinian
doth beare, with moderate takinge as I
wil say more at large hereafter, & yet rather
suffereth it thē alloweth it, to auoid
great harms, least the trade of merchandises
should decay through the couetousnes
of men, that els woulde not trade, ye
same being hemmed notwithstandyng,
within certeine listes or bounds, ouer &
aboue the which if any man do passe, hee
is cōdempned for an vsurer.Extra. de vsuris per tot
                     •
                  
                  ̄. But ye Canon
law, which is the law of the church
is most vehement against vsurye, & appointeth
very sharp punishmēts against
al vsurers, grounding it for a most dedly
& dampnable sinne, & making it by al
circumstances, more yrkesome in gods
sight then murther. For y• an vsurer is a
destroier of whole families, towns, and
kingdomes: wheras a murtherer is but
an offendor against one or twoe parsōs.
Therfore who soeuer maīteineth vsury
not to be a dedly sinne, the Canon lawe
iudgeth him for an heretique, againste
whom the laws may of right procede to
his condempnacion.
         
         
            
            ¶The punishmentes appoynted
by the làwes, are these.
            
               FIrst they are defamed persones,L. improbum & ibi Bald. C. de infamibus. for
that the lawe defames thē. So that
if my brother make an vsurer his heire,
I may breake the testament, and by excludynge
hym, be admitted my selfe, by
complaint of a testament, made against
office or good right.
               2 Agayne, they cannot bee suffered to
receyue ye holy Communion, or to come
into the churche where god is honoured
in the congregacion, that by suche meanes
they beinge ashamed, might repent
& acknowledge their faults & call to god
for grace.
               3 Moreouer they shall not bee suffered
to vse any oblatiō, in the church of god,
as other christians doe.Clem. eos vers sepelije, De Sepul. Ioā de Imol. in 7. Collat. & ib. Card.
               
               4 And when they are dead, they shall
not be buried in christian burial. And if
anye minister doe receiue anie knowne
& conuicted vsurer to ye holy Cōmunion,

the same prieste or minyster shalbee
straight wayes suspended from celebrating
in the churche. And who so burieth
an vsurer so conuicted, shall immediatly
be excommunicated. According wher
vnto, an olde tale comes to my memory:
which because it is a matter of fact, &
setteth foorth thys purpose well, I will
breefely shewe it.
               A riche vsurer,A notable tale, fitte for an vsurer to knowe. beinge notorious, and
therfore often warned to amende, and
yet amending neuer the more (as many
that come to sermons, are neuer the better)
departed this world: where, & when
I cannot tell (for the booke goethe not
so farre, eyther for time or place) But
after the man was dead, his kynsemen,
that succeded him, (as ryche men wante
none) desired to haue hym buryed in the
parish church, before the hygh altare on
goddes name. The person being a zealous
godly man, would not burye hym
at all, no not in the churchyarde, muche
lesse in the churche, or at the hygh altar.
His kynsemen hereupon, being greatly
dismayde, offered largely to haue thys

fauour: but al would not serue. At lēgth
vnderstandinge that the person had an
asse, whiche broughte hys bookes from
hys parsonage dailye to the churche, being
a prety distance in sonder, they pollitikelye
desired, to obtayne thys fauor
for hym, that as his asse did dayly carrie
hys seruice bookes to the churche, so it
would please hym, that for thys one tyme,
the quick asse, might take payne, to
carye thys dead asse in a coffyne, with
thys condicion, that wheresoeuer ye asse
stayed, there the bodie should be buried,
persuading themselues, that as the asse
by an ordinarye course, vsed euery daye
to go from the parsonage to the church,
with a burden of bokes vpon his backe,
so of course, hee woulde take the same
waye, with this dead mans corps, being
cheasted, euen straighte to the churche.
The priest, vpon theire importune suyte,
was contented that the asse shoulde
deale in thys matter for the vsurer, and
bee hys dumme iudge: who, when hee
had the cheasted bodye vppon hys back,
feelynge the waight heuier, then it was

wōte to be (as vsurers wāte no weight,
beinge ouerladen with sinne) or els by
some secret motion of god, I thinke, as
Balames asse was inspyred: So thys
foresayd beaste beinge laden, and ouerladen
(as it should seeme) did flinge, and
take on immediatly, as though wild fier
had ben in his taile, and leauing the ordenarye
course to the churche, tooke the
strayght waye out of the town, and neuer
leaft flinginge, and runnynge, till
hee came to a paire of gallowes at the
townes end, and there walloinge hymselfe
vnder the gallowes, with the corps
vppon hys backe, dyd neuer leaue tomblynge
and tossynge hymselfe vpon the
bare grounde, till hee was cleane dis
                     •
                  urdened
of so myserable a carion. So that
there euen vnder the very gallowes hee
leafte thys vsurers carcase. A fitt alter
vndoubtedly for vsurers to be sacrificed
vpon a lyue, or buryed vnder when
they are deade, and a moste worthy tabernacle
or shryne, miraculously assigned,
for all suche lewde sainctes to bee
shrowded in, eyther dead or alyue. But

thys tale hath almost made me forgeate
my diuision.
               5 It ys further determined, that wheras
priestes doe ordinarely goe vnto all
other christians, to geeue them ghostlye
comforte: none shalbee suffered to come
vnto vsurers, to geeue thē any ghostly
counsel, but to suffer them rather to perishe
like dogges. Except it be euidently
pr
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  ed, that they are sory for theire former
lyues, and are contented to make
restitucion of goodes so horribly taken,
or gotten, as by wrongfull vsurie▪ putting
in pawne for the same, accordinge
to their habilities. Wherein they are in
woorse case, then common strumpettes
or hatlottes bee. For a drabbe, is not
bounde, to make restitution of that shee
hath gotten vnlawfully, by abusing her
bodye in fylthynes, but onely to doe penaun
                     •
                  e.
And yet an vsurer, must restore
his euil gotten goodes, because hee hath
stolne them, or els, hee cannot bee receyued
into the church agayne.
               6 Besides thys, when they make theire
willes, none must be presente at the makynge

thereof; to heare witnes of anye
thynge they doe.
               7 Neyther shall theire testaments hee
of anye force, excepte they make satisfaction.
               8 Naye they cannot make anye maner
of last will at all, neyther nuncupatiue▪
nor yet codicill, that is to saye. Neyther
wil by woord of mowth, nor yet a short
wyll, wythoute i
                     •
                  stitucion of an
heyre.
               9 No although hee make hys will, and
register it, putting in sufficiēt caution
                     •
                  
yet it will not helpe hym, as some doe
holde opinion and saye, as Bartolus amongst
others.
               10 And yf any vsurer,Sextus de vsuris. will dwel in any
other shyre, then where hee was borne,
hee shall not bee suffered, but vtterly be
banished for euer, and neuer to come
there agayne. Or yf through sufferaunce;
such doe dwel
                     •
                   those places, & are wi
                     •
                  
                  ked
at, the chefest men there shalbee indited,
the byshop suspended, and inferiours
prelates excommunicated.
               11 And what become of an vsurer, no

man ought to care, although hee beggi
hys bread, and dye for hunger, because
hys lyfe is as hatefull, as it is abhominable.
               12 And lawes made, for the allowance
of vsurye are vtterly abrogated.
               13 And bycause, theye are accompted
worse then cōmon theeues and rouers:
they are boūd, not onely to restore that
they haue, but also to aunsweare all the
frute, that they haue gotten by such vnlawfull
meanes. Notaries are charged
vppon great paynes, not to make anye
instrumentes, for such wicked contractes
and vngodly bargaynes: for yf they
doe otherwyse, they are holden for periured
persons, because they take an othe
vpon theire firste admission to the contrary,
and also are restrayned for euer
to bee publique notaries afterwarde.
Moreouer, al lawes and statutes made,
or by othe receyued, and allowed to bee
good, or that enforce debtours to paye
vsury vnto theire creditours, are vppon
greate penaltyes forbidden and made
voide. Agayne, those great vsuries, that

haue ben payde, are also abrogated, by
the councell of Uienna, and those that
hereafter will take vppon them, to bee
aucthours, wryters, officers, or deuisers
of suche lawes, shalbee straygtway excommunicated
& accursed of the church.
All thys notwithstanding, yf the vsurer
doe repente, and call to god for grace,
hee shalbe absolued, and receiued again
into the congregation: so that hee doe
make faythfull restitucion of all hys
gayne gotten by vsurie, and do further
stande, to tharbitrement of hys ordinarie
diocesan, and iudge in causes ecclesiasticall,
who by the lawes is appointed
to punishe hym by the purse, that wherby
hee hath gayned, hee might make recompense
by the same. And assuredlye,
there cannot bee a greater punishment
to a couetous vsurer, thē to punish him
with payment of money, who hath sett
all his mind and whole thought, vppon
scrapynge, and gatheringe of goods together,
without anye care in the worlde
howe hee came by them. And yet some
will neuer bee good, do you to thē what

you will. Accordinge whereunto, a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
to reuiue your wittes, and to quicken
you, yea and perhappes to touche you
master Gromel wyth all, I wyll tell
you a ieste by the waye, touching thys
matter, of a merchaunt whome you all
knowe.
               A certayne famous preacher,A tale, of a merchaunt in London. a man
most zelous in religion, and therewith
so vehement agaynst synne (as I know
fewe hys lyke within thys land) made a
sermon, not many yeres past at Paules
crosse: whiche sermone was wholye
agaynste vsurye, wherein hee shewed
hymselfe, both very well learned, and
also ryghte godlye, and (as I thinke) hee
dyd good to some. The same Preacher
dyned the same daye, eyther with the
maior or sherif, or some other merchāt:
but whyther, I cannot wel tell. And coming
to dinner, the partie dyd welcome
hym, as it seemed, hartely: and glosed
yet in dede, as it fell out afterward, saiynge
that hee doubted not, but hee had
done great good that daye, in speaking
so muche againste vsurye, and therfore

thanked hym. Where upon an other famylier
acquaintaunce of the sayde merchaunte,
sayd vnto hym serretly. What
meane you sir, to geeue thys man so
great thankes, for speakyng so much against
vsurie? I doe not knowe hym in
London, that gayneth more by hys money
then you do, and therfore mee thinkes,
you speake eyther holowly, or not
aduisedly. Tushe quod the merchaunt:
you are a foole. I do thanke him, & thāke
hym agayne, for wote you what? The
fewer vsurers that hee can make, the
more shalbee my gayne: for then, men
shall chefely seeke me out. For doe you
thinke, that hee can persuade me, to leaue
so swete a trade, for a fewe woordes
of hys trolling tong? No by the roodes
bodye can hee not: and therfore I will
clawe him, and saye wel might he fare,
and godds blessing haue he too. For the
more hee speaketh, the better it itchith, &
maketh better for mee. Thus you see,
that notwithstandinge the straightenes
of lawes, and the myghtie threates and
curses vttered by god, & hys prophetes:

some are so stonie harted, that nothyng▪
will enter to temper them, whiche are
to bee taken, as graceles people, abiecte
persons, and reprobate hethens, vtterly
renounced & forsaken of god. For wh
                     •
                  
                  ̄
lett vs praye, if it bee godds will, to turne
their hartes, that they may enter into
theire owne consciences, and vse charitye,
as they are bound, and learne to
doe to others, as they would that others
shoulde doe vnto them. The wryters vpon
y• lawe, are most generally against
vsurie,Baldus. cons. 449. in parte 3. and amongst the rest, Baldus in
hys booke of councelles, speaketh bitterlie
agaynste them, saiynge that vsurie
is a gaynefull piracie, contrarye to
nature, vpon the lone of any thing, that
consisteth vppon weighte, measure and
number. And yf anye man (sayeth hee)
doe thinke it not to be synne, to lēde for
gayne, hee is strayghte wayes an heretike:
yf hee do thinke it to bee synne and
yet do vse it, then he is straighte wayes
a land pyrate. And therfore, whether he
beleue it or no, he is like a leprouse persone,
that through te contagiousnes of

hys owne desease infecteth others, and
to beynge infectious, hee oughte to bee
banished out of christian mens companye
and congregation, till hee bee foūd
cleane, as those leppers were in the olde
lawe. Yea he offendeth, sayeth thys doctour,
against the nature of thinges, because
it is impossible, by the order and
course of nature, that once one, shoulde
bee twise one: whiche the vsurers goe
about to make, heapinge and gathering
together, more then the boundes of nature
wil suffre, for nature can not foord
yt, that once one of dead things, should
become twise one, whiche must needes
bee, yf I receiue more than I lente: for
in receiung more than I did lend, I haue
myne owne, and one thynge more,
which is two for one. And it cannot be,
I saye, eyther in nature, or in reason,
that one shoulde make twoo: so that all
vsurie ys agaynst nature, lawe, reason,
religion, and all goddes forboade.
               And farther he sayeth, that an vsurer
ys a deuouring beast,Pli. lib. 7. nat. historiarum. and like vnto the
worme called of Plinie, Teredo, that breadeth

in timbre, for that the same wor
                     ••
                  
being touched or handled, seemeth gētle
& softe: & yet hath he so hard teeth, that he
destroyeth all maner of wood. Euen so
the vsurer ys a woorme at the first handeling,
softe and gentle in woordes, alwayes
pretending the charitable ayde
of hys borower: but in ye ende he deuoureth
euery mans patrimonye and enheritance,
yt dealeth wt hym. And although
naturally it bee geuen to vs to abhorre
moste, the greatest synnes: yet it is contrary
in an vsurer, for ye greater vsurer
he ys, & the greater gayne hee getteth, ye
more swete & plesaunt is his vsury vnto
him. And as fyer will neuer cease to burne,
yf it haue matter laid vnto it to burne
vpō: so ye vsurer (like vntohel mowth)
doth deuower & gnaue, vpō euery mās
goods, as lōge as ther is a peny, or half
peny worth in the world to be had. And
that which is woorst of all, he then hurteth
most, whē he is least felte. And therfore,
vsury is called yt most wicked thīg
yt can be.D. 47. & ibi. Archid. And note further (quod he) that
an vsurer doth licke with his tōgue, like

a serpēt, & stingeth like a scorpion, & seeketh:
euer like an angry or roaring lyō,
whom he may deuoure, being a false deceiptfull
beaste throughout al ye predica
mētes (that is to saye) in euery parte of
him, & in euery acciō yt he taketh in hād:
for yt he taketh that, which he gaue not,
or taketh more than he gaue. Yea ye vsurer
is wtout al ciuilitie, curtesy, or kyndnes:
& the reason is, because there is no
parte of man in hym at all. Thus farre,
& a greate deale more sayeth Baldus, not
onely in thys place, but also in diuers other
places. But I wil leaue hym now,
& goe to others:Bart. aute
                        ••
                     . de naut. vsur. & Autēt. de Eccles
                        •
                     is. 
                  Bartolus sayeth, that all
vsury is vtterly forbiddē, and offensiue
to god and man. Panormitanus, that writeth
vpon the canon lawe, most excellētly
entreateth vpon thys matter at large,Panormi. ext. de vsuris,
and doth vtterly condempne all vsury
& vsurers whatsoeuer. And amongst
many other speaches, that hee vseth, hee
sayeth thus. The whurlepoole and bottomlesse
gulfe of vsury, doth destroye ye
soules of men, and all togeather deuoureth
theire goodes, and bringeth them

at all, to bee woorse than nought.
               Card. Zabarella, a famous writer,Card. Zabar. vppon
the decretales,C. quāto. ext. de vsuris. doth saye, that vsurie is
forbidden, by al lawes, and geueth reasons,
alledging Innocentius, and saiyng
that al men should sterue,c. in ciuitate. de vsuris. yf vsury were
suffered: because tillage, woulde wholie
be leafte,Innoc. super rubr. de vsur. whē vsury were allowed, & so
all loue & charity, would clerely bee forsaken,
& all good trades abandoned for
euer.Hosti. in sum ma de vsuris. 
                  Hostiensis, wrytyng the summe of y•
lawe, ys of the same minde. Azo, likewise,
makyng the like gatheringe, beinge
both of them,Azo. devsur. the twoo eyes of the lawe,
doe so much speake against vsury, as he
that once preached against ye pope, & not
hable to thondre out his disprayse fully,
concluded, that hee was fyfteene tymes
woorse then the dyuel. And so these men
do rattle against vsury, in such sorte, as
they make it the worste, & greatest faulte
almost that can bee vppon earth.Iason. in l. cū
                     ctos populos. 
                  Iafon
vppon the code sayethe thus. It is not
lawfull to commit synne,C. de summa trinit. & fide catholica. for the safegarde
of any mans life. Neither ought
there any dispensacion be graunted for

vsurye, though it were to redeme captiues
from the infidels. And therefore no
prince ought to suffer vsurye, althoughe
it were to the benefite of the common
weale.
               
                  Zabarella, whom I named before,Card. Zabar. de vsuris. ys
of the same opinion, writing vpon the
cannon lawe, in the tytle de vsuris.
               
               
                  Speculator, frameth libells agaynste vsury,Spec. de vsur.
and calleth yt vsurariam prauitatem
that ys the wickednes of vsurie.
               
                  Iohannes Andreas, vpon the canō lawe,Ioan. And. in regula peccatum. in mercurialibus.
maketh vsurie, to bee most wicked.
               
                  Archidiaconus, and Cardinalis, calleth it
heresie. Imola, tearmeth it a vermyne.
               
                  Pet. de Ancharano sayeth,Archid. 31. q. 1. & Card. cle.
that vsurers be
scorpions.
               But what doe I,1. de vsur. vnnecessarilie heape
wryters,Imola. seynge there are moe, that
write agaynst this offence,Pet. de Anch. then against
any other wickednes whatsoeuer? I wil
nowe therefore leue to mynde moe doctours,
& briefly shewe vnto you, what
seuerall nations and countries, haue
done herein, & therewith laye before you
the myndes and saiynges of dyuerse

wise and sage gouernoures in all age
                     •
                  
and states.
               The Romanes beynge in theire most
perfect and florishing state,Cornel. Tacit. made a law
by theire twelue tables,Annal. lib. 5. that no man
shoulde put foorth money vpon vsurie,
but after one ounce in the hundred, called
faenus vnciarium: whiche is one poūd
in the hundred, whereas before that tyme
riche men myght take at their pleasure.
Afterwardes it was ordeyned at
the entreatynge of the tribunes, to take
an ounce and a halfe, and that was 30.
shillinges in one hundred poundes. After
that, it came to fower in the hūdred,
called triens, or faenus trientarium, whiche
is fower in the hundred. And last of all,
to sixe in the hundred, called semissis, after
sixe pounds in the hundred. And yet
all these alterations, and diuersities of
suffering in vsurye notwithstandinge,
one L. Genitius,
                  Alexand. ab Alexand. a tribune or burgese
of the people published a lawe, that it
shoulde not bee lawfull for anye man,
to bee an vsurer at anye hande, or by
anye maner of meanes. And so by all

deuises that might be, it was vtterly forbidden,
and thereupon all fraudes were
mette withal, by diuers edictes and proclamacions,
whiche being often repressed,
did yet notwithstanding, breake out
by wonderful strange meanes, as what
thynge is so stronglye establyshed, that
the malyce of man seekethe not to ouerthrowe?
Wherefore Tiberius Caesar, to
remedy this euill, and because he would
not that there shoulde bee any vsury occupyed
at al, did put a maruelous masse
of money in banke to the summe of millies
sestertium, which as Budaeus sayeth, amounteth
to two millions and fiue hundred
thousande crownes, & is after oure
English accompt, fiue hūdred thousand
pound sterlinge, and toke order, that euery
man should haue credyte for three
yeres without paying any vsurie therefore
at all, so that the debtour were able
to put in a sufficient pawne or suerty, to
yt double value of that hee borowed. And
last of al, not onely all maner of vsurye
was forbidden by diuers edicts & proclamacions,
but also al maner of exchange

for gain:Cornelius Tacitus. for (as Cornelius Tacitus saieth)
thys canker of vsurye, is an olde venomous
sore, and is the chiefest hed & cause
of rebellion and variance in countreys,
and therfore it was altogether banished
in the olde time, when leaste corruption
of lyfe appered amongst men. Iulius Caesar
made a lawe, that whatsoeuer was
payde aboue the pryncipall for the very
lone, the same shoulde bee defalked out
of the principall, and noe manne to bee
charged with more, then with that only
which was meerely borowed. There is
a constitucion in the name of the Emperor
Alberte,
                  Hermenopulꝰ wherby all mē are forbiddē
to put out their money for vsury. And
if any man did vse this trade secretly, or
by any colourable meanes, and thereof
was conuicted: he loste by and by all his
goods, aswel immoueable as moueable,
the same to bee as an excheate confyscated
to the Emperours Exchequer. And
yet, if the same offendour had a wife, she
had the thirde parte of his goods assygned
to her: so that shee tooke a corporall
othe, and dyd sweare that her husbande

vsed this kind of vsury, altogether with
oute her consent or knowledge. But yf
shee refused to take this othe, then were
al the goods of this man straight waies
forfeyted as I sayde, and he excommunicated
from the company of Chrystian
men, tyll hee had made amendes, and
was becom a new man, according to the
prescript order of the lawe.
               The Germanes dyd not knowe in the
olde tyme,Alexan. ab Alexandria. what vsury was, nor yet the
Indians nether, til couetousnes sought
to suck gayne of money, and so destroyed
all. Yea, som people haue so hated vsury,
yt wheras a theef (for then they suffered
noe deathe for stealinge) was punyshed
to paye the double of that hee
hadde taken,Cato de rerustica. the vsurer was alwayes
condempned to paye fower tymes the
value.
               The Lacedemonians dyd bannysh vsurye
foreuer out of all their territories: &
whereas al Egipt was sore ouerlayd wt 
vsurie, a law was made, that then a mā
might take onely his owne that hee had
lent, but no more at any hand.
               
                  
Amongst others, Agis Duke of the Lacedemonyans,
is so thought to haue hated
vsury, that he burned all the vsurers
bookes with a flaminge fier, in the open
market place: which spectacle being viewed
by Agesilaus, he sayde that he neuer
saw a blesseder light in al his life before.
Would god such light might once shine
gloriouslye ouer London, nay throughe
out al England.
               
                  Lucullus so hated the excessiue delings
of ye vsurers, that whereas all Asia was
ouerwhelmed with vsury, he cleared the
same vtterly from al vsurers. Likewyse
Cato beinge a sharp and seuere man, did
banish vsurers out of all Cicilia.
               
               
                  Anthoninꝰ Pius, Alexander Seuerus, Claudius,
Vespasian, Leo, & diuers others, dyd
restraine the couetousnes of vsurers frō
time to time.
               
                  Cato beinge asked what was the chiefest
pointe for houshold keeping,Cicero de officijs. lib. 2. answered:
to pasture wel, that is, to haue good pasturinge
for cattell. Beynge asked what
was the seconde point, he aunswered, to
pasture sufficiently well: that is to saye,

not to ouerlay the pasture. Being asked
what was the thirde, he sayde: to clothe
well, that is, not to exceede in apparell.
And asked what was the fowerthe, hee
said, to till the ground: that is, to mainteyne
husbandrye, for plentye of corne.
Last of all, beyng demaunded what hee
thought of lending money for vsury, he
aunswered, marye what is it (quod he)
to kill a man? shewynge by this, that vsurye
is a very murderer of mankynde.
Tullie in his first booke of offyces, compareth
the vsurers to vile artificers, that
geat their wealth by lying deadlye and
vtterynge falsehed to saue them selues
from famine. And with the vsurer, hee
reconeth tolletakers, customers, & suche
money officers, that pille and polle both
prynce & people, wheresoeuer they beare
aucthoritie. Aristotle saieth, that vsurers
and baudes maye well goe together, for
they gayne by filthy meanes all yt theye
geat.
               
                  Plato that diuine Philosopher, and most
Christian writer, in his fift booke of lawes,
or of lawe makinge, as he geeueth

the title, warneth among other thinges
that no body whatsoeuer he bee, that wil
beare the face of an honest man, do lette
out his money for vsurye or gaine. And
saith farther, if any do put forth his money
for vsurie, it shalbe well allowed in
him that so boroweth, if he neuer pay the
principal again, much lesse the vsury rising
therupō. If this Plato were now lyuing,
& had ye place of a councellor to her
maiestie, & would mainteine such an argument,
many riche vsurers would vtterly
cry out vpon suche a magistrate.
               Ther is a boke in greeke of Plutarches
doyng against vsurie, in which he coū
                  celeth
al men not to borow vpon vsury,
& therewith dothe condempne the whole
manner of lendinge for gaine. And hys
reasons be these.
               1 It is against the rule and order of nature,
that nothing should brynge forthe
somthing for yt lēding. Besides this, the
property of the goods is an other mans
& not mine, & so it is nothing to me, and
therfore against nature that any thyng
should come of nothing, which is ye gain

ouer & aboue the principal.
               2 It taketh away also frō ye poore, their
chiefest comfort, & that is, the quyetnes
of their mynd, which theye cannot haue
when theye are forced to bee carefull to
aunsweare the byting vsurie, ouer and
aboue the principal howsoeuer they doe
speede.
               3 It deuoureth gayne before it can bee
gotten, takynge vsurye in the hundred
and not vpon the hundred, as these wicked
wretches doe.
               4 It enforceth those that paye deepe vsurie,
to take vp vpon double vsance, so
that the more they borrowe, and the lō
                  ger
they tarrye: the nygher theye are to
vtter destruction. And sayethe hee, these
vsurers are lyke vnto these great rauenynge
foules called Harpiae, that weare
sent from the gods (as ye poets do faine)
to deuower blynde Phineus meate from
hym, so often as anye was layde before
hym, because he had at the request of his
secōd wife, being stepmother to his two
childrē, by his first wife Cleopatra, yelded
to ye plucking out of hys childrens eyes:

so the vsurers do deuower all yt goods yt
any mā hath, as those vgly beasts did eat
Phincus meat frō him whē he was blind.
5 Lastlye, hee condempneth all vsurye
for this reason, because that all men for
the moste parte, doe borrowe to satisfye
theire sinfull luste, and fonde desire, in
vayne expences and needelesse cost and
charges. And therefore he willeth suche
as wilbe vnthrifts, that they do not borowe
vpon vsurie, and so paye moneye
for money, the woorst bargayne that anye
man can make: but rather that they
doe sell their landes out right, to get for
them what they can at the firste, because
they shal haue more that way by a great
deale, then by the vsurer, who wil make
them lose al for a lytle, and to sell theire
lāds altogether, for a trifle, as I knowe
dyuers men haue done in thys realme.
Thus farre Plutarche, that great lerned
Clarke. Yea, what godly wyse mā was
there euer, that did not enueigh agaynst
vncharitablenes, and beat downe vsury
flatte to the grounde, by all waies possible?
yea what tyme, what gouernment,

or what state is or hathe beene, that dyd
not abhorre thys vgly monster and Caterpiller
vsury? And to come home after
the rehersal of so many forein & strange
decrees, not only by princes in al ages,
but also by priuate lerned mē ī al times.
Dyd not the Emperoure Charles of famous
memory, in Anno 1530. assemble a
dyet at Augusta in high Almain, & there
conclude by thaduyse and assent of the
whole Empire, that no maner of cōtract
yt had any felowship with vsury, should
bee allowed? but rather that all vsurye
shoulde be auoided for euer, and bee neuer
more vsed. And if anye were founde
to haue made anye suche contracte, the
same man strayght wayes forfett to the
magistrate and ordinary Judge, the fowerth
parte of hys principall summe, so
put forthe to vsurie. And if ye magistrate
were negligent in this behalfe, & would
foreflowe to punyshe suche offendours,
the Emperours procurator had aucthoritie
to call the officer before him, and to
punyshe him wyth forfeyture of two or
three markes of pure golde.
               
                  
In oure time, that godlye prince kynge
Edwarde the sixt, yea godly may I wel
call hym, dyd make an acte of Parlyament,
that noe man might put oute hys
money for any gaine at all, neither dyrectlye,
nor indirectlye, and appoynted
paynes against thoffendours in that behalfe,
as you master temporall Lawyer
knowe better then I. Thus I haue led
you a long waye in worldlye punyshements,
aswell by the Canon lawes, as
by the Emperours laws, which are called
Ciuyll, and the statutes also of dyuers
other countreis and natyons. But
lorde, what are these punyshementes in
comparison of gods sharp rodde and seuere
iudgement in the life to come? The
scrypture of god you haue partly heard,
but the threates and punishements perhappes,
you do not wel remember, neither
haue I āplified them, as they are to
be vttered. But lorde god, what a difference
is there betwixt the punyshments
of thys life, and the sharpe vengeance of
god in the life hereafter, as you master
Preacher haue often sayde? The paines

in this life, are in deede but transitorye
and for time: but the paines in that life,
are perpetual, and shal neuer haue end.
Yea, such and so horrible shall the smart
bee, as noe mouthe can vtter, nor tong
expresse: a bottomlesse hell, a deuouring
furnace, and a fier vnquencheable, prepared
for the deuill and his angelles, to
burne foreuer with tormentes eternall.
God bee mercyfull vnto vs, and holde
hys holy hande ouer vs and defende vs.
               And nowe commethe to my mynde, a
matter moste needefull to bee spoken of
after such heates of speach vsed agaynst
the vsurer,Whether ye borower bee an offendoure as the vsurer is. and that is, whether hee that
payeth vsurye bee an offendour or noe?
For some thinke that because there can
bee noe vsurye wythoute borowynge,
these therefore that borow, are in fault,
as they which do geue cause of this horrible
offence, seekynge out these money
men, & so after a sort, do compel thē to be
vsurers, yt els wold not put out their money,
if they were not merueilously ētreated
therunto, & knew not vnto whō they

might lend. I do aunswere, that euerye
borower doth not sinne, because it is an
inuoluntarie action, and muche against
the borowers will, to paye money vpon
vsury, who woulde rather wyth all hys
harte, borow freelye, and pay nothinge
for the lone then otherwise. Yea, it is as
muche agaynste his will, to pay vsurye
for money, if he might haue it freely: as
that mans deede is inuoluntarye, whoe
being in a shippe, and in great peril, casteth
his goods that are in the sayd shyp,
into the main sea, to saue himself harmles,
by lightening the ship for the tyme.
And as he that being set vpon by theues
in the high way, geueth his purse frely,
rather then hee woulde haue hys throte
cutte violentlye, and yet god knowethe
it is muche against his will to part with
his money: Euen so the poore nedy man
boroweth, that seeth hymselfe readye to
starue, except hee be presently relieued,
who yeldeth rather to be half vndō, for a
time, in hope to recouer himself againe,
by some odde meanes hereafter, thē suffereth
himself to be vndone, both he and

his for euer, for want of present reliefe.
Againe wher thentent is not euil, nor y•
minde consenting to sinne, as allowing
it, but rather altogether vnwillynge to
yeelde thereunto, as vnto sinne: whoe
can say that he offendeth, whose mynde
is sounde, pure, and vndefiled. And ys
there anye so madde to thynke, muche
lesse to saye, that he had rather wyth all
his hart pay for ye lone of money, then to
borowe it freely. So that in one, and the
self same facte, one may offend, and the
other may be innocent.32. q. 5. propos. As for example,
an aduowterer abuseth a womans body
against her will, the man dothe sinne, &
yet the woman is vndefiled, because her
minde is chaste and vnspotted.Iason Baldus Felinus ext. de iure iurā
                     do. C. debitor. et ibi Glos. Imola. Pet. de ancho. et 32. q. 5. proposito. 
                  Lucretia
the Romane Matrone, liueth chaste for
euer, of whose bodye though proud Tarquinius
sonne had hys pleasure, yet her
minde continued still most chaste & faith
full to her husbande, and therefore shee
not consentynge in harte to sinne, is by
same recorded to be the ornament of all
womanhode and perfyte chastitie. And
therefore sayethe Saynt Iherome verye

wel.Hieron. lib. 
                  Corpus mulieris non vis maculat, sed
volūtas:
                  Hebr. quest. not violēce, but wil doth defile a
womans bodye.
               
                  And Saynt Augustine to Victorianus.August. Vic toriano.
Ad deum ingemiscentibus ānino suis aderit
qui suis adesse cōsueuit,Epist. 122▪
                   et aut nihil in eam
castissimis membris libidine hostili perpetrare
permittet: aut si permittet, cum earum animus
nulla consensionis turpitudine maculatur,
etiam carnem suam defēdet a crimine.
Et quic quid in ea nec commisit, nec permisit
libido patientis, solius erit culpa facientis,
omnis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   illa violentia non pro corruptionis
turpitudine, sed pro passionis vulnere deputabitur.
Tantum enim valet in mente integritas
castitatis, vt illa inuiolata, nec in corpore
possit pudicitia violari, cuius membra potuerunt
separari, which is thus in english.
               
               He will euer be present with his, that
sigh and grone to god, as hee hath wont
to be present with his. And either he suffereth
nothing to be done in their chaste
bodies, by diuelishe luste: or if hee dothe
suffer, whereas their minde is not defiled
with any filthines of cōsent, he dothe
defende hys owne fleshe from offence.

And whatsoeuer eyther the luste of the
pacient, hath either not consented vnto,
nor suffered, it shalbe the fault of ye only
doer. And al that violēce shal not be imputed
for the filthines of corruption, but
for the woūd of suffering. For the soūdnes
of chastity is of such force in ye mind
that when the minde is vndefiled, chastitie
can not be defiled in ye bodye, whose
members might haue ben dysseuered in
sunder,August. Honorat. episcopo. one from an other.
               
                  And in an other place. Magis timeamus
ne sensu interiori corrupto, pereat castitas
fidei,Epist. 180▪
                   quàm ne faemine violenter constuprentur
in carne, quia violentia non violatur
pudicitia, si mente seruatur: quoniā nec quis
in carne violatur, quando voluntas patientis
sua turpiter carne non vtitur, sed sine consensione
tolerat quod alius operatur, that is.
               
               Let vs feare more, leaste the inwarde
vnderstanding being corrupt, the chastitie
of faith do therewith perysh, rather
then leaste weomen shoulde be violentlye
defiled in theire fleshe: for chastitye
ys not defyled by vyolence, yf it bee
kepte sounde and cleare in the mynde,

for as muche as none is defyled not so
muche as in the fleshe, when the will of
the sufferer, doth not filthely vse ye flesh,
but suffereth that thing without consēt,
which an other doth worke by violence.
This case is likewise to bee proued true
in an other matter, betwixt the landlord
and the tenaunt: for the landlorde maye
so oppresse hys tenaunt, wyth takynge
a great fine, and enhaunsing his rents,
that he may vndoe the poore▪ tenant foreuer,
and so commit deadlye sinne, and
yet the poore tenaunt nothing to be blamed.Ext. de locat.
For god knoweth he woulde haue
had hys farme better cheape, and haue
payde lesse rent with all hys harte,Bart. L. vlt. yf it
had so pleased his landlord.Cod. De indicta viduitate tollenda. Thus wher
the reason in offending betwixt twoe is
not like, the punishment should not extend
to thē both.C. super 10. And of this opinion are
diuers Doctors,Ext. de vsuris as Archidiaconus, Imola
Laurentius de Rodolphis wyth others. Albeit
ther be, that are of a cōtrary mynd,
& would haue ye receiuer, to be coūted an
offendor, aswel as yt lēder, & yet not euery
receiuor neither, but suche as borowe

to spend wantonly and vnthriftely, and
induce them, to lend for gayne, that else
haue not vsed so to do, nor would not yf
they had not been greatly constrayned,
and almost driuen to lend, against their
wils. Such borrowing in deede, by such
men, semeth to induce others to synne,
and they themselues doe sinne, that doe
thus borowe, to serue theire lust and couetouse
desyre, not he that boroweth to
gayne honestly, and saue himselfe from
staruing. And therfore, as I would not
haue vnthriftes to borrowe, so would I
haue lenders to take hede, what maner
of mē they be, vnto whom they doe lēd,
and not respect so muche their owne cō
                  modity,
by gettinge of vnthriftes into
their daunger, as the benefyte of them,
and hys great necessity, vnto whō they
are desyred to lēd. For surely they do of
fende much, that are ouer hastie in lending,
when they see present gayne comming
to themselues, and vtter vndoing
readye for others. And thus, as I haue
sayd some what of borrowers, excusing
some from synne, and accusing others

of synne: so will I speake of theire misery
that are driuē to borrowe. And thus
I saye, hee that wanteth, and is forced
to craue, must of necessitie be dryuen to
fawne, to flatter, to lye, to submyt hymselfe
to an other mans will, & to speake
oftentimes against his own conscience,
and so to falsifie hys fayth all together.
Such a one is not meete to be trusted in
matters of weight, concerning the state,
especially yf hee bee greatly in debte
through loose dealings. For men being
needy, will commonly yelde to muche
euil, before they will starue: & yet not al
poore men are vnfitte for aucthoritie,
but some more fitte thā some ryche mē.
Such onely are vnfit as are in daunger
to others for debt, into yt which they are
fallē, through theire owne foly, & know
not how to paye ye same agayne, by any
good or lawful meanes. And thys is very
pityful to heere, yt hee who is once in
miserable debt through vsurie, cā neuer
gett out again, except some great goodnes
do happē vnto hym. For yt more he
borroweth vppon vsurye, the more hee

oweth still, so that hys myserie is infynyte,
hys losse still encreasynge, & hym
selfe decaiynge and consuming awaye,
as waxe or butter, melteth at the sunne.
For as time goeth away, and tarieth no
man, so the vsurer taketh euer the benefite
of tyme, and gayneth by course of
the sunne, by a cleane contrarie waye to
all others. For wheras ye sunne helpeth
housbande men in theire haruest, & at
these tymes, whē they take paynes and
trauayle for theire liuynge: the vsurer
getteth gayne throughe tyme by verye
ydlenes, a fytte man to be openly whipped
for a commun rogue.
               They therfore, that would bee without
daunger of suche deuils, and not stande
in neede of them, lett them somewhat
harken to me, and they shalbee eased by
gods grace. I woulde haue euery bodye
lyue in order, folowe hys vocation, bee
not wastefull, spende nothing vaynelie,
looke twise vppon theire money before
they laye it out, and that theire expenses,
doe not excede theire reuenues, but
rather to lyue vnder than aboue theire

degree, remembringe alwayes, that in
sparing is great gettynge. Thus shall
they haue the lesse neede to borowe, a
better harte to lyue, and a more quyet
conscience to god warde, whē they shal
spende of their owne, and owe nothing
to any bodye, but good wil and charity:
And I tell you, it is a true saiynge, faelix
qui nihil debet, happy is hee that oweth
nothyng, hee sleapeth sounde sleapes, he
taketh lyttle thought, and so passeth the
course of hys lyfe, with muche ioye and
quietnes.
               There ys a pleasaunt tale, in one of Aristophanes
Commodyes, whyche I wyll
shewe vnto you, and somewhat enlarge
it for myne own pleasure, the rather to
refreshe youre wyttes, with some mery
matter, whō I haue thorowly weried, I
am afrayde, with a longe discourse.
               Thys Aristophanes, beynge the moste
pleasaūt deuiser of Commodies and enterludes
that euer wroate, hath one commodie
amongst the rest, whiche hee intituleth
de nubibus, of the clowdes, and he
deuised it, at the requeste of Socrates enemyes

to mocke hym thereby, and to
bring hym in hatred with the people,
as one, that broughte into the Citye,
worshyppynge of newe goddes.
And amongst other thynges, hee bringeth
in one Strepsiades, an aged man, all
together shipwracked by frayghting wt
vsury, who offered hymselfe, to bee one
of Socrates schollers, to learne thereby y•
rather of him, the waye and maner how
to deceiue hys creditours, & not to paye
them theire monethes vsurie, whiche
was vsual amongst yt Grecians, to paye
theire creditours, at the begynnynge of
euery newe moone. Unto whōe, when
Socrates made aunswere, that hee coulde
not geeue hym any counsell to deceyue
hys creditours, hee called hys wyttes to
hym, as one that was brought to an afterdeale,
and desired Socrates to tell him,
yf that way were not good, whiche hee
had deuysed, for (quod he) I haue found
out a waye, that I shalbee eased of my
burden. As for example. What yf I buy
a witche of Thessalia, and by her enchantements
doe fetche the moone oute of

heauen, and bringe it awaye, and afterwardes
enclose it in a case of glasse, and
so kepe it, as I woulde keepe a flee in a
boxe. And what good (sayethe Socrates)
woulde that bee to the? Mary, quod
Strepsiades, if the moone doe neuer ryse
agayne, I shall neuer pay myne vsurie.
And why so, sayethe Socrates, forsoothe
(quod he) because men paye theire vsurie
euer, at the begynnynge of the news
moone, and not before. Thus you see,
to what a straunge shifte thys poore
man was dryuen, euen to plucke by
violence; the moone out of heauen, for
hys helpe. And of truth ye witche did her
best, and began to charme the moone,
which when the creditour vnderstoode,
hee was put in such a peltinge chafe, as
was wonderful to heare: and accusinge
thys poore debtour of enchauntement,
wente hymselfe to an other wytche, not
onelye to keepe the moone from comming
out of heauen, but also to hasten
the course of it faster, that he myght the
sooner haue hys moneye.
               But lord what a trouble was the moone

put vnto, betwene these two witches?
what stormes and tempestes dyd
ryse? what horrible wynde did blowe?
what great rayne did fall? what floodes
ensued euery where? what countries
were almoste drowned and vnder the
water in manye places, as of late it was
here with vs? At what time, I feare me,
some faythlesse people were yeldinge
themselues to the dyuels deuocyon, to
bringe theire wicked purposes aboute:
and I thinke, it was some vsurers practyse,
to hasten the yeare forwarde. But
all thys I haue hytherto rehearsed, to
shewe the myserable state of poore debtours,
and the greedye desire of wicked
creditours, that like as the one for
mere necessitye was dryuen to a merueilous
rare shyfte, to auoyde hys debt
and the penaltie thereof: so the other of
an vnmercifull crueltie, sought as extremely,
to hasten the retorne of hys
moneye, by the swyfte course of the
moone. Thys impossible dryfte, and
vnnaturall fetche that the poore man

was put vnto, proceded vpon the vncharitable
dealinges of the vsurers in those
dayes. For whosoeuer failed of paiyng
hys debte and vsurie, the firste daye of
the newe moone (for so the Grecians &
olde Romaynes also did lend, from moneth
to moneth, and for no lōger time)
the partie vppon an execucion, was by
and by taken, and bound with a corde,
and so committed to prison,Caelius Rhodiginus. lib. 12 & 20. de nexis, & nectē
                     di ratione. there to liue
and rotte, eyther at hys owne charges,
or els, yf hee had not wherewith to find
himselfe, the creditour gaue hym a little
meale and colde water and no more, so
much onely as would fynd nature, and
so he lyued in that miserye, till he dyed.
               
                  Septimius Florens reporteth, if one man
were a debtour to many, hys body was
geeuen vnto them, to bee equally cut in
peces, and wheras hee had not to paye
in his purse, hys quartered body should
paye for all, to geue a terrour to others,
how to breake with theire creditours, &
as thys was amongst the Romaynes,
so the Grecians vsed the same.
               
                  
But Solon, that wyse and mercyfull
counsellour of Athenes, would not that
men should so much as bee bound with
cordes, for anye debte rysing vpon vsurie,
and so haynous & hurtfull hee found
vsury to the whole state, that hee procured
a generall pardon, for all those that
were indebted for vsury, which in greeke
is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as who shoulde
saye, an easemente of a burden.
               Thus hauinge longe holden you with
talke, I will now drawe towardes an
ende, for I am halfe wearye my selfe
with speakynge. Woulde god, others
were more werye of theyre euill doing,
and then all should be well. I pray you
beare with me my maisters, and take
that in good parte, which I haue hether
to sayde.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               I cannot otherwyse, for my
parte, but iudge well of your longe oration,
for that generally vyce hath bene
rebuked, although in some particuler cases,
some doubte maye bee made. But
because I haue no great skyl, to syfte seuerall
causes, I doe not mynde to quarell,

but to vse myne olde trade in rebukynge
synne, and referring euery particuler
actiō to euery mans pryuate conscience.
And glad I am, there haue bene
some good popes, for surelye they haue
ben all nought for the most parte, as by
all storyes written of them, and by sundrie
their canons and decretales it may
appeare.
            
            
               Gromel gayner.
               I, as one of no greater
skil, wil neither saye buffe nor baffe, but
thanke you for your longe communication,
which I am sure, hath rather don
me good then harme. For as you maye
perceyue, I haue often greeted youre
good talke with a nodde, and therefore
haue thereby the better digested my dinner,
and not misliked your longe rehersall
at all.
            
            
               Lawyer▪
               
               Out of all your ciuill and canon
lawe, you haue shewed plentie of
matter, but whether trulye or no, I cannot
tell. And vnder your correction, me
thinketh still, that all vsurye, euen for
lendinge of money, should not be so offensiue
to god, as your canon lawe maketh

it. And therefore, I doe better like
the iudgement of themperour Iustinian,
who would by lawe enacte a moderatiō
of takyng, wherfore, yf you would farther
open thys matter, I would be right
glad to heare you.
            
            
               Gromel gayner.
               So woulde I, yf it bee
for my profite, as I thinke it is.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               In deede there are wryters
of this age, that do merueilously defend
Iustinian, for hys lawe of moderacion:
yea, and stand in it earnestlye, that it is
neyther againste goddes lawe, nor yet
against the canon lawe neyther, & think
it rather a matter of policie, to permitte
moderate gayne, than thus preciselye to
deale in thys case, and vtterlye to forbid
all maner of takynge whatsoeuer. But
before I doe reherse the wryters, I will
sett fourth, and shewe ye lawe vnto you,
whiche is in thys maner.
               Wee haue thought necessary,l. eos. C. de vsuris. sayeth
the emperour Iustinian, to make a generall
lawe or statute, touching the quantitie
of vsurie, bringing the olde harde &
most greuous weighte of the same, to a

certayne moderate stay, or meane rate.
Therfore, wee commaunde those noble
mē, that are Erles, or their betters, that
they doe not make anye stipulacion, or
firme bargayne in anye maner of contract
whatsoeuer great or lesse, for vsurie
or gayne to be had aboue fower poū
                  des
in the hundred. Those that are guardens
or gouernours ouer handye craftes
men, or places where artificers doe
woorke, or els doe vse anye lawful trade
of merchandizes, wee will, that they
shall moderate theire stipulacion, or firme
promise, taken in anye bargaine, to
eighte in the hundred. And as for those,
that do aduenture their goodes beyond
the seas, and put out theire substance vpon
theire owne hazard, such may lawfully
demaunde by firme promise, to receyue
twelue in the hundred, and in no
wyse to take aboue that rate, althoughe
by the olde Romayne statutes, it hathe
ben lawfull to excede. And we will, that
all other men shal take onelye sixe in the
hundreth poūd aboue ye principall, & the
same quantity of excesse, in no wise to be

enlarged in other contractes and bargaines,
where vsury is wonte to bee demaunded,
without stipulation or couenaunte
made. Neither shall it be lawful
to the iudge, to encrease the foresayd taxation
or rate, made by reason of yt custome
vsed in anye country. And if anye
man should do any thing, againste ye order
and measure of thys statute & lawe,
hee shall not haue any benefite, by actiō
of anye ouerplus: but yf hee doe take
more, hee shalbee forced to accompte it
into the principall, forbidding all creditours,
to defalke or to retayne vnto thē
                  selues
anye thinge of the moneye, that
they put out to vsurie, either for Iohn Debates,
or for Iohn de Curtesia (as the Portugales
tearme it) when man will take
a drynkynge peny, or a trifle for theire
pleasure. Or that they will bee allowed
for brocage money, or to the scryuener,
for wryting of thindentures, or for any
cause whatsoeuer. For if any such thing
bee done, the principal debte shalbe diminished
by so muche in quantity, as hath
ben taken, so that aswell that, whiche is

to bee deducted, shall not bee asked, as
that the vsurie also shal not bee demaunded
at all.
               And we minding to cutt of all sleights
and engines of those creditoures, that
beyng forbydden by thys lawe, to take
greater vsury, do deuyse other meanes,
& worke by others, who are not so forbid
by thys lawe as they are.
               Wee do commaund, that yf any such
thinge bee attempted, the vsuries maye
be so recouered, and accompted, as shal
bee requisite, euen as though he, who vsed
an other mans helpe, had made
the stypulacion or bargayne hymselfe.
Wherein, we doe ordeyne, that the partye
shalbe put to hys boke othe, to make
hys purgacion. And the substaunce of al
thys lawe, is cōprehēded in these fower
simple rymed verses.
               
                  Discant illustres stipulari posse trientes:
                  Et mercatores sibi possint quaerere besses:
                  Quaerere semisses possunt communiter omnes:
                  In traiectitijs vires centesima sumis.
               
               
                  ¶In English thus.
               
                  Greate men of an hūdred by lawe may
fower make:
                  Merchaunts may haue eyght, al others,
sixe alone:
                  Twelue partes aduenturers, maye allwayes
to them take:
                  More then thys to gayne, Iustinian will
haue none.
               
               Nowe, touching the wryters of thys
matter, and in fauour of thys lawe, ther
is amongst others one Carolus Molineus,
a Frenche man, a notable lawyer vndoubtedly,
and one that lately lyued, &
such a one as shoulde seeme to bee of a
most godlie spiryte, referringe all hys
doynges to charity, whiche (hee sayeth)
yf it bee kepte amongst men, there cannot
bee anye vsurie committed. For as
you master lawyer haue sayd to master
Ockerfoe, so longe as neyther parte taketh
harme, but rather profyt, and is the
better for suche their tradinge, how can
it bee countted an offence to god? Excepte

you will saye, that therfore it is an
offence, because god hath expreslye forbidden
it? which if it be so in deede, then
there is no remedie to the contrary. For
looke what god forbiddeth, no man
should allowe. But herein Molinaeus desireth
an interpretacion, and saieth that
vsurye is not forbidden, but where charitye
is broken, and my neyghboure
dāpnefied by some exaction. And wher
it is sayde, that therefore wee shoulde
not lēde for gayne, because Christ saieth,
Mutuum date nihil inde sperantes, Here
hee speaketh not of vsurie, sayeth he, but
of restitucion of the pryncipall agayne,
or a like good turne. And that thys is
true, it semeth most euident to hym, because
Christ speaketh there, against those
onely, that geeue vnto them as good agayne,
which thyng heathē men and sinners
doe. But the seruauntes of Christe
shoulde lende, and not loke at all for the
principal agayne, as who shoulde saye,
they shoulde lende to the poore & needie
without all hope, to haue theire owne agayne.
And therefore Christ requireth of

his disciples, a greater perfection and
righteousnes, then the gentyles or heathen
doe shew. That is to saye, that they
lende to the poore and needye with thys
mind and intent, that although ye poore
men are neuer lyke to restore penye againe,
yet they may be glad and readye
to helpe their needye neighbour at al times,
for gods sake. And so farre vnlike
it is, that suche a good turne shoulde bee
l
                     •
                  st and dye: that god him selfe wil geue
a more plentyfull rewarde, when man
doth looke for the lesse rewarde of men.
Therefore as Christ will not, that anye
man shal lend vnto those onely, that are
able to repay them againe, but rather to
haue an eye, how to do good to our needy
and poore brother, then to looke that
our lent money bee in safetie, & in a sure
hande: So if my neighbour and brother
be not in suche neede, but that hee maye
with his ease paye, not onely the principall,
but also geue me somewhat for my
good will and frendshyp, god dothe not
forbid any suche dealinge. As lykewyse
god did not forbid a man to ask his own

agayne by order of lawe. But Christes
meanyng and intent is, that we should
alwaies haue regard vnto charitie, & to
consider the state & case of oure brother.
And Christ doth shew ther at large, how
wee shoulde vse the poore, which eyther
at all bee not able to paye vs, or elles
wyth theire ease cannot conuenyentlye
answeare the debte in time. Therfore it
is not agaynste charitie to take any maner
of vsurye sayeth he: but to take with
the hurte and losse of my brother, that is
it, whiche is offensiue and dysallowed.
For yf thy brother do gayne any thinge
by thy moneye, and hee thereof do geue
thee parte, thou doste take parte of the
blessinge of god, and not anye parte of
an other mans good. Neither ought the
offence of vsurye bee measured by the
quantitie of that whyche is taken, but
by the harme and losse which thy neighbour
hathe susteyned, so that the same
quantitie of takynge do not exceede, the
boundes lymytted by the polytique lawes:
shewynge that noe man shall for
anye cause whatsoeuer, take ouer and

aboue twelue pounde in the hundred
and yet not all neyther, canne take
twelue in the hundred, but the merchā
                  tes
onely that do aduenture their goods
ouer Seas, and into farre countreys,
hazardynge their wares by aduenture.
Others shall take but eyght, and some
but sixe in the hundred by Iustinians
lawe, and greate men, but fower onelye.
Thus farre Carolus Molineus.
               
               Andreas Alciatus likewise, a new wryter,
& a moste famous Clerke in ye Ciuill
lawes sayeth thus.
                  Alciatus de verb. signif. C vsura. Apud nos certe
publicè interest legem ciuilem obseruari, quae
certum modum faenerantibus constituit, vt
qui cùm excederent,L. eos. C. de vsuris. plecterentur. Nā propter
Canonū ꝓhibitionē non nisi pessimꝰ quisque et
impudentissimus faenerat, qui cambij vel
eius quod interest nomine, vel alio fictitio
titulo indigentem, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   necessitate, quòd humaniores
non reperiat, compulsum, deglubit,
nec episcopi et sacerdotes id hominum genus
vllo modo coercent, sed adiuuāt potius, suis
quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pecunijs Danistae in id lu
                     •
                  rum clam
creditis, quod et diuinus Ciprianus conqueritur.
               
                  
That is to saye, Amongst vs surelye, it
were behoueable for the cōmon weal, yt
the Ciuil law should be obserued, which
appointeth a certein rate vnto vsurers,
yt who so exceedeth the same rate, should
be punished. For now adaies because of
the strayght prohibicion made by y• Canon
lawe, none doe let out their money
but the woorst men of all, suche as care
not for laws, and are past al shame, reckyng
not what they take, whoe vnder ye
colour of exchaunge or interest, or some
other counterfeyte cloake or tytle of entercourse,
do eate vp the poore and needye
euerye where, beinge driuen thorough
necessitie to goe vnto suche men,
because there are none other that theye
can find to shew thē any more fauor, or
gentlenes at al. Neither do the bishops &
priestes, punishe any such kynde of dealings,
but doe rather helpe them then otherwise,
putting their owne money secretly
in bank, for the same gayn: which
S. Ciprian did complayne vpon in hys
tyme. Innocentius likewyse, one of the
Popes of that name, semeth to holde the

same opinion.Innocent in Rub. de vsur. in fine. These thinges I do think
my masters, wil plese some of you metely
wel.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               In deede I must saye, yt
you haue pretely well confirmed myne
oppinion, howsoeuer yours is.
            
            
               Ciuilian,
               Notwythstandinge I haue shewed the
Canon law vnto you, and spokē largelye
thereupon, heapinge examples, and
bringynge in dyuers reasons: Yet some
great learned men thinke, as you haue
harde, that this kinde of dealinge maye
be vsed in any Christian cōmon weale.
But I woulde know, what master Gromel
thinketh, & also heare master Ockerfo
yet once againe.
            
            
               Gromel gayner.
                 I would
haue it free for euery man, without any
limitacion at all, or els rather then the
prohibicion should be so straight, as no
man vpon great paynes should lend for
anye money at all, that there might bee
a rate appoynted, beyonde whyche, noe
man shoulde passe. Marye. I would that
the merchant should lende at all times,
and for all causes, for twenty if they list
in the hundred, wythout contradiction,
although he do not hazard, nor aduēture

his money abroade or beyonde the seas:
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               Will you see how couetousnes
is rooted in this man? no mercye at all,
no charitie, no loue, hee would haue the
most yt is possible to be had, & so woulde
haue it at libertie, which is worst of all.
For then wheras some men would willingly
lend for .x. or xij. at the most: he wt 
others would engrosse to them selues al
the moneye that they coulde geate after
that rate, and so when scarcitye came,
they woulde put the same moneye oute
agayne for fifteene, naye for twentye.
Whyche weare a cruell dealynge and
a crafty practise also: not vnlike to those
priestes in the olde time that woulde offer
an halfe peny to encourage the common
people to offer a grote more franklye.
For so these subtyll and deceyptfull
merchauntes wyll come to the Streete,
and take vppe all the moneye that theye
can geate after .x. or twelue in the hundred
and so put it out straight waies againe
as I here say, for fifteene, nay xx.
and more in the hundred: a wicked and
a most vnchristian engrossing, and god

forbyd that you or anye man should doe
so. Touchyng your gentle moderatyon
and lessenyng of iniquitie by Iustinianus
lawe, I cannot say, as you say neither,
but stil I must holde myne olde opynion
because the scrypture dothe so directe
mee, perswadynge my selfe, that ouerplus
takē for lone whatsoeuer it be, yea,
bee it but a farthinge in the hundred, for
the verye acte of lendynge: is playne vsurie,
and dampnable before god. For
so it is playne in the olde and newe testament.
And I wyl not seeme wyser thē
god and hys prophets, neyther wyll I
adde or dymynyshe anye thynge from
hys woorde. Lawyers, and worldlye
learned men maye blaunche and mynse
thynges as the deuyll and carnall reason
doth lead them. But god is wyser
then man, and the wysedome of thys
worlde is foolyshenes in deede before
god.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               I wyll tell you master
            
            
               Ockerfoe,
               Yf youre expoundynge bee so
strayghte, that the takynge of a farthynge
shoulde bee dampnacyon to him
that takethe it, of whom soeuer it bee

and that you haue no respect of men, nor
yet in anye thinge haue any regarde to
the cyrcumstaunces of tyme, persone or
place, I cannot tell what to saye to you,
but god haue mercy vpon vs al, for that
none in any age did euer liue (I thynk)
so perfectly as you expounde scriptures.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               I praye you let vs examyne that
place of Ezechiel and turne the booke to
see what the wordes be:Ezechiell. 18 The soule that
sinneth shal die, and his bloud shalbe vppon
him. If a man be godly and doe the
thinge that is equal and right, he eateth
not vpon the hylles, hee liftethe not hys
eyes vp to the Idols of Israel, he defyleth
not hys neighbours wife, hee medlethe
with noe menstrous woman, hee
greueth no body, he geueth his debtour
his pledge againe, he taketh none other
mans good by violence, he parteth hys
meate with the hungrye, he clotheth the
naked, he lendeth nothing vpon vsury,
he taketh nothing ouer. This is a righteous
man, he shall surely liue sayth the
lorde god. If hee nowe geat a sonne that
is a murtherer, a shedder of blood. If he

doe one of these things (thoughe hee doe
not all) he eateth vpon the hilles, hee defyleth
his neighbours wife, hee greueth
the poore and needy, he robbeth & spoyleth,
hee geeueth not ye debtor his pledge
againe, he lendeth vpon vsurie, and taketh
more ouer, shall this man liue? hee
shall not liue, seynge hee hathe done all
these abhominacions, hee shall dye, and
his bloud shall bee vpon him. Nowe, yf
thys man geat a sonne also, that seethe
all his fathers sinnes whyche hee hathe
done, and feareth, and doth not ye like,
namelye hee eateth not vpon the mountaines,
hee lifteth not his eyes vp to the
Idolles of Israell, hee defileth not hys
neighbours wife, hee vexeth noe man,
hee keepeth no mans pledge, he neyther
spoyleth nor robbeth any man, hee dealeth
his meat with the hungrye, he clotheth
the naked, hee oppressethe not the
poore, hee receiueth no vsurie, nor anye
thinge ouer, hee keepeth my lawes and
walketh in my commaundemēts: This
man shall not dye in hys fathers sinne,
but shall liue without fayle. I do see here

diuers thinges, and by them I do iudge,
of thys texte twyse rehearsed whyche
is, hee that lendethe freelye, and taketh
nothinge ouer, hee is a ryghteous
man, he shall surelye lyue. But hee that
lendeth vpon vsurye, and takethe anye
more ouer: shall this man liue? he shall
not liue. I woulde anye of vs weare so
well learned, as to vnderstande the Hebrue.
For I thynke thys matter weare
soone ended. The greatest clerkes as
Leo Iudas, Oecolampadius and others, doe
not turne this place into latin out of the
Hebrue in suche sort as wee do expound
it in Englishe. For in steede of the olde
translation plus, whiche is more, they do
translate super abundantiam, that is ouer
abundance, or ouer excessiue, whiche in
deede is wicked and dampnable to doe.
For then men are bitten, & oppressed,
and not when anye smal tryfle is taken
ouer. The lyke that is sayd agaynste vsurye,
is sayd also in the same text twise
of hym that geenethe hys debtoure hys
pledge agayne. The same man is ryghteous,

hee shall surelye lyue sayethe the
lorde. But hee that geeueth not the debtour
hys pledge againe, shall that man
lyue? Noe. hee shall not lyue. Nowe I
praye you sir, howe will you expounde
thys texte? hee that geeueth, or geeueth
not the debtour hys pawne againe, shal
euerye man lendynge vpon a pawne to
anye one whatsoeuer hee bee, geeue hys
pawne agayne beynge not able to paye
the debte? In good soothe, then men bee
more then madde, that wyll redeeme
theire pawnes, when Ezechiel wylleth
that euerye creditour shall delyuer to euerye
debtour his pawne agayne, or els
hee shall not lyue. Assuredlye me thynketh
thys weare a straunge exposicion,
yet yee maye as lawefully expound this
so, as the other agaynste vsurers. In
both which texts to my simple vnderstā
                  ding,
I do think ther is a specyal regard
had to the poore, that lyke as I ought to
delyuer to ye poore debtor his pawne again,
who is not able to redeme it: So
should I not take any thīg ouer & aboue

my principall vppon my poore brother,
least I doe oppresse him, who perhaps is
scant able to pay the principall, and therfore
I shoulde rather forgeeue hym all
charitablye, when he is not able to paye
me, then to take myne owne and more
too, and so oppresse him.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               The
wordes in Ezechiel are general. He that
lendeth vpon vsurie, and taketh more ouer
without any mentyon of the poore.
            
            
               Lawier.
               So are the wordes of the pledge
pawned, general. And yet I thynk you
will not haue all pledges restored.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               Yes, all pledges muste bee restored.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               Then what assurance hath the
creditour of his owne by anye pawne,
when the debtour shallbee sure neuer to
lose it, because it is commaunded, that it
shalbe restored: I doe not vnderstande
this Diuinitie.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               He must restore
the pawne vpon paiment of his money,
or els he may keepe it, excepte the poore
man be sore decayed, and then for charitie
sake, he is bounde to geue him his
pawne againe.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Euerye man is
bounde by all lawes vppon payment of

the debte, to geeue backe the pawne againe,
yea, they that neuer hard of god,
will doe that by a naturall order. And
therfore this precept as you vnderstand
it, is boyde and of noe force, for as noe
man by lawe, can bee suffered to keepe
backe an other mans pawne, so I doe
thynke, none dareth or wilbe so wicked,
as vpon receyuing of his owne againe,
to withhold another mans pledge. Marye
wheather men wyll geeue againe a
pledge pawned, & lose their principall, I
doubte muche of that, and I thynke noe
man will so doe, or if any be so minded,
no doubt that man is a very perfit man.
            
            
               Gromel gayner.
                I neuer denyed any man
his pawne, that payde me my money againe.
But by Saint Mary, hee yt brake
day with me, was sure to lose his pawn
foreuer. And that is reason as I take it,
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               Me thynketh you vnderstande
this texte so straightly, as the Jewes vnderstoode
the first precept, who because
theye we are forbidden to make to them
selues any grauen Image, or any lykenes
of any thynge, that was in heauen

aboue or in earth beneath, or in the water
vnder the earthe, therefore to thys
daye bothe theye and the Turkes also
(who groslie lykewise vnderstande this
precepte) forbeare to make by painting,
caruynge, grauynge, or woorkynge anye
lykenes of anie thynge created by
nature eyther in theire buyldings, or in
their Turkey carpets, or ī stone, wood,
mettall, or coyne, or in anye thinge els
whatsoeuer. Whereas I trust you wyll
not cal it Idolatrie amongst vs Christians,
yf a man haue his Image paynted
or grauen in the likenes of a man, either
in tiber, stone or brasse: or if one haue ye
Quenes Maiesties portrature coined in
siluer, or wrought in golde. And yet me
thīketh yt text maketh asmuch for Iewes
& Turkes, as this dothe for you against
all vsurers, for they bothe are generall
and forbidden vniuersally. Therfore as
in the matter of Images, I shoulde not
make anye Image to my selfe to attrybute
any diuine & godly honor thereunto:
So shoulde I not in lending my money
oppresse my neighbor wth excessiue

taking & in such sort, yt he cā not liue by
the bargayn. And therfore in both these
sayings, ye offence is accidental, & not in
the substance, yt is, in the maner & vsage,
& not in yt matter it selfe, as it is in other
offences, namely in theft, murder, & fornicaciō.
And so should I not lēd out my
money, to ye hurt & oppressiō of my neighbor,
wheras otherwise I may lende forgayn
 wt a safe conscience, when no hurt
cōmeth therof, but rather much good, as
I may cause my picture to be made, wt
                  out
offence, when onely pleasure is had
therby, & no honor geuen therunto.
            
            
               Preacher.
               Nay surelye, you are deceiued, y• offence
is in ye substāce, you may not take
ouer & aboue the principall, so much as a
poynt, no not to gaine a point, no more
thē to steale a point. In Images, aboration
is forbiddē only, & not ye making of
Images, as I haue sayd before, & in lendinge,
all ouerplus is prohybyted, that
is to saye, whatsoeuer is taken more
then the pryncipal. And thus your similitude
holdeth not, as I haue wel ꝓued.
            
            
               Lawier.
               Let yt similitude holde as it may.

What shal not a man take so much as a
poynt? And shall that point be oppressyon
or deadlye sinne? Nowe god for hys
mercies sake, send you better iudgemēt,
For surely, I cannot as yet, bee of your
minde. This is ouer great precisenes in
my simple vnderstandinge. Yea, this is
to bad, I will say no more of other your
straite and curious dealynges.
            
            
               Gromell
gayner.
               wel I say master
            
            
               Ockerfoe,
               I haue
yet a knacke for you, & yt is this, because
you are so precise againste lendinge, I
wyll make hereafter a byll of bargaine
and sale, and neuer lend againe, and yet
gaine by this meanes, makynge a prouiso,
that if the money be payde at tyme
appointed, the sale to be void, and wher
are you then?
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               Lorde god what a
world is this, and what deuises are vsed
to mocke god and his lawes, but god is
not mocked. These dealings suerly, are
the woorkes of darknes, god be mercyfull
vnto vs. And where I am charged
with ouer muche precisenes, I pray god
others vse not ouermuch boldenes, and
take too much vpon them. If I sought ye
                  
glorie or prayse of men, I should not be
the seruaūt of god. I trust no good man
is offended with me, saye you my masters
as it pleaseth you. And thys will I
saye vnto you. The best learned men of
all ages, are directly agaynste you.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               With your pacience, master
preacher, although my profession be the
lawe, yet doe I sometyme looke vppon
the scripture, & see what they saye, that
haue written there vpon. And thys will
I saye vnto you, the best of this age, as
Bucer, Brentius, Caluyne, and Beza, with
others, are not againste moderate vsurye,
but doe rather thinke it needeful to
bee permitted, and saye also, that temperate
takynge, according as it is rated
by the ciuill lawe, ys not agaynste god,
nor hys lawes: because it is not agaynst
charitye.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               I doe honor both Caluyne and
Bucer, as the chosen vessels of god, and
yet I am not bound to anye opinion of
theires, otherwise thā the scripture doth
declare. Neyther are these true, because
they haue so sayde, but because the truth

of god, which was before them hath ben
so vttered. And I knowe, they did neuer
directlye allowe of vsury, but by circumstance
forced to write theire myndes,
as they dyd, for verye necessitie. I
knowe the olde fathers haue expounded
vsurie, as I doe vnderstande it, & therefore
haue forbidden it vtterlye, and the
catholike cōsente of christendome, hath
agreed thereunto.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               Yf you will allowe all things
that the olde fathers haue agreed vpon,
and stande to the determinacion of the
churche, your doctrine that you teache,
maye soone bee called in question, and
perhaps vtterlye forbidden. Therefore
you shall not do well, to vse suche argumentes,
and to stande vpon vniuersalities.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               In deede the woorde of god
is my foundacion, whiche doth expoūde
it selfe playnelye ynough, to my vnderstandinge,
and to the satisfaction of my
conscience. And yet so long as vniuersalities
doe agree with gods truthe, I
maye well allege suche consentes. And

thys I saye for vniuersalities, the verie
substaunce of all our doctrine, that wee
teache thys daye, hath the vndoubted
witnesse, not onelie of the scriptures of
god, whiche are infallible, but also of the
olde catholique general counsels & learned
fathers. And whosoeuer thinketh otherwise
hath not reade thē. But nowe,
whereas much talke hath passed, & euery
man hath sayde hys mynde, I pray you
lett me aunswere yet once agayne, and
reioyne to euery one of you, as you haue
geuē me iust occasion. I haue a great
desire to wynne you all to Christ, and
none of you can tell, how gods myghty
spiryte maye woorke in me at length to
speake, and in you to heare. For I hope
wee are all gathered together in his holie
name, and none is here so wedded to
his owne will, but the same man is contented
to captyuate hys senses, to godds
most holye will, Neyther cometh euery
one at y• first calle, but at such an hower
as god hathe appoynted, eyther at cocke
crowe, at none dayes, or in the euening.
With that, they were all contented,

and therefore thus hee beganne his
reioynder, and last oracion.
            
         
         
            ¶The preachers, reioynder, &
laste oracion.
            
               
                  CHrist, before hee shoulde suffer, hauinge
hys disciples (as you rede) about
hym, willed them, to loue one an other,
as hee loued them. She winge that
no man could vtter a greater loue, than
to spend hys lyfe for them, which Christe
did vpon the crosse, for the redemptiō of
mankynde.
               Nowe then, yf Christe dyd so dearlie
loue vs, that hee bestowed hys owne
bodye, to bee torne vpon the crosse for
vs, and requireth nothing more of vs,
but loue, for loue, firste towardes hym,
& then one of vs to an other: What doe
we meane to be so vnthākful, that neyther
we thinke of godds goodnes towardes
vs, nor yet haue any remorse or
pitye of oure poore brethren in Christ amongst
vs? Assuredlye wee 
                     •
                  e so lyue

now for a great parte of vs, as thoughe
there were neyther god, nor worlde to
come. Suche hardnes of harte, so vnmercifull
dealinge, such bribinge, suche
oppression, suche bytinge, and suche
wringinge of oure poore brethren, was
neuer in anye worlde, as I thinke. And
what other thing is this, than wilfullye
to warre with god, and vtterly to defie
his holy lawes? to offende of sett purpose
agaynst the holy ghost, and so to condempne
oure sowles eternally? The
word of god ys true for euer. And these
scriptures that I haue alledged, are
gods owne woordes, whiche yf you wil
not beleue and followe, you shall all perishe
euerye one of you, and bee dampned
for euer. And as surely as god lyueth,
I saye still vnto you. No vsurer
shall enter into the kyngdome of heauen,
except hee doe repent vnfaynedly,
and call to god for grace. And like as he
is a theefe, that stealeth but one halfe
peny, with a felonyous entente, so is he
an vsurer, that by contracte taketh but
one halfe peny, ouer and aboue the principall,

in respecte of tyme, and both are
deadly synners before god. For lēding
must bee free, without anye thynge takyng
ouer, by couenaunte made before
hande, or els it is no lending, but an other
kynde of contracte wythout name,
neuer yet vsed, no nor possibly, as I take
it, to bee vsed by anye lawe, being all
together agaynst reason, lawe, and nature.
For no man can reasonably and
dutifully make anye writinge, to haue
more then is hys own in ryght to haue.
And what ryghte hath any body to that
which is an other mans? as al ouerplus
is, being no parte of the principal lone?
Or what man can put that in wrytyng,
whiche is an other mans goodes, for
hymselfe to recouer, as hys owne proper
lent goodes? And yet these vsurers,
to benefite themselues, will bee notorious
lyers, for they will saye, yea and
haue it put downe in writinge also, that
they lent a hundreth poundes, when in
deede they neuer deliuered aboue 80. li.
or perhaps some smal portion ouer. And
here they shewe playnelye, whose scholers

they bee, namelye the very children
of Sathan, for he is a lyer, & the aucthor
of lyes. So that suche, as will nedes haue
gayne for tyme, and forbearing present
payement, bee the gayne neuer so
lyttle, do not onely destroy altogeather
that louing, charitable and free trade of
borrowing and lending, which oughte
to be amongst men, but also shewe thē
                  selues
to bee very lyers, both in woorde
and wrytinge, puttinge that in their obligacion,
whiche they dyd neuer lende.
And now, yf a man would reason with
them of the tyme, I pray you let vs consider
of it a lyttle. Hee that borroweth,
is Lorde of the thinge borrowed, immediatlye
after that it ys deliuered vnto
hym. And then, yf thys vsurer will bee
payde for the deliuering of hys moneye
in respecte of tyme, he must be aunswered
for so muche tyme, whyle hee is in
deliuering of the money, for immediatly
after the money is deliuered, it is no
more hys, that did lende it, but strayght
wayes it is hys that hath borrowed it.
And what reason is it, that a man shall

paye vsurie, for halfe an howers forbearing
of his mony? Yea many tymes not
halfe a quarter of an hower, althoughe
the payement be a hundreth poundes, if
it were in soueraignes of one coyne.
And why should anye man pay for nothing,
some thing, as they do, that paye
for the lone of mony any thinge ouer &
aboue the principal? For, as master Ciuilyan
hath well sayd, the vse cannot be
seperated from the thinge, and then hee
that hath the vse of a thinge, and so the
propertie by vertue of borrowing, howe
can it bee, that any man can aske anye
thyng of hym for nothynge, seeynge he
is Lorde of all, by vertue of hys borrowinge
for the time? Againe, by what
lawe, or ciuill vnderstandinge, should
anye one haue an other mans goodes
for naught, as they haue that reape the
frute of an other mans labour and industrie,
for the onely lone of money, which
being once lente, is none of hys, for the
tyme that hee dyd lende it, but hys properlie,
that did borrowe it, who must in
reason haue all the profite alone, yf any

can bee gott with that mony, for the tyme
hee hath the vse of it? Thirdlye, who
did euer see coyned siluer, and curraunt
money growe, which must nedes so do,
yf it should bring an ouerplus or encrease
agayne, for the verie acte of lending?
A thing so much against nature, as nothinge
can be more repugnaunt or contrarye.
Then yf we be reasonable men,
lett vs lyue accordynge to reason, and
haue an especiall regarde aboue all
things, to god aboue, who seeth al our
follies, and forbiddeth so expresly these
merchauntes of tyme, and these sellers
of sunne and moone, as hee forbiddethe
nothing more, willing all men to deale
freely in theire lendynge, as hee dothe
freely suffer the sunne shynynge, the
moone and starres to haue theire course,
and the worlde to continue, with seasonable
weather and tyme. But vsurers
commonly stand vpon these pointes,
that where charitye is not broken,
and that both parties doo feele no harme,
but rather gayne, and where men
doe to others as they would haue others

do to them. Here cannot bee (say they) anye
vsurye committed at all, these respectes
beinge had. I doe aunswere that
there is no charitie, where priuate gaine
is chefely sought, without any especiall
regard to the profite of my neyghbour,
whiche playnelye appereth in all them,
that lett out their money for vsury. For
weare they sure, that they shoulde not
reape any gaine at all by theire money,
they would neuer helpe the necessitie of
theire poore neyghbour, although hee
were in neuer so great extremitye. And
what charitye call you thys, when a mā
chefelye seeketh hys owne auayle? And
although hee take but lyttle, yet hys desire
is forbidden, and therfore synneful.
Agayne, bee it that both the borrower,
and the lēder are gayners, shall the acte
of vsurie therfore bee counted lawfull?
Nowe god forbid, for howsoeuer they
twoo doe speede, the common weale assuredly
smarteth, and playne dealinge
men that vse no suche trades, shall feele
want hereby, when they haue neede to
buy anye thing for theire owne prouision

and maintenaūce of theire famely,
for by these meanes, both wares, and all
kynde of victualles waxe deere. And
how can it bee otherwyse? For the man
oftentymes that taketh money vpp by
interest, paiyng after twelue or fifteene
vpon the hundred, or perhaps in the hū
                  dred,
which is more, is an occupier him
selfe, eyther a victualer, or artificer, or a
merchaunte. Nowe how can hee make
vp hys money agayn at the yeares end,
and lyue to thryue, excepte hee will sell
hys wares after twenty in or vpon the
hundred to hym that commeth to buy?
And then do you not see very playnely,
that the common weale smarteth, and
euery particuler man of what estate or
condicion soeuer he bee, is hereby greuouslie
wronged and pynched?
               Nowe, yf an ydle gentleman doe happen
to paye this vsurie, his lande in the
ende, by oft vsing thys trade, payeth for
all, and he and hys begge theire breade
at laste. And is not then the common
weale muche woorse, when a landed
gentleman of an auncient house perhaps

is eaten vp by an vsurer, and so
hys howse decayed for euer, & hys poore
tenaunts racked and hayled with incū
                  bes
and fynes vpon the vsurers firste
entrance, and possession takynge of the
land? But forsooth, the vsurer will still
replye and saye, that he hath donne to
others, as hee would haue others doe to
hym, yf he hymself had ben in like case.
Neyther is it a small pleasure (as hee
saieth) to saue a mans land from forfeyture,
so that he hath not offended either
god or man, because he hath fulfilled the
lawe of nature, by thys hys maner of
doynge. But god knoweth how theuishely
thys vsurer speakethe in thys behalfe.
For let him imagyne, that he him
selfe were very poore in deede, and dryuen
by extremitie to borrowe moneye,
for redeming of lande, or else to loose a
good lordship, for a smal portiō of treasure:
woulde hee (thinke you) hauinge
suche great neede, rather paye vsurie
for the lone of moneye to redeme hys
lande, than to haue it freely lent hym?
I am well assured, hee woulde neuer

doe so. For who is hee, that woulde not
rather haue it geeuen hym, than lent
hym? or who woulde not rather trauaile
without a burthen vppon hys backe,
then with a burthen? or who would not
haue the sweete, and auoyde the sower?
or who would not receyue an hundred
poundes, to paye so muche and no more
at the yeres end, rather thē to paye a hū
                  dreth
and twenty poūds, for a hundreth
poundes at the twelue monethes ende,
as they commonly doe, eyther more or
lesse? Then let vs leaue these dissemblinge
speaches hereafter, and away on
goddes name with all gayne takynge
for tyme, because it is both hurtfull to a
common weale, vncharitable to oure
neyghboures, and also forbydden by
goddes woorde, as you haue hearde
at large, vnto whose sharpe voyce and
seuere commaundement wee oughte to
geeue good eare, and to bee alwayes obedient,
euen because he onely hath said
it, although there were none other matter
in it. And let not the vsurer saye,
that hee saueth the gentlemans lande,

for it is he, and none other, that causeth
hym to make hys lād awaye almoste for
nought, who yf hee had not dealte, with
suche cutthrotes, hee had neuer been so
greate an vnthrifte, nor so wastefull in
hys expenses, nor so readye to mortgage
hys ryght of enheritaunce, which he
shall neuer bee hable to redeme, beinge
once faste lapte in the vsurers bandes.
But the vsurer wil not bee aunswered,
for any thing that can bee sayde against
hym, standinge still in thys opinion wt
himselfe, that hee deserueth great thankes,
because he doth forbeare hys money
for a yere or two, till the borrower
be hable to make better shifte, for redemynge
hys lande. Unto whome I doe
aunswere still, because he is so importune,
that he doth no good to ye borrower,
but encreaseth hys harme, making him
euerye daye lesse and lesse hable to paye
hys debtes. In deede I muste saye, and
cannot deny, but that the vsurer forbeareth
hys mony, sometymes for twoo or
three yeres, but that is to his great gayne,
& to the borrowers bitter paine. For

in the ende, y• vsurer hath done no more
than thys, that hee hath onely respited ye
debtours certayn vndoynge, for a yere,
twoo or three, and then, bee hee well assured,
hee shalbee vndone, without all
remedy. As the cat, that playeth with a
mouse a whyle, to eate her vp in ye ende:
or like as yf a prynce shoulde saye to an
offender, he is contented to pardon him
lyfe for a monethe, but at the monethes
ende, hee will that he shall then dye assuredly,
and lyue no lōger. Euen so the
vnmercifull vsurer, will forbeare for a
yere or two, to cut the borrowers throte
at laste, for when these two yeares are
ones paste, hee will not fayle to doe hys
feate. A gentle dishe of fauour, god knoweth,
suche as I am well assured, they
woulde bee loth to haue the like themselues.
Repent therefore, O ye vsurers,
for gods anger against sinne, although
it bee slowe, yet it is certayne, and the
slownes oftentymes is recompensed,
with the heuy weighte and greatnes of
payne when it comes. And yf thys bee
not true whiche I doe saye, touchynge

gods anger agaynste tyme sellers, then
is the woorde of god, both false and vntrue,
whiche were horryble blasphemye
to saye. In whiche woorde of god, these
straighte prohibitions are enacted and
made, threatening lawes agaynste all
vsurie, that men shoulde the rather vse
charitye one to an other. But I thinke,
there is none of you all, that denyeth ye
scriptures, or thinketh them to be false,
for so you shall denye god, and renounce
vtterlie the knowledge of hym. For
by them hee ys knowne, as whiche doe
geue testimonie of hym. And surelye I
doe wonder, that the worlde shoulde so
muche choake men, that they wil so farre
forgeate god, as that they contempne
hys holye lawes. For wheras in all other
offenses men are thought, through
frayltie to breake the lawe, It seemeth,
yt in thys matter of vsury, they stand wc
god in it, that it is none offense at al, although
ye worde of god be most plaine agaynst
thē.Senaeca de beneficijs. lib. 3. 
                  Seneca sayeth, Pudorē rei, tollit
multitudo peccantium, & desinit esse loco
peccati, commune malefactū. Et alibi. Cessere

publica iura peccatis, et caepit licitum esse,
quod publicum est.
               
               The multitude of sinners, hathe taken
away the shame of sinne, and common
euill doing, is not taken for any priuate
offēce. And in an other place. Publique
lawes haue geuen place to common offences,
and that is accompted for lawfull,
which is commonlye vsed. Whereby
it appeareth howe needefull it is for
al men to enure themselues wyth ye best
thynges, leaste by euill custome, theye
haue no sence in sinne, but throughe error
walow in al wickednes. It is an old
prouerbe, sitte by the good, and by the
good arise. And happie are they, yt seeke
the company of the godlye, & acquaint
themselues wyth the woorde of god.
               And in this matter, what can bee more
plaine then yt whiche Christ saieth in S.
Luke. Lend one to an other, hopinge for
nothing ouer & aboue that you did lend:
whereby not onely al contractes and vsuries
vpon lone, in respect of tyme are
forbidden, but the very hope also to loke
for a good turne agayne, or any thynge

els ouer & aboue the principal is vtterly
barred and cleane taken away. Neither
is your exposicion sound master Ciuiliā
in this behalfe, that would haue Christs
meaning to be, that men shoulde neuer
looke for their principal againe. For thē
Christ myght haue saide, geeue freelye,
whereby is included a cleare renoūcing
to aske backe a gyft geeuen, whereas in
lending, it was neuer so mente in common
reason, that a man shoulde neuer
hope to haue his owne againe. Neyther
wil men leese theire principall, excepte
some great matter moue them, as thextreme
pouertie of the partye, or some other
like thynge. For althoughe goods
lent be not his that did lend them for the
tyme they were borowed, yet when the
daye of the retourne commethe, for repayment:
hee maye wyth good conscyence,
aske his owne agayne. And therefore
suche gloses are vayne, and to noe
purpose, and yet bee it that your exposicion
were true, thus then I reason. Yf
god requireth suche perfectyon in man,

not to aske his principal againe, when
he hath once lent it oute of hys handes:
muche more then dothe god forbyd all
manner of ouerplus in takyng for lone
more then the verye pryncipall. So that
expounde thys texte as you wyll, it ys
rather agaynst you, then wyth you, and
requyrethe in all constructyons a free
lendynge. Agayne, in Ezechiel amonge
other thynges, god sayethe there, as
you haue hearde before, hee that hathe
not lent for vsurie, and hathe not taken
anye thynge ouer and aboue, that hee
dyd lende, the same personne is a iuste
manne, hee shall lyue the lyfe sayethe
the lorde. Whereas on the contrarye
part it is said in the same chapiter.
               Hee that dothe lette oute hys moneye
or goods for vsurye and taketh more, or
an ouerplus, shall than man lyue sayethe
the lorde? Noe, hee shall not lyue,
but shall dye the deathe, and hys bloud
shall bee vppon hym, whereby it appearethe
that anye thynge taken ouer, is
dampnable aswell as excesse.
               
                  
Yea, any thīg aboue ye prīcipal is excesse,
because it is an iniury or wrong don to
an other man, by usurying his goods, &
so a dedly sinne. Neyther did those trāslators
Leo, Iudas, Oecolampadius, & others
vnderstande thys text otherwise then I
haue said, although you master Ciuiliā,
do not so take thē, who ī their other writings,
did vtterly condempne al maner
of vsurye. And Luther (amongst others)
is so vehement against al vsurye whatsoeuer,
as he was neuer more vehemēt
against the Pope himself, & al his counterfeit
holines. And let not this imagynacion
hinder you, to thynke as manye
doe, that no vsurie is committed but vpon
the poore, because the scripture sayeth,
thou shalt not put out thy money to
thy poore brother for vsury. For it is also
saide in Deuteronomie.
                  Exod. 22 Thou shalt not
lend money to thy brother for vsury,Deuterono. 23 wt
                  out
addicion of any pouertye at all, so yt
al lending to any Christian be he neuer
so rich, is vtterly forbidden, except a brother
simply be no Christian in verytie.
Then seing the scripture is so plaine, &

so vnderstoode by the auncient fathers,
and by manye good men of thys tyme,
what mean you to seeke suche out leaps
of libertie, by wreasting of gods word,
to your wilfull lust & sensuall pleasure?
Those other learned menne whom you
named Caluin & Bucer, did somewhat enlarge
this law by a charitable exposiciō,
for the hardnes of mens hartes void frō
mercy, and also for very necessitie sake,
to helpe the needye banyshed men then
dwelling amongst them, not but yt they
woulde haue al men lend freely, as god
hath commaunded. And yet what warrantie
haue they for so expoundynge the
scriptures of god? But goe we on. The
lord god saieth in his x. commandementes.
Thou shalt not couet thy neighbors
goods, his oxe, his asse, or any thing els
that is thy neighbours. And what other
thing I pray you, do these vsurers that
take ouerplus, but couet their neighbors
goods? for theirs it is not, because they
did lend it, and more then they did lend,
they should not haue in right, so yt theye
breake ye law Non concupisces, thou shalt

not couet. Now lord in heauē. Who hearing
these speaches, & hauinge ye feare of
god before his eies, wil of set purpose &
wilful madnes becōe an vsurer? For as
I cā perceiue, ye greatest harm in this of
fence, is yt men haue not y• sēse or feling
of this hainous fault, wt in their hartes,
but think they may lend theire money &
goods for gayn, wtout cōmitting sinne,
or offending god at all, wheras of other
sinnes they are ashamed, although thorough
fraylty they do offēd. For no mā
durst euer stād in yt defence of theft, aduowterie,
or murder, and yet vsurye is
as great and as horrible before god, as
any of them al, according to the opiniō
of al good and learned men in all ages.
yea, so horrible is this sinne, yt amongst
al other sinnes, it maketh men to forget
god, or rather to thinke there is no god.
Mars
                        •
                     lius ficinus in his booke de Christiana
religione, the .xi. chapiter sayethe thus.
Soli faeneratores auaritiae mancipati, de diuinis
rectè sentire non possunt. Onely vsurers
amongst al others (saieth he) being bond
slaues to couetousnes cannot think wel

of heauenly things of god: & the reason
is, for yt they are worldlye, & makes the
world their god. And truly as a christiā,
is no Ethnik, painim, nor Jew, so is he
no vsurer, & this wil I boldlye saye, that
Turks, Tartarians, & Ethniks in dede
are pure Angels in comparison of these
worldly vsurers, & lesse harme do thei to
christians, then vsurers do, and are lesse
cruel or vnmerciful. For y• Painim somtimes
sheweth mercye, but ye vsurer neuer
sheweth mercy at all, but would bee
lord of yt whole world himselfe alone, if
he might. So y• 
                  Cerberus in hel, & al those
monsters yt 
                  Hercules subdued, are inferiors
in euil to these wicked vsurers vpō
earth. And therefore as Lucifer for pride
fel down from heauen: so vsurers for couetousnes
wil fall down frō earth, to the
dark dungeō of hel. And mark this euer
whatsoeuer he be yt is a great vsurer, is
of a vile & base nature, & nothīg of value
in him: one sayeth, yt vsury vpon vsury,
is vilain vsurye, & no doubt they are no
better then vileins or slaues, whosoeuer
they bee yt are great vsurers, let them set
neuer so good a coūtenāce vpō ye matter.

Al this notwtstanding, these wise worldly
riche men (to cloke their sinne) and to
beare out the matter, as though their doings
were lawfull) do deuise policies against
god, and seeking to mitigate offences,
teache god what hee hathe to
doe. So were the stewes deuised as a cō
                  mon
sinke to scower cities, and maynetained
as tollerable, to auoide farther euill,
being neuer punished in other coū
                  treis,
and muche merueled by strangers
resorting hether, that simple fornycaciō
is so seuerely punished here in Englād.
But suche deuises are wicked policies &
fetches directly against al godlines. For
Saint Paule saieth,Paulus ad Ephes. 5. ad Hebr. cap. 12 that no fornicatour,
no whoremonger, or vncleane persone,
shall inherite the kyngdome of heauen.
And as it is saide for whoremongers, so
saieth the holie prophet king Dauid,
                  Psal. 15 that
no vsurer, who taketh ouerplus for hys
money, or goods, for the verye lone therof:
shal enter into the kingdome of heauen.
To geeue almes, and to lende freelye,
are the fruites of charitie, and twoe
especial precepts of god, and plaine tokens

to knowe a faithful christian from
an infidel. But he that wil do neither of
these two thinges, as god hath commaū
                  ded,
can neuer be thought a good christian.
For they yt are of god, do those thinges
bothe gladly and faithfully, whiche
god hath commaunded them to do. For
as loue is commaūded, so is loue & gift,
whiche is the fruite of loue, commaūded
likewise. Then what shal I saye to those
men of the world, that handle gods doings,
so as they make no sinne to seeme
wher great & horrible sinne is: seekyng
by turnes and twines of texts to cloke &
excuse sinne. I speke to you master tēporal
Lawier, who for yt you seme lerned,
do seeke to infecte ye corrupte natures of
others, as amongst mo, this worshipful
merchāt here, & diuers besides, rocking
them a sleepe, wyth the cradel theye best
like. I think if you would put into some
of their heads, that custome and tribute
were not due to the prince, there be that
woulde geeue eare vnto you: for all the
worlde is geeuen to harken after theire
owne profite. And badde is that counsell

which they will refuse to followe, when
gayne may rise thereof, without danger
or hazard of temporall lawe to punyshe
them, let gods lawe bee neuer so strong
against them. And you, master Ciuiliā,
although you haue saide muche and very
well, but especially out of the Canon
lawe: Yet I doubt of your constant abiding,
in the very practise and true the of
this cause, that is to say, simplie to geue
your eare to gods woorde, if the matter
shoulde bee determined by your iudgement.
For I feare me, you wyl beare wt 
gloses, and winke at these worldly and
politike deuises, which are inuencyons
of the deuill to destroy man, & to brynge
hym to euerlastynge dampnacion. And
yet god forbyd, that anye man shoulde
seeme to make hym selfe wyser then the
holy goost, in abusing or counterfeiting
his worde. You did allege certeine learned
Lawyers of thys tyme, and wyth
them, some godlye diuines, that thynkes
it were good to haue some tolleracion
to auoide farther mischiefe, and to
bridle the greate greedines of certeine

couetous wretches, as that whiche you
accompt to ryse of a good minde & zeale.
Well, I wylnot stande vpon their meaninges,
but I am sure the same is not
grounded vpon gods worde, for intentes
imagined without gods warraunt:
are deedes accursed, although in appearaunce
theye seeme moste godlye.
               For god sayeth.Hoc tantum facies, Deute ro. 12. Thou shalt not do that
whyche is good in thine owne eies, but
doe thou that onely which I commaund
thee. Vpon this place Saint Ihon Chrisostome
in his oration against ye Jewes,
sayth thus in Englishe. Of a trueth that
whiche is done accordyng to the will of
god, although it seeme to be wicked: yet
it is altogether plesaunt & acceptable before
god. Contrarywyse, whatsoeuer is
don besides the word of god, and otherwise
then he will haue it done, thoughe
it bee esteemed as a thynge acceptable
to god, yet it is of al others the worst,
and moste wycked. Wee haue a notable
example agaynste good intentes in
the firste booke of the kynges,Reg. 1. cap. 15 and fyfteene
Chapiter, to warne al menne not

to deale vpon any deuocion or good intente
whatsoeuer more or lesse in gods
cause, then they are expreslye commaundid
to doe. For Samuel the prophet was
sent to kinge Saule, as messenger from
god, who saide in this maner. Thus saieth
the lorde of hosts. I haue called that
to thy remembrance which Amelech did
to Israel, how they lay in waite for thē,
in the way as they came out of Egypte.
Nowe therfore go and smyte ye Amelechites,
and destroy ye all that perteineth
to them, and see you haue no compassyō
on them: but slaye bothe man and woman,
infant and suckling, oxe & sheepe,
camell and asse. Now when Saule had
this commaundement, hee sette foorthe
with .200000. footemen, and .20000. men
of Iuda. But he dyd not fulfill the lords
commaūdement. For after he had slain
the Amelechites, hee tooke Agag theire
kinge aliue, and left of the sheepe and of
the oxen, and fat thinges, & the lambes,
and all that was good and woulde not
destroy them. Whereupon the worde of
the lorde came vnto Samuell sayinge.

It repenteth me, yt I haue made Saule
kinge, for he is turned from me,& hathe
not perfourmed my commaūdementes,
so yt he lost his kingdom by this means,
for that he of a good intente, spared the
kynge, and saued the fatte oxen & shepe,
to offer sacrifice vnto ye lorde, vnto whō
Samuel saide. Hathe the lorde as great
pleasure in burnt sacrifices & offerings,
as he hath, that thou shouldest obey hys
voice? Behold, to obey is better then offering,
and to geue heede, is better then
the fatte of Rambes, for to be rebellious
is as the sinne of witchcrafte, and dysobedience
is wickednesse and Idolatrye.
Because therefore thou haste caste awaye
the woorde of the lorde, therefore
hath the lord cast awaye thee also, from
being king. Thus you se men must not
fansie to them selues a certeine manner
of dealing for respect or pity, or to mitygate
offences, & so to despice gods commaundement
with their deuised Imagynacions,
but rather to doe neither more
nor lesse, then that onely which god hath
commaunded to be done. And therefore

in your iudgementes and sentences of
lawe, I pray you master Ciuilian, haue
god and his worde alwayes before your
eies, that you lawyers, maie say and do
the trueth according to his worde.
               And you master merchant vnto whom
god hath lēt great treasure of this world
(for I tell you, you are but his steward)
call to god that he will lende you grace
in the middest of your welth to learne &
knowe him aright: let not wealth choke
your iudgement and cloye your vnderstanding.
Beware how you cloke with
god, do not vnder colour of bargayne &
sale, practise vsury as most mē do. Ther
be plaine waies for men to take, whiche
are and hath ben euer allowed. And this
I say, he that liueth in his vocacion trulye
and iustlye, is an honest man. That
Grocer who sellethe holsome wares we
good conscience, is to bee well esteemed.
The Draper that dealeth lawfullye, deserueth
credite. The true Taylor, is an
honest man in his callinge. The Goldesmith,
the Mercer, and the Haberdasher
are all to be well liked, & so all others of
any occupaciō, yt liue iustly ī their trade.

A merchāt of whatsoeuer callyng he is,
is to be accōpted for honest, if he lyue wt 
good fame & name, by his lawful trafik,
or occupacion. But I pray you, of what
occupacion is goodman vsurer, or who
would gladly be called one of ye vsurers
occupacion? Or of what company or seuerall
hawle or elsewhere, are theye in
London. God grant al merchāts to be otherwise
occupied, & euery one to folow
his lawful vocacion, rather thē to trade
by this lewde craft or kinde of liuynge.
Some lerned fathers, yea, & some great
philosophers also, thīks it a thing almost
īpossible, for a great riche merchāt, yt is
a mighty occupier to be a good christian.
But I am not altogether of yt minde, especially
if ye merchāts yt are gret occupiers
do liue in ani fere of god.Chrisostomns Plato de legibus. For I thīk
there be of merchāts, as ther be of other
sorts, & surely al such as dele lawfully in
their allowed trades, as I haue said, are
honest, iust, vpright, & worshipful, & not
inferiors to other men of anye callinge.
True it is, were are al sinners more and
lesse, and therefore euery one of vs had
neede to call to god for mercy.
               
                  
And assured we are that god beynge the
searcher of our hartes, wyll take an accompte
of al our doings. Wee haue but
a time and a course to runne, let vs take
that right way for our race, whiche god
hath made playn and open for vs by his
word and testament. Let vs be charytable,
louing, and liberal one to an other,
and readie alwaies to geue some porcyon
of that bountifulnes, which god dayly
and infinitely of his free mercy poureth
vpon vs. And as reasonable men
let vs consider, that ryghteousnes establisheth
kingdomes, and charitable dealings
maynteineth states: whereas vsurye
the daughter of couetousnes, the
mother of mischiefe, and the very hel of
euil, ouerthroweth trades, decaieth merchandizes,
vndoeth tillage, destroyethe
crafts men, defaceth chiualries, beateth
downe nobilitie, bringeth dearth and famine,
hyndereth ye prince in her custome
& welfaire, & last of al, causeth destruction
& confusion vniuersallye. For if the
merchant may be allowed to make gain
of his money, he wil rather vse yt certein

and assured waye, that dangerously aduenture
the seas, and so the Quene shal
lose her gayn and right of enheritance,
and the state shalbe vndon. The plough
man will no more turne vp the ground
for vncertayne gayne, when hee maye
make an assured profite of hys money,
that lieth by hym. The artificer wil leue
hys woorkynge. The clothier will cease
hys makynge of clothes, because these
trades are paynefull and chargeable:
yea all men will geue themselues wholie
to lyue an idle life by there money, if
they haue any. And although al can not
haue mony, yet yf al those yt haue mony
will lyue by ye lone thereof, all will be
marred in ye end. And amongst others,
the gentelman will no more professe
armes nor chiualrye, to aduaunce hys
welfare, but selling hys landes will haue
double gayne by hys moneye, and so
geeue ouer howsekepinge all together,
takynge a chamber in London or else
where in steade of a house in hys owne
countrie, as wee see they doe now commonlye,
the more is the pitie, and the

greater is theire shame, yea the noble
man will no more defend the widowe &
fatherles, nor yet do iudgement and iustice,
but lyue by hys filthye gayne, and
lose therby hys dignity and estimacion,
as all those that doe lyue by corrupt vsury,
for none in right should be a knight,
yt is a known vsurer,Bar. in l. i. C. de digni. tex. in l. quoties. de dignit. lib. 12. l duo Mar. C. de quest. & such a hurt to his
countrie. And thus by these vsurers
great dearthe will ensue of all thinges,
as you see, and misery will fall vpon vs
vniuersally, for yt fewe men will woorke,
and most will play, and men liuyng
without labor and doinge nothing, wil
loyter and wallow in the ease of vsury,
and enriche themselues by thys moste
vile assured trade of the Epicures occupacion.
And what good I pray you will
mony doe then, when we haue neyther
meat to eate, nor clothe wherwith to couer
vs, nor house to shrowde vs in, nor
man to defende vs in oure ryghte. For
not so much as the butcher, the baker, or
the taylor on godes name, or anye other
whatsoeuer, hauing neuer so lytell
mony, but they will all togethers bee vsurers,

as manye already are, yf thys
mighte bee suffered. And what shoulde
lett, why they shoulde not all bee vsurers,
aswell as others, yf the same maye
once bee liked or holdē for lawfull. For
a surer and easyer, and a more gaynefull
trade cannot bee vppon earth, then
to gett mony, with the lone of monye
onely. And who doth not loue ease and
gaine, yf they may be had both together?
So that I say, yf thys geere take place vniuersallie,
as why may it not? thē may
ye worthiest mē say, farewel world, yea
farwell life for euer maye all men saye
in generall.
               The trademade to yt Indians, dothe
not so muche benefite y• Spanyards, as
vsury hath done thē harme, for they trading
with the Genowayes, and others
to paye so muche vsury as they doe for
wares vppon theire returne from the
Indianes, doe lose all theire gayne that
they make in the voyage, and waxe beggers
at the last, with all theire trauaill,
& paines they take: as who should say,

they laboure for the vse of others, that
doe nothing themselues but loyter, and
with ease make mony of mony. An alcumye
founde out by the deuill, to distroy
all trade in the worlde when none haue
anye thinge but themselues. But theire
rewarde in the ende shalbe death euerlasting,
excepte they doe amende. It is
written in Solinus, de mirabilibus mundi,
that in the islande Sardinia, there is a
well, whereof yf a trewe man doe drinke,
hys eye syght straight way waxethe
cleare, but yf a false harlot doe but supp
of it, hee waxeth starke blynde oute of
hande, althoughe hee dyd see neuer so
well before. Nowe happye were Englande,
yf all the conduites in London
dyd runne with suche water. And yet
what dyd I saye, I woulde thinke
London then, and England also would
bee moste vnhappy. For yf it were so,
wee shoulde haue so manye blynde
men in the Citye and countrye, that
there woulde scante bee founde guydes
sufficient to leade them in the streates,

and hyghe wayes, when theye shoulde
seeke to goe abroade. The morall of
thys saiynge is, that good men haue
the grace of god, and see hym in hys
glorie, wheras euill men are starke
staring blynde, through their folye and
wickednes. And of thys sorte are there
manye companies blynde in thys land,
as the clergye with simonye, merchauntes
with vsurye, iudges with bryberye,
great men with extorcion, and the common
sorte with micherie. God bee mercifull
vnto vs, and sende vs of hys grace.
But sayeth the couetous man, seing
you goe harde to worke with vs, and
wyll not suffer vs to make anye gayne
at all of oure moneye, but restrayne
vs vtterlye from aduansynge oure
wellfare, wee will not lende at all
hereafter, because wee will not offende.
Euell sayde of you, say I, when
god commaundethe the contrarye, and
by youre woordes you bewraye what
you are, men graceles no doubte, withoute
affection or charytye, and people

voyde of all loue. Sainct Paule sayeth,
vnthankefull, harde harted and vnmercifull,
and so the children of perdicion.
Yf you woulde haue sayde, you
woulde not lend to all them that would
borowe of you, I wold haue holden wel
with that sayinge. For I promise you,
it is an offence to lende to some, and a
maintenaunce of their follie. And therfore,
they doe wel, that are not ouer hastie,
or rather ouer gredy to lende without
great cause and good consideracion
had before. For indeede men should rather
lende to helpe others, then seeke
gredelye to enriche themselues, because
it is properlie the nature of lendinge,
(beynge a certeine kynde of almese) to
helpe the necessity of oure neighbours,
with parte of oure plentye, as occasion
doth serue. Whereas lending for gayne
without good cause had of an others
neede: maketh wanton princes to seeke
needelesse warre, noble men riotous to
spende without reason, yong gentlemē
vnthriftie to bring all to naughte, after

they are newly come to theire landes, &
so to take the verye hyghe waye to vndoe
themselues for euer: as euery day if
doth appeare, not onelye in gentelmen,
but in some greate states and Lordes of
thys lande, the more is the pitye. And
suerly, he is farre from thrifte, whatsoeuer
hee bee, that boroweth vpon vsurie
without great cause, and rather woulde
hee seme to bee that which he is not, thā
to bee in deede and in outwarde shewe,
that whiche hee is. And no doubt, wantonnes
broughte in thys follye at the
firste, that men with theire maskynge
maners and greate braueries, shoulde
seme for a time to be ioly felowes, wher
as at length they discouer themselfes, &
are become woorse than naughte. And
therfore they doe euill, that make a certayne
gayne of lending, to the vndoing
of others, wheras lendinge shoulde bee
for charitie sake, and not to mainteyne
the outragiouse excesse and foolishe ryot
of manye adeuise vsed more here in
England, than in any place els, that I
knowe in Christendome. For yf mony

might not so sone bee had of those couetous
vsurers moste men woulde lyue
within theire boundes, and leaue theire
wanton apparell, theire vnnecessarye
feastynge, theire fond gamnynge, and
theire lewde hazarding of great wealth
and reuenues without all wytte, vpon
a mayne chaunce at dyce, or vpon a carde
or twoo at primero, and other vayne
diuelishe games. For so these vnthriftes
maye haue mony to serue theire lustes,
& to hazarde their chaunce, they care not
what to paye. And thus they being ouer
laden with a mayne losse, and most certayne
debte to the vsurer before hande,
doe sett vppon blynd fortune afterwardes
all that they haue, and are vndoone
before they are a ware, onely by the vsurers
dealinges, although they bee no
great losers, neyther at dyce, nor yet at
cardes. But you will saye, and proue it
to, that many haue bene made with paiynge
vsurie, gettinge great welth into
theire handes, and at the leaste haue saued
themselues from imprisonement, &
vtter vndoynge. Unto thys I do aunsweare,

as hee that came into a churche,
& sawe it full of Images made of waxe,
asked the cause of suche a sighte. Unto
whom one answered, that these people,
whome these waxen images did represente,
were saued from drowninge, by
calling vpon our ladie: Nay then (quod
hee againe) wher be the images of those
I pray you, that called vppon our ladie,
and were drowned notwithstandinge
And so saye I, yf some one man haue
gott good by vsurie, and hath been made
thereby, how many thousandes haue
had mischiefe, & been vtterlie vndon by
vsurie. Wel, well, saye you stil, & replie
as you please, yf the world go so wt vs yt
lēding for gayne muste clerelye bee restrayned,
and that vpon paine of death,
as we wolde haue it: farewell then all
hope to borrowe any moneye herafter.
Unto thys I aunswere, and I thinke
cleane contrarie, especially if men will
conforme themselues to the lawe of nature,
and lyue as they ought to doe vprightelie
in theire vocation, and remember
there is a god. For then plentie will

folowe, and good cheape will bee of all
thyngs, whē euery man lyueth vprightelye
in his callinge & profession as god
hathe appoynted, and forsake these vnlawfull
shyftes, and so charitye wyll abounde,
and no man can wante, that
being honeste hath any neede, say you
what you wil. Mary vnthriftes, and suspected
men, maye perhaps fayle by these
meanes, and be dryuen to trust to their
own, when none will lende vnto them.
And suerlye I woulde wyshe that lending
were chefely to the needy & thryftie
parson that wil trulie gett his liuing
with the sweate of hys browes, & paye
that agayne faithfullye, which hee hath
ones borrowed. But to say you wil not
lend to any body at al, because you cannot
bee suffered to make gayne of your
money, and so to do as muche as in you
lieth to destroye occupiyng: that I saie,
is an vnmerciful saiynge, and directlye
against god. And yet say what you wil,
yf the lawes of god in this behalfe were
straightelye executed againste vsurie,
there woulde bee for all thys lending

ynoughe, suche lendinge I meane as
is needefull, and in charitye oughte to
bee vsed. Yea, I will saye more, rather
then men wil suffer theire wares to lye
deade by them, and theire goodes not to
bring foorthe anye encrease at all: they
will hazarde theire wealth into cheapmens
handes, and yong occupiers, and
bee contented, aswell to aduenture the
losse or perill of their ware, as to assure
themselues of currante gayne, and certayne
profite. And so doynge they maye
boldlie put foorth theire substaunce for
others to occupie, vpon such charitable
dealing. And althoughe fewe perhaps
will trade in thys sorte, that is aswell
to hazarde losse, as to assure themselfes
of gayne: yet the world wilbee the better,
wares will waxe more cheape, dealinges
wilbee more vpright, and fewer
men will breake, when suche christian
charitie is commonly vsed, both in moderate
takynge of gayne, vpon charitable
forbearing for a tyme, till men may
make mony, and frendly bearing with
losses, when any suche doe happen. And

amōgst honest and godly men, I know
there will neuer bee wante of charitie.
And happy were England, yf all men
were honest, for then lawes wer needelesse,
and suche euill as thys had, neuer
neede to bee feared: as for euill men, it
were good to ridde the world of them, if
it were possible, and to deuise by lawes
that none should liue, muche lesse come
to wealth by such vnlawfull wayes, for
that they onely and none others, are the
cause of all dearthe and wante in thys
worlde. Thus when euery man lyued
vpryghtely within hys boundes and calling,
vsing suche trade as hee oughte to
doe, plentie woulde soone appeare in all
places, and god would blesse the worlde
also with encrease muche. And doe not
thinke that you are to be excused, when
you doe lend to the riche, where it may
seme you haue not oppressed, and so not
deale with the poore, for feare he should
bee oppressed, for I tell you, you shoulde
lende to all that haue neede, of what estate
condicion or liuing soeuer they be,
poore or ryche. And fonde is thys argumente

that you haue often vsed, of
which many do take fast holde. It is not
lawfull to take vsurie of the poore, therfore
a man may take vsury of the riche,
for by the like reason one may thys argue:
It is not lawfull to vexe a poore
man by lawe, therefore it is lawfull to
vexe or to trouble a riche man by lawe.
None, eyther riche or poore, yonge or
olde, lowe or bye, should be troubled or
vexed at all, or by anye maner of meanes.
Regarde alwayes must bee had to
the common weale, that no harme doe
come thereunto, by anye vnlawful dealynges,
and not whether thys man, or
that man bee wronged or no. For so it
may fall out that your neyghboure vnto
whome you haue lent mony for gayne,
fealeth no harme thereby, and yet
assure your selfe, the cōmō weale smarteth
by suche vnlawfull dealinges, as I
haue often heretofore sayde. And therefore
the Ciuilians sayeth, Interest reipub.
vt quisque resua rectè hoc est, honestè & legitimè vtatur. It is for the behoue of the
common weale, that euerye man do vse

hys own thynges rightfully, that is (as
I take it) honestely and lawfullye. And
thys is that aequum & bonum, that eauen
hode, and ryghte balance dealinge, so
much commended by all lawes, thys is,
I saye, that christian charitie, which seeketh
nothing of her own, but those thinges
that are of Iesus Christ. And is it so
straunge a thinge for men to borrowe
freelie in thys worlde? I am not verie
olde, and yet I haue knowne manye in
my dayes, that haue borrowed freely
great masses of moneye of diuerse men,
and some agayne that haue borrowed
small summes freely of a great sorte, for
no peny vsurie at all? Good men can no
more bee without charitie, than fyer cā
bee without heate. And therefore, let vs
pray, that good men chefely may enioy
the frutes of the earthe, yea lett vs all
that bee badde, consider thys one thinge
we our selues, that nought we brought
with vs into thys worlde, and noughte
wee shall carrie oute againe, and when
wee haue foode and raymente, lett vs
therewith bee contente, as Saint Paule
                  
saythe to hys disciple Timothee.
                  1. Timoth. 6. Ynough
(as they saye) is as good as a feaste, and
what shoulde we doe with more? A litle
with quietnes, is better then a greate
deale with trouble. Yea happye is that
man, whose conscience doth not condēpne
hymselfe for euil gotten goodes, euil
gotten I may well saye, whē they bring
death and dampnation with them. Alas
doe wee not see euery daye how vncertayne
thys lyfe is? howe sodeinely men
goe awaye, and that no man hath anye
charter to tarry here one hower, but
as sone goeth the riche as the poore, the
lorde as the plougheman, the merchant
as the craftes man, the wyse man as the
simple. And besides this, what a cōscience
hath he (lord god) who wittinglie and
willinglye hath been the vndoinge of
manye an honest poore man, of manye
auncient gentelmen also, yea, and shall
I saye of some great lordes of noble houses,
throughe hys vnmercifull vsurie?
Doth hee thinke after hys wronge gotten
goods, to bleare god with an vnworshipful
gluttonous table, with building

of a fewe almese houses, with geeuinge
to hys warde after hys decease a lyttle
summe of mony? Naye, he is deceaued,
that so thinketh. These are abhominable
offrings in the sight of god, that are
offered of suche gayne, lett hym geeue
on goddes name hys owne goodes lawfully
gottē, and not deale almese of that
whiche is none of hys. Hys owne conscience
wil tell hym an other tale, when
the same shall searche hym, and accuse
him before the maiestie of god, and then
will he tremble and quake, call for grace,
and can not bee heard, weepe & wayle,
when none will pitie hym, and so lyue
in hell, and neuer dye, continuynge
still in suche paynes and formentes, as
passe mens speache to vtter, and more
greuous, than any mans harte can imagine
or thought cōceyue. Wherfore cō
                  sidering
god, nature, reason, all scripture,
all lawe, all aucthours, all doctours,
yea all councels besides, are vtterlye agaynste
vsurie: yf you loue god, & hys
kyngdome my masters, yf your natural
countrey bee deare vnto you, yf you

think to haue mery daies in this world,
and to liue in ioy, you and your childrē
after you, both nowe and euer, yea, yf
you haue care of your owne soules: for
Christes sake abhorre thys vgly vsury,
and lothe with all your hartes, this cursed
limme of the deuil, and lend in dede
freelye, as god hathe commaunded you:
and departe with your goods or wares,
as freelye for time, as you woulde bargayne
to bee payd for them out of hand,
or at sight, or for redye money, hauinge
alwaies a charitable intencion with you
to helpe your poore neighboures, wyth
parte of your plenty, and make no merchandizes
hereafter, by the Sunne shynyng,
and Moone shininge, by yeares,
by monethes, by daies, and by howers,
leaste god take his light from you, and
shorten all your daies, and all your howers.
And as you lende freelye as occasion
serueth to all men, of what estate or
condicion soeuer they be: So geue to the
miserable folke willinglye, and help the
poore housholder franklye. And thē shal
god blesse you and all yours, and geeue

you the peace of conscience, whyche
passeth al treasure, and make you inheritors
of his kingdome, after thys transitorie
lyfe. Nowe god for hys mercyes
sake open al your eies, and geue you the
right vnderstanding of this his wil, for
his deare sonnes sake Jesus Christ our
lorde and sauiour. Amen.
            
            
               Ciuilian.
               I haue longe studyed the Romaine
lawes, and I thanke god my vnderstandinge
is somewhat encreased by
them. But woulde god I had more earnestly
studied the verye texte of the olde
and new testament, whereby not onely
I should the rather haue gathered most
true knowledge: but also I should haue
ben more mortified, by a great deale thē
I am. It is vnspeakable, what good they
do reape, to their soules health, that doe
daylye and howerly, meditate the very
letter and text of the scriptures.
               And I thanke you most hartelye master
Preacher, for your good zeale and earnest
care, to sifte out the truethe of thys
matter, whiche I doe thynke, & am fully
perswaded, that you haue founde out

according to gods most holy will. And
I praye god moste hartely, that I maye
be a true follower, of all that you haue
sayd, and neuer consent in hart to lend
moneye for gayne, nor yet to allowe of
them that are knowen vsurers.
               I do knowe certeinly, that to lend freely
is a naturall contracte commaunded
by god, and allowed by man, and therefore
to be done and vsed of all men: but
to lende for gayne is a suspected kind of
dealynge, and therefore to bee blamed
whatsoeuer colour I doe sette vppon it.
And the wise man sayeth, Quae dubitas
ne feceris, neuer doe that, whereof thou
doest stand in doubt. And therefore by ye
leaue of god, I wyll neuer deale otherwise
hereafter, then plainelye and truly,
as gods word & my consciēce shal direct
me, assuredly mindīg to lēd for gramercie
alwayes hereafter to the poore
and needie, or to anye one that shall desire
to borowe of mee, yf I be able to
lende, and maye forbeare my money or
goods without any my great hīderāce.
The Ciuill lawe, is a wise studie, & full

of pollicie, whiche I haue euer wel liked
because of the natural & good reasōs yt it
carieth in shew. But I must say nowe,
that the wisedome of man, is folishnesse
before god, and vayn are all those speaches,
that are vsed to blaūch gods groū
                  ded
rules, beinge the onelye vndoubted
trueths chiefly to bee followed of al godlye
& Christian people. And for my part
I am gladde that god hath touched mee
thus muche to renounce mans reason,
and to followe his most holy will, which
I will hereafter embrace, by his especyall
fauour and mercye, and preferre the
truethe of hys woorde, before all other
learninge whatsoeuer, and confesse in
hart, that al lending of money or wares
for any gayne, whatsoeuer in respecte of
time, is a thing abhominable and a dāpnable
deede before god and man.
            
            
               Lawyer.
               It is euill striuinge againste a
knowen trueth. And wo be to him that
doth anye thing against hys conscience.
I haue hearde muche, and somewhat I
knowe, and althoughe naturall reason
and mans policie, haue caryed me oute

of the waye, yet I thanke god my conscyence
dyd neuer accuse mee. For I
thoughte assuredlye, that whatsoeuer I
did in this behalfe, so that charitie hadde
been kept, and no harme in appearance
committed, nor offence notoriously knowen:
that al then had been well. But I
doe see it is cleane contrary, and I confesse
my selfe to haue erred, for whyche
I am sorie. And nowe I perceiue yt man
must not seke to seeme wyser then god,
nor yet deuise doinges for his owne excuse,
accordynge as hys fonde brayne
might imagyne. For I doe nowe plainlie
finde, that euen the verye sufferance
of vsurie, although it were for a meane
rate: is not only forbiddē by god, which
is chiefely to be noted, but also hurtfull
to a state, and cause of muche dearthe &
scarcitie, whiche is pitifull to bee seene.
Therefore I doe wishe, that wee might
all lyue as god hathe commaunded vs,
and not fansie vnto oure selues, suche a
kinde of dealynge and lyuinge as god &
nature haue alwaies forbydden. Oure
lawe is plain inough against this sinne,

yf we were as good execucioners therof
as the lawe geueth aucthority. But our
countreye disposicion is rather to make
laws, then to keepe laws, yea rather the
lawe is vsed to enriche lawiers, then to
execute the iustice of lawe.
               Holy king Edward as they call him, he
yt was before Williā Cōqueror, among
other his good lawes, did in the .37. law
that hee made vtterlye forbyd vsurers,
and woulde not that anye suche shoulde
tarrie wythin this Realme. And if anye
weare conuycted to haue exacted vsurye,
he shoulde loose all hys goods, and
after that be estemed as an outlaw. The
said king Edward did further say, yt hee
did here it reported in ye court of Frāce,
when he was ther, yt vsury was thought
to bee the roote of all other sinne & myschiefe
whatsoeuer. After this, in Henry
the secondes time, I do remember what
Glanuill chiefe.Glanuil. lib. 7 Cap. 16. Justyce of Englande in
those dayes wrytethe, whiche I thynke
not amisse to make knowen for oure amendement.
In the seuenth booke wher
he speaketh of inheritances, of last wils

and testamentes, hee sayeth amongst other
things, in the sixteeneth chapiter of
that booke, that all the goods of an vsurer,
whether he dye makyng a wyll, or
not making a wil, are proper to ye king.
And yet no man so longe as hee lyuethe
was euer wonte to bee appealed or conuicted
of vsurie. But amongst other enquiries
for the kinge, it is vsed to be enquired
vpon, and proued by twelue law
full men that dwell nyghe hym, vpon
their othes, that a certeine man died an
vsurer, whyche thynge being proued in
open courte, al the moueable goods and
chatelles that weare the vsurers owne,
at the tyme of hys decease, shall be seased
for our soueraigne lorde the king, in
whose handes soeuer the sayde goods or
chatelles shall be founde, and the heire
of the same vsurer shal be dysherited for
yt self same cause, according to the law of
the Realme, & the land shall returne to
the lord or lords agayn, from whence
it came. Al which notwtstāding, it is yet
thus to be vnderstoode, yf any mā hath
ben an vsurer in his life time, and therof

was openly and notoryouslye fames
so to bee: and after repented hym selfe
before his deathe, and did penance therfore,
whiche can not be without restitucion,
his goods shall not be within compasse
of the lawe agaynste vsurers. And
therfore it must be wel knowen by good
and sufficient tryal, that one dyed as an
vsurer, to make the lawe determine vpō
him, as against an vsurer, & to dispose of
his goods, as vpō ye goods of an vsurer.
Thus far Glanduil in yt place, who in his
x. booke & third chapiter, sheweth plainly
what vsurie is, and thus hee sayeth.
Thinges are due vpon lendinge, when
anye man dothe trust an other, in those
thynges that doe consist vpon number,
weight, and measure. Therfore when a
man hath lent anye suche thinge, if hee
that hath so lent it, doth take any thyng
ouer and aboue his lone, he committeth
vsurie in so doing. And if he depart this
world so offending, he shalbe condempned
as an vsurer, by the lawe of yt land,
as before more at large hathe ben declared.
According vnto this law, Mathewe

Paris, maketh reporte in the life of king
Rycharde the firste, by these woordes.
Quicquid laici in vita sua donauerint, vel
quocū
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      titulo a se alienauerint, etsi vsurarij
fuisse dicuntur, post mortem non reuocabitur.
Quae verò post mortem non alienata fuerint,
si cognitum fuerit ipsos tempore mortis fuisse
vsurarios, confiscabuntur. That is to say.
Whatsoeuer lay men haue made awaie
in their life time, by gyfte, or alyenated
from them by anye title, although theye
were knowen in their life time to be vsurers,
yet the same shal not be reuoked
after their deathe. But whatsoeuer thinges
are not made away after their deth,
if it were knowen that they at the tyme
of theire deathe were vsurers, the same
thinges shalbee confiscated. The statute
lawe also, in ye fifteene yere of kyng Edwarde
the thirde, dothe make thys matter
plaine, where it is accorded and assented:
that the king and his heires shal
haue the conisance of the vsurers dead.
And that the Ordinaries of holy church
haue the conisaunce of vsurers on lyue,
as to them appertayneth, to make compulsion

by yt censures of holy church, but
ye statut of 37. of king Hēry ye .8. hath takē
away ye force of this law. And yet whether
ye cōmon law was or is taken away
hereby or no, I do refer yt to my masters
ye Lawyers. Nay it is plain, y• our law
was euer against vsury, as in Martō ca.
5. it is most euident, Vsurae non currāt &c.
And touching thexchāge,An. 9. Ed. 3. 25. Ed. 3. you haue said
wel in my iudgement. And thus muche
I know by the statutes of this land, that
king Edward ye third, caused thexchāge
to bee kepte at Douer, and in other places,
wher it best pleased his grace, as in
good towns & thorow fares through out
England, declaring ye value of al coine,
and straitely chargynge al his subiects,A. 14. Ric. 2▪
                  
that none so hardy as to make gaine,An. 3. Hen. 7. of
coyned money, saue onely the kings exchāgers,
so yt vsurie by that means was
vtterlye banyshed from amonge yt common
people. But how the kings exchangers
vsed the matter, I know not. This
I knowe well, the fewer that vse thexchaunge
in manner as it is nowe vsed
amongst merchauntes, the better it is

for the state & commō profit of this lād.
But I for greedy desire of profite, haue
forgot all these thinges, and seeing how
lothe men are to lende, thought it better
euen against gods law & our lawe also,
according to ye cōmon maxime, to suffer
rather a mischief, then an inconueniēce.
But I see now that suche proposicyons
are wicked and dampnable,Roman. 3. for no euill
must be eyther donne, or suffered to bee
done, that good maye come thereof, as
you master Preacher haue very godly
saide vnto vs, out of gods moste holye
worde. I do reade that in the .47. yeare of
kynge Henrye the thirde, a ryot was
commytted against the Jewes, and fiue
hundred of thē slain, & thoccasion of this
ryot was, for that one Jew would haue
forced a Christyan man to haue geeuen
vnto him more then twoo pence for the
vsurye of twenty shillings by ye weke.
For ye Jewes had licence from the king
to take two pence in the pounde, for the
weekes lendynge, which is forty pound
and more by the yere vpon the hundred,
a deuelishe vsury no doubt, and worthy

of all death, wythoute al peraduenture.
And great pitie that any prince shoulde
euer yelde to suffer anye suche spoyle or
theft amongst good subiectes. These Iewes
are gone. Would god the Christyans
remayninge, and our country men
at this time dyd not vse theire fashyons.
I for my parte wilbe from hencefoorthe
a moste deadly enemy againste all vsurers,
and willingly I will not eate nor
yet drink with any of them. And I pray
you master Merchant, if heretofore you
haue taken any enboldening to commit
vsurie through any qualification that I
haue vsed, contrary to law which I professe,
and against my conscience: do you
from henceforth amende it, and amende
your selfe by my warnynge, and beare
not your selfe vpon mee, nor yet vppon
the lawe that I professe. For both I wil
discharge my selfe before god, and thys
good companye of anye suche mainetenaunce
and declare vnto you, that not
onelye the lawe whiche I professe, is agaynste
it, but also my conscyence condempneth
me of suche tolleratinge. For

the whiche I am right hartely sorie, and
doe nowe constantly affirme that al lēding
for gaine in respect of time, is both
against gods lawe, and oure lawe, and
is a mischiefe most hurtfull to all states,
and the principall cause of all want and
scarcitie in any common weale, wheresoeuer
it hathe once gotte a footing and
is eyther allowed or suffered. And for
your good cheare, I thanke you moste
hartely. And nowe will I saye, thys is
the best dinner that euer I came at in al
my life. And I pray god it may be so vnto
you master merchaunt, that are the
chiefe of this feast, and haue been after a
sorte the cause of this disputacion.
            
            
               The Merchant or Gromell gayner.
               
               I haue hearde you saye master Preacher,
and I haue heard it also of others,
that god in the scriptures affirmeth it to
be an easier matter, for a Camell to goe
through the eye of a nedle, thē for a riche
man to enter into the kingdome of heauen.
Surelye I beleeue it to bee true, except
gods goodnes bee the greater, for
wee merchaunts are meruelously geuē
                  
to geat goods without conscience & without
all gods forboade. And thys worlde
is a greate temptacyon, for man to aduaunce
his welfare, and hardly can one
auoide, the sweete entisements thereof.
               For what is hee nowe a dayes that is
of anye estymacion, if he want wealth?
whoe maketh anye accompte of him,
bee hee neuer so learned, neuer so vertuous,
or neuer so worthy, that hath not
the goods of this world? Yea, what maketh
vs merchants to beare aucthoritie,
& to be taken with ye best, but our goods
that lye by vs to serue our owne turnes
with al, and other mens also, as we lyst
and think meete? But fie of this world,
in respecte of the worlde to come. And I
thanke you master Preacher, for suche
your heauenly doctrine. For I promyse
you I am nowe become through ye same
(as I trust) a new man praysed be god,
and you therefore. And nowe I doe asmuche
abhorre to lend money for gaine
hereafter, as I doe abhorre to steale by
the hyghe waye, or to murder any man
violentlye for his goods, which god forbyd

that euer I shoulde thinke or minde
to doe. And you master Lawyers bothe
of you, haue wel put me in remembrāce
that my goods are not myne to bestow,
after my deth, if I should die an vsurer.
Lorde god, yf the prynce woulde take
aduauntage of all suche as haue offended
in this behalfe▪ manie should begge,
that howe are braue. And yet marke
gods iudgement. You shall hardlye see
an vsurers issue prosper wel, but eyther
the partye comes to an euyll ende, or
the goods are lewdlye wasted awaye.
Mercye, mercye, therefore Lorde god,
and I truste assuredlye that vpon myne
vnfeyned repentaunce, god wyll bee
mercifull vnto mee. Restitucyon I had
neede to make, and I wyll so doe by
gods grace, as I can. Euill is that penye
gotten, whiche bringeth dampnation,
and vnhappie is he, that for greedie
desire of this world, doth leese the ioyes
of heauen. It had been my part, hauing
had such wealth, to haue vysited the prisons,
where men lie long for smal debt,
and haue beene oppressed wyth vsurye,

to their vtter vndoing: to haue ayded ye
poore housholders, the fatherlesse chyldren
and the widowes. But hereafter I
will vysite Christ more often in hys afflicted
mēbers, and lend freely by gods
grace, to suche and so many, as I shalbe
able and know to be honest godly men,
and relieue them chieflye, and make also
restytucyon vnto them whom I haue
most oppressed, and get my goods hereafter
by lawfull meanes. Wee all feare
the plague merueilously here in Londō,
and desire god that the Cytye maye bee
cleared of it, but what a blesse weare it,
to the City, and realme also (as I remē
                  ber
you said before master Preacher) if
in one yeare god would take al vsurers
away, and cleare this lande of such vnmercyfull
men. I for my part knowyng
that I doe knowe, rather then I wyll
hereafter make gayne of my goods or
moneye, for the verye lone thereof, in
respecte of time, I wyll suffer a thousād
deathes in this worlde, to saue my soule
the rather in the worlde to come. Yea,
none of myne shal euer haue my fauor,

that will take that waye, for I knowe
thys lyfe is but a passage, and stewardes
wee are all, (as you haue well sayd
master preacher), to make an accompte
of our former lyues, and to shewe how
faithfully wee haue bestowed those talentes,
which god of hys goodnes hath
vouchsafed to bestowe upon vs. For yf
wee haue bene euill officers, woe is our
hyer, wheras otherwise hauing faithfullie
discharged our duties, god is iust,
and will rewarde the faithfull for euer,
according to hys promise, throughe the
merites of Jesus Christ, who bee praysed
therefore.
            
            
               Ockerfoe.
               Now blessed bee the Lord god
of Israel, and holy bee hys name, bothe
nowe and always hereafter. I am hartlye
glad before god, that I haue lyued
vntill thys daye, to see suche a conuersion
of you my deere brethren, and greater
ioye I knowe ther wilbe in heauen,
for the recouering of so fewe lost sheepe,
than of 99. that haue not strayed. I
praye god that all others maye take example
of you, and vpon gods good

warnyng folowe those thinges in theire
conuersacion of life, that you haue now
professed to doe during your lyues. And
thys I saye, hee that lyueth to dye well,
shall dye to lyue better. Nowe, god for
hys mercyes sake, make vs all hys
seruaūts. With that, they all tooke
theire leaues, & departed in charitye
one with an other, like
ioyfull and spirituall brethren
in Christ. God
graunte all others
to doe the like.
Amen.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            ¶A conclusion to the louing
Reader.
            GEntle reader, and deere countrieman,
I haue in some parte layde
open (as maye appeare) the doinges &
dealinges of thys worlde. And muche
speache hath passed diuerselye betwixte
parties, & great heate hath ben vttered,
aswell in defense of cloked euill, as in
rebuke of knowne sinne, the most & the
worst, lykynge that always best, which
is cheefely for theire purpose, bee it neuer
so bad. At the last, an agreement is
made (as you see) and all reconciled to
god, as people much ashamed of sinne,
and men most sorie for their by past folies.
The merchaunt, as it seemeth, will
no more deale vnlawfully, but vse hys
trade in good order, and in suche sorte,
as to good conscience and gods lawe is
agreable. The lawiers, aswell Ciuilian
as temporall, shewe themselues mortified
persones, and will neuer geeue occasion
(so muche as in them lyethe) for
any to offende by their example. And all

thys goodnes commeth through ye preachers
godly and zelouse dealing. And is
all thys trewe (sayth one) that wee shall
haue suche a worlde hereafter, as there
wilbee neyther euill lawier, nor yet euil
merchaunte? For aunswere I saye, god
knoweth onely, what wilbe hereafter.
I haue made but onely a rehersall of an
assemblie, whiche I will not sweare to
bee trewe neyther, for all the goodes in
Englande, and yet I wishe the same
had been trewe, especially for the latter
parte of theire agreement, let their former
lifes bee, as they will be, whiche I
thinke are woorse than I haue sayde.
For neither tongue can vtter, nor penne
expresse at ful, the euii of this world.
And yet I haue said so much euery way,
as I was hable to saye, & as my leasure
serued. And an easie matter it is, to tell
a tale, or to make a tale of any mā, or of
any matter eyther to or fro: but the hardest
piece of worke of al is this, for men
to bee, as they woulde seeme to bee. For
who woulde not seeme very honeste in
outwarde apparaunce, and yet who is

perfectly honest in very deede? I haue
concluded of these men, as I woulde
it were, or had ben at the first, and so al
thyngs after much talke are lapped vp
as you see, with a ioyful ende, but whether
it will fall oute so or no hereafter,
god knoweth, and not I. Therefore
I shal tell you a shorte mery tale, somewhat
to the purpose of thys last speach &
compounded agreement.
            About xvi. yeares past, at my beeinge
in Rome (where I was forth comming
afterwards, agaynst my will god knoweth)
ther was warre betwixt the pope
Paulus quartus, & the Emperour Charles,
for the kyngdome of Naples, the pope
himselfe beynge a noble man by byrthe,
of the house of Carraffa in Naples, and
the chiefe aucthor and beginner of this
warre, as one that hated the emperour
most deadly, for putting to death an vncle
of the sayde popes, vpon the rebelliō
made by the prince of Salerne & others,
to restore the Napolitanes to their auncient
liberties, & free gouernement of
that kyngdome. In this tyme of warre,

duke of Alua being not farre of, with a
mayne power, against the pope, & frenche
kynge, who tooke hys parte, duke
Guyse being general then for the frenche
armie, the holy father did sett forth
in prynte, a certayne prayer for peace,
and commaunded that all prestes wtin
their paroches, should cal the people together,
& exhorte them to pray for peace.
Amongst whom, one pryest of a certayne
paroche there, seynge the people assembled,
began to declare vnto them
the holy fathers will, whiche was, that
they should all praye together for a spedie
peace. And when they were thus denoutelie
gathered together, & warned to
praye, the priest saide thus, after many
speaches past before. Good brethrē, you
see I muste doe as I am commaunded,
I can not doe otherwise, & therfore I exhorte
you eftsones, & I pray you hartely
praye for peace. But thys I will saye
vnto you before hande, yf you haue any
peace at all, wt all your prayers, I will
geeue my head. For howe can it bee otherwise,
whan he yt is the aucthor, & the

onely deuiser of thys warre, doth require
you to praye for peace, who myght haue
it, when hee list, yf he would be quiet
hymselfe: But I knowe hee will not, &
therefore your prayers wilbe in vayne,
& yet pray sirs for maner sake. A straunge
speache of a parishe pryest in Rome,
who was well punished for hys labour,
bee you well assured.
            And now, what yf I sayde, that these
merchaunts and lawyers, notwithstanding
their solempne vowes, will not be
so good, as they seeme to haue made promyse
vpon this last agrement? I thinke
yf I layd a good round wager of mony
vpō this matter (for other things I will
not hazarde) there be thousands in England,
that woulde bee my halfe. Men be
worldely, selfe louers, geuen for ye most
parte to euil, full of hypocrisie & dissimulation,
& very loth to do good, whē they
see no profite folowe, and vnwyllynge
to be such, as they are bounde and commaunded
to bee. An easie matter it is, to
renounce synne by wordes or outward
promise, and betwixt doyng & saiynge,

there is greate oddes. The worlde is
full of sweete entisyng baytes, and
man is made of fleshe, subiect euer to all
temptacion of thys worlde. And yet
shal not I wishe and praye that al thinges
may bee wel, although it bee almost
impossible, to haue perfection and soundenes
of lyfe in all men, and amongest
all states? God forbidde else, and well I
knowe, that the prayer of good men,
is of great force before god. Therfore I
desire all the good true seruauntes of
god, to ioyne in prayer with me, that al
folke may amende theire lifes in euery
vocation, and that the kingdome of god
maye come hastelye amongst vs, & hys
glorye appeare for the speedye succour
of his chosen people, and perfite ending
of all thynges, with most ioyful triumphe:
which god graunte, for the merites
of Christ hys sonne, our onely mediator
and sauiour. Amen.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Londini in aedibus Rychardi
Tottelli.
1572.
            
         
      
   