
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Almightie God I pray, his Holy ſpirite to ſend:
The iuſt mannes hart ſtedfaſt to ſtay, and wicked liues to mend.
            
               
                  True tryall touchyng truth, time trimly here doth trye:
               
                  Except the Scribes therfore we paſſe in righteouſnes, we dye.
               
                  Myndes many mooued bée, all truth to eſtablyſh:
               
                  Papes popiſh puft in Plutoes pride, all popery here doe wyſh.
               
                  Voyde from them all good men, which godly be in mynde:
               
                  Sith Sathan aſſaileth ſome ſo ſore, and ſtyl their harts doth blynde.
               
                  Embrace and loue the Truth, on Chriſts ſyde ſtifly ſtand:
               
                  Deny the Pope Sathan the Turke, reiect them quite from hand.
               
                  And neuer wiſh in wyll, with wicked men t'agrée:
               
                  Xp̄e ſaith we can not their wayes hould, and eke his ſeruaunts be.
               
                  Reiect, and expell quite, that which diſpleaſe God may:
               
                  Encline to Chriſt, the truth embrace, be ſure thereon to ſtay.
               
                  Reioyce though Rigour raunge, and run for to obtayne:
               
                  Vpon thée perſecution beare, great ioyes to haue agayne.
               
                  Muſe nothyng on theſe dayes, but wey the time now frayle:
               
                  The tryed truth time vnder treades, in time truth wyl preuayle.
               
                  In time the wicked laugh, in time the iuſt lament:
               
                  Muſe not therfore, the iuſt to trie, the Lordes wyl now is bent.
               
                  Employ thy wyll and mynd, to the Scriptures deuine:
               
                  Be not ſeduced in no wyſe, from truth doe not decline.
               
                  Refuſe (yf faith thou haſt) a Chriſtian dumme to bée:
               
                  Yelde out thy talent with encreaſe, and looke thy faith be frée.
               
                  No doubt yf dumme thou lurke, clokyng thy faith for feare:
               
                  God wyl thée plague, and to good men, thy faint faith wyl appeare.
               
                  Enclyne thine eare hereto, and this well vnderſtand:
               
                  Trie out the ſence hereof by truth, all wickedneſſe withſtand.
               
                  Heauen with the Lorde of Lordes, we ſhall not inherite:
               
                  Except our righteouſnes far paſſe the Scribe and hipocrite.
               
                  All wicked men we ſée, now glorie much in mynd:
               
                  Lookyng for maſſe, an Idoll which to them hath ben full kynd.
               
                  Truely thoſe naughtie men, thinke now within ſhort time:
               
                  Here, for Ieſus Chriſtes true worde, to plant Sathans doctrine.
               
                  Yea ſtyll they hope in déede, and ſtyll looke for a day:
               
                  No doubt, Chriſts goſpel to exclude, & popes lawes to beare ſway.
               
                  God ſaue our noble Quéene, Lorde graunt this we requyre:
               
                  Emong vs here long ſhée may raigne, and cut ſhort papes deſyre.
               
                  Send out thy wrath (O Lorde) confound with open ſhame:
               
                  Thoſe which in hart vnto her grace, long lyfe doe not proclaime.
               
                  Out pull thoſe hatefull harts, which in ſpight rage and boyle:
               
                  Againſt thy truth, her grace, good men (O Lorde) yu canſt them foyle.
               
                  Nothyng but wickedneſſe, ſuch in their hartes embrace,
               
                  Emong vs here although they ſay, and beare out a ſmooth face.
               
                  Now Lorde thy flocke defend, Lorde bleſſe thine heritage:
               
                  Direct thy ſpirit ouer vs all, in this our time and age.
               
                  Encourage vs againſt rageyng Sathan alway,
               
                  Quicken our myndes, ſtrength vs herein, O Lorde to thée we pray:
               
                  Vouch ſafe eke on thoſe men, thy heauenlie ſpirite to ſend,
               
                  O Lorde enſpire them with thy grace, their erryng liues t'amend.
               
                  Deſtroy all errours here, illuminate their hart:
               
                  Call home all thoſe which haue run wyde, to the truth them conuart.
               
                  Heale thoſe which broken be (O Lorde I ſay) in mynd:
               
                  Reduce and bryng to thée in truth, all wicked Iewes vnkynd.
               
                  Infidels and eke Turkes, Paganes which know thée not:
               
                  So ſhall we all be to thée one inheritaunce and lot.
               
                  Tread vnder and ſuppreſſe all vice, and eke expell
               
                  Our hollow harted hipocrites, which loue not thy Goſpell:
               
                  Put in their harts ſuch grace (O Lorde) that they may now:
               
                  Hope in thée their eternall God, and to thée their hartes bow.
               
                  Euer to watch and pray, as thou haſt taught the ſame:
               
                  Ready to be with oyle in lampe, heauen with thée to attaine.
               
                  VVée hopyng on thée thus, all vayne hope now confound:
               
                  In heauen wt thée at length wyl we thy worthy praiſe forth ſound.
               
                  Lorde graunt that we may raigne, in ioyes celeſtiall:
               
                  Such as wyl ſtyl thy foes remaine, ſhall to paynes infernall.
               
                  O Lorde graunt this requeſt, Lorde let thy kyngdome cum:
               
                  Now watch and pray we wyll, for whye? Tempus edax rerum.
               
               ¶ FINIS.
               
                  
                     (ꝙ) Chriſtopher VVilſon.
               
            
         
         
            
               SOme hope you ſée,
               (The more pitie)
               Not in the Lorde of might:
               Whoſe harts and mynd,
               His wayes ſhould fynd,
               To prayſe him day and night.
            
            
               ¶ With hart and voyce,
               They ſhould reioyce,
               Onely in Chriſt I ſay:
               And not to hope,
               To ſée the Pope,
               With his lawes to beare ſway.
            
            
               ¶ Lament I doe,
               Here to ſée nowe,
               The ioyes that ſome be in:
               Wyſhyng for Maſſe,
               I ſay alas,
               The cloke of filthy ſin.
            
            
               ¶ I may here write,
               And truth endite,
               Affyrme plainely and ſay:
               The worde of truth,
               (The more is ruth)
               Is ſowne in ſtonie way.
            
            
               ¶ For all teachyng,
               And true preachyng,
               Some harts be hard as ſtéele:
               There is no way,
               Their harts to ſtay,
               Or cauſe them truth to ſéele.
            
            
               ¶ But ſtoute they be,
               In all Poperie,
               As by this man doth ſéente:
               Whoſe ſhameleſſe face,
               Put forth this caſe,
               And bad his neighbours deme:
            
            
               ¶ Where beſt ſhould be,
               To make (ꝙ he)
               An aulter for our Maſſe:
               Let vs firſt be,
               Herein (ꝙ he)
               It wyll thus come to paſſe.
            
            
               ¶ This fréend of Popes,
               Offred ten grotes,
               This aulter there to make:
               Where maſſe ſhould be.
               Haue here (ꝙ he)
               This money mine here take.
            
            
               ¶ Lorde our Quéene ſaue,
               We cry and craue,
               In godlie ſtate alway:
               Defend her grace,
               Long time and ſpace,
               Emong vs here we pray.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London without Alderſgate, in little Britaine: by Alex. Lacy. The. 16. of Auguſt. 1566.
         
      
   