
      
         
            
            
            THE ENGLISH MARTYROLOGE CONTEYNING A SVMMARY OF THE LIVES of the glorious and renowned Saintes of the three Kingdomes, ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND.
            
            COLLECTED AND DISTRIBVTED into Moneths, after the forme of a Calendar, according to euery Saintes festiuity.
            
               VVHERVNTO Is annexed in the end a Catalogue of those, who haue suffered death in England for defence of the Catholicke Cause, since King Henry the 8. his breach with the Sea Apostolicke, vnto this day.
            
            By a Catholicke Priest.
            
            Eccles. 44.
            
               Nomen eorum viuet in generationem & generationem.
            
            Their memory shall liue from generation to generation.
            Permissu Superiorum. Anno 1608.
         
         
            
            
               Ecce Regni Anglia dulcis patriae excidiū dolendū &c. Mar
                  
                     •
                  yribus, Confessoribus, &c. Behould the lamentable destruction of England so pleasant a Countrey &c. An Iland so shining with Martyrs. Confessours, and holy Virgins, that scarcely shall yow passe by any famous Village or streete, where yow shall not heare the glorious Name of some new Saint or other &c. 
                  Matth. Paris. in Hist. Angl. Anno 1. Gul. Conquest.
               
            
            
               NVsquam gentium, vt opinor, reperies. &c. No where, I supose, shall yow find so many incorrupted bodyes of Saintes (as in England) resembling that their euerlasting incorruptibility. Which by diuine prouidence, I thinke, to be therfore so ordayned; that a Nation situated almost out of the world, should by consideration of their incorruption, be more confidently animated to the hope of eternall Resurrection &c.
                  Author Continuat. Hist. Ven. Bedae l. 2. cap. 30. Vixit anno 1110.
            
            EVery corner of S. Augustines Monastery at Cāterbury lieth full of the bodyes of Sayntes, and those of no small Name or merit; but euen of such, as one wherof alone were sufficient to make England famous. &c. 
                  Idem eodem lib. cap. 33.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CATHOLICKS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND.
            
            
               WHEN I had almost brought this little worke to an end, (deare Catholicke Countreymen) I began to thinke with my selfe, to whome, among many so dearely affected, I might make bold to dedicate the same, therby the better to patronize that, which ouer bold presumption had cōceyued. And though the thing it selfe needed none other Patrons or Protectors then the glorious Saintes themselues, of whome we are now to treat: yet because I might not seeme, in a manner, to defraude any heerin of their right & interest, which I imagined; at last I thought it most conuenient, that YOW, whose hartes and myndes are firmely fixed in the honour and veneration of so glorious and elected wightes, and for the imbracing

wherof yow daily suffer so great and many persecutions, should take vpon yow this Protection, for whose comfort and consolation principally (next after the honour of the Saintes themselues) the same is published. I do not heere offer vnto yow any new thing (which is alwayes commonly the custome of such to do who dedicate their workes to others) but that which so many ages since, hath by a certaine inheritance, as it were, of your forfathers, descended still, by good right and title, vnto yow, and shall heerafter vnto your, and all posterity. Only this, that I haue heere gathered togeather, and restored vnto yow againe, that which the iniury of tymes had violently taken from yow, and sought to abolish all memory therof: humbly presenting the same, as a duty of my loue towards yow, & my dearest Countrey. Wishing yow to take in good part, what my poore endeauours haue byn able to produce heerin for your spirituall consolation, in these your so great affictions and pressures: with desyre to be made partaker of your good prayers.
            
               
                  This first of October. 1608.
               
               Yours wholy deuoted. I. W. Priest.
            
         
         
            
            THE CALENDAR.
            
               IANVARY
               1 Midwyne Conf.*Eluane Bish.*
               2 A Thousand holy Martyrs *
               3 Meltorus Mart. *
               4 Croniacke Conf. *
               5 Edward King.
               6 Peter Conf. *.
               7 Ced Conf.
               8 Guithelme BishopTransl. William
               9 Brituald BishopAdrian Abbot.Transl. Iudocus
               10 Sethrid Virg. *
               11 Egwyne Bishop
               12 Benedict Abbot.
               13 Kentigerne Abbot.
               14 Beno Confessour *
               15 Alfred King *
               16 Henry Ermite
               17 Milwyde Virg.
               18 Deicola Abbot.Vlfride Bishop *
               19 Wolstan BishopHenry Bishop.
               20 Elfred Virg. *
               21 Malcalline Abbot.
               22 Brituald Bishop *
               23 Boysill Abbot. *
               24 Sophias Bishop.Cadocke Mart.
               25 Conuersion Paul.Eoglodius Conf *
               26 Theorithgid Virg. *
               27 Palladius Bish. *
               28 Arwaldi Broth. Mart. *
               29 Gildas Abbot.
               30 Amnichade Conf.
               31 Adaman Conf.
            
            
               FEBRVARY
               1. BRigit Virgin
               2 Laurence BishopBurchard Bishop.
               3 Wereburge Virgin
               4 Gilbert Conf.Liephard Bish.
               5 I
                     •
                  hn. Indractus Mart. *
               6 Inas King. *
               7 Richard KingAugulus BishopTransl. Helena
               8 Edelsted Virg. *
               9 Merigold Mart.
               10 Transl. Wi
                     ••
                  rid Bishop.
               11 William Bish.Canoch Conf.
               12 Edilwald Bishop. *
               13 Ermenild QueeneTransl. Kilian B.
               
                  14 Conwane Conf. *
               15 Sigfride Bishop.
               16 Tancone Bishop.
               17 Finan Bishop.
               18 Iohn Bishop. *
               19 Acca Bishop. *
               20 Mildred VirginVlsricke Ermite
               21 Cymbert Bishop. *
               22 Transl. Gudwall Bishop.
               23 Transl. Milburge Virg.
               24 Ethelbert KingBerectus Conf.
               25 Transl. Furseus Abbot
               26 Iohn Bishop. *Sexulfe Bishop.*
               27 Alnoth Martyr*Oswald Bishop.
            
            
               MARCH
               1 Dauid Bishop.Switbert Bish.
               2 Chad Bishop.Willeicke Abb.
               3 Wenlocke AbbotFurseus Abbot
               4 Wilgise Confess. *
               5 Frodoline AbbotKinisdred Virg.Kiniswide Virg.
               7 Deifer Ermite *
               8 Felix Bishop.
               9 Bosa Bishop. *
               10 Himeline Conf.
               11 Transl Oswyn King.
               12 Gregory Pope.Fethno Conf. *
               13 Vigane Conf. *
               14 Ceolnulph King. *
               15 Aristobulus Bishop.
               16 Alred Abbot. *
               17 Patricke Bishop.
               18 Edward KingChristian Bish.
               19 Alkmund Mart. *
               20 Cuthbert Bish.Herebert Conf.
               21 Isenger Bishop. *
               22 Hamund Bishop. *
               23 Egbert King. *
               24 Lansrancke Bishop.
               25 William Martyr
               26 Many holy Martyrs. *
               27 Archibald Abbot.
               28 Transl. Fremund King.
               29 Baldred Conf. *
               30 Pattone Bishop
               31 Transl. Adelme Bishop.
            
            
               
               APRIL.
               1 Sadocke. Mart. *Adrian. Mart.*
               2 Ebba Abbesse. *
               3 Richard Bishop.Burgundofora Virg.
               4 Guier Priest. *
               5 Tigernake BishopGotebald Bishop. *
               6 Celsus ConfessourEthelwold King. *
               7 Sigene Abbot. *
               8 Duuianus Conf. *
               9 Frithstan Bish. *
               10 Paternus Confess. Eschillus Bishop.
               11 Guthlacke Conf.
               12 Hugh Bishop*Mechtild Virg.*
               13 Elfled Virgin. *
               14 Ethelnulph King. *
               15 Eleua. Oswald Bishop
               16 Transl. Alban Protom.
               17 Marianus Conf. *
               18 Oswyn Conf. *
               19 Elphege Bishop
               20 Ceadwall King.Transl. Aldar B.
               21 Anselme Bishop
               22 Birstan Bishop. *
               23 George Martyr.Etheldred King
               24 Mellitus Bishop.Egbert Abbot.Inuent. Iuo B.Tran. Wilfrid B.
               25 Obodius Conf. *
               26 Modan Confess. *Midan Confess. *
               27 Walburge Virgin
               28 Kortill Bishop. *
               29 Senan Conf. *
               30 Erconwald Bishop.
            
            
               MAY
               1 Assaph Bish.Vltan Abbot
               2 German Bishop.Piran Conf. *
               3 Walter Abbot
               4 Ethelred King. *
               5 Algiue Queene*Scandalaus Conf.*
               6 Edbert BishopTran. Dubritiu
               7 Iohn Beuerley Bish.
               8 Wyre Bishop.
               9 Beatus Conf.
               10 Transl. Bede Priest
               
                  11 Fremund King Martyr
               12 Remigius Bishop
               13 Merwyne Virg. *
               14 Edith Virg. *
               15 Dympna Virg.
               16 Symon Confess.Transl. AlbanBrandan Abbot.
               17 Transl. 11000. Virgins
               18 Sewall Bishop.
               19 Dunstan Bishop.Alcuine Abbot
               20 Ethelbert King Mart.
               21 Godricke ErmiteConstātine Emper.
               22 Henry King.
               23 William Martyr
               24 Edgar King *
               25 Adelme Bishop.
               26 Augustine BishopFugatius Conf.Damianus Conf.
               27 Bede Priest
               28 Ionas Abbot. *
               29 Burien Virg. *
               30 Hieu Virg. *
               31 Wolstan Martyr
            
            
               IVNE.
               1 Rufin Mart. *Vlfade  Mart. *
               2 Malcolme King *
               3 Eleutherius Conf. *
               4 Patrocke Bishop. *
               5 Boniface Bishop Mart.Eboam Bishop. Mart.Adlar Bishop Mart.Vintruge Priest Mart.Walter Priest Mart.Abelhere Priest Mart.Hamunt Deacō Mart.Boso Deacon Mart.Gunderhere M. Mart.Wilhere Monke Mart.Adolph Monke Mart.
               6 Gudwall Bish
               7 Robert AbbotTransl. Wolstan
               8 William Bish.Disibode Bish.
               9 Columbe Abbot
               10 Tran. Edmund KingMargaret QueeneIthimar Bishop
               11 Edilwald Conf. *
               12 Agatha Virg. *
               13 Elerius Abbot *
               14 Transl Brandan Abbot
               
                  15 Eadburge Virg.Transl. MenigoldMayne Abbot
               16 Transl Richard Bishop.Leofgar Bishop. Mart.
               17 Botulph Abbot.
               18 Dunstan Abbot *
               19 Iohn Bishop. *
               20 Transl. Oswald K.Transl. Edward K.
               21 Engelmund Mart.
               22 Alban Protomart.Souldiar MartTransl. Ortrude V.
               23 Ediltrude Virgin.
               24 Rumwald Bishop.
               25 Amphibale Mart.Adalbert Conf.Transl. Lebuine Conf.
               26 Nine hundred Mart. *
               27 Iohn Conf.Transl. Leuine B.
               28 Columbane Monke *
               29 Peter & Paul Apost.Ethelwyne Bishop *
               30 Deusdedit Bishop.
            
            
               IVLY
               1 IVlius & AaronGoluin Bishop.
               2 Swithin Bishop. Oudocke Conf.
               3 Transl. Lanfranke B.Guthagon Conf.
               4 Odo Bishop
               5 Modwene AbbesseTransl. Anselme Bishop
               6 Sexburge Abbesse
               7 Tran. Thom. of Cant.
               Hedda Bishop.Willebald Bishop.Edilburge Virg.Ercongote Virg.
               8 Grimbald Abbot.Kilian BishopColman Mart.Totnam Mart.Erwald Mart.
               9 Edilburge Queene
               10 Etto Bishop.
               11 Dronston Conf. *
               12 Luane Abbot *
               13 Transl. Mildred Virg.
               14 Marchelme Conf.
               15 Transl. Swithin
               Bishop of Winch.Plechelme BishopEadgith QueeneHarrucke BishopDauid Abbot.
               16 Transl. Osmund Bishop
               
                  
17 Kenelme King Mart.Iohn AbbotFrideg and Conf.
               18 Edburge VirginTransl. Odilia
               19 Diman Conf. *
               20 Ethelwide Queene *
               21 Arbogastus Bishop
               22 Wilfrede Queene. *
               23 Vodine Bish. Mart. *
               24 Transl. Lewine Virg.
               25 Wiaman Mart.*Vnaman Mart.*Sunaman Mart.*
               26 Christian Virgin
               27 Ioseph of ArimathiaHugh Martyr
               28 Sampson Bishop
               29 Lupus BishopOwen Conf. *
               30 Lefrone AbbesseTacwine Bish.
               31 Neoth Conf.
            
            
               AVGVST
               1 EEthelwold BishopTransl. Wenlock
               2 Alricke Ermite *
               3 Domitius Conf. *
               4 Transl. Wallurge Virg.
               5 Oswald King.
               6 Henry BishopAlexander Conf. *
               7 Maude Queene *
               8 Fagane Confess. *
               9 Hugh Bishop
               10 Malcus Bishop. *
               11 Gilbert Confessour *
               12 Bertelme Conf. *
               13 Wigbert Mart. *
               14 Transl. Werenfrid Conf.
               15 Margaret Prioresse *
               16 Thomas Monke *
               17 Thomas Conf.Ieron Martyr
               18 Helen Empresse.
               19 Clintanke King.
               20 Oswyne King
               21 Richard Bishop. *
               22 Arnulph Conf. *
               23 Iustinian Mart. *
               24 Alice Prioresse *
               25 Ebba MartyrThom. of Hereford
               26 Pandwyne Virgin *
               27 Decuman Mart. *
               28 Rumbald Conf.*Agnes Virg. Mart.
               29 Sebbe KingTransl. Edwold
               30 Fiaker Conf.
               
                  
31 Aidan BishopCuthberge AbbesseTransl. Eanswide
            
            
               SEPTEMBER
               1 Elphege Bishop *
               2 Adaman Abbot *
               3 Transl. Foillan Bish.
               4 Tran. Cuthbert Bish.Marcellus Bishop.
               5 Altho Abbot *
               6 Bega Virgin *
               7 Transl. Dunstan Bish.
               8 Ethelburge Queene *
               9 Queran AbbotWulfhild Virg.
               10 Otger Deacon Conf.
               11 Bather Abbot *
               12 Eanswide AbbesseQuemburge Virg. *
               13 Werenfrid Conf.
               14 Bernard Conf. *
               15 Chineburg Queene *
               16 Ninian BishopEdith Virgin
               
                  
                     Martyrs
                     17 StephenSocrates
                  
               
               18 Transl. Winocke Abb.
               19 Theodore Bishop
               20 Cibthacke Confessour *
               21 Edilhun Conf. *
               22 Higbald Abbot *
               23 Hereswide Queene *
               24 Transl. Winibald Abb.
               25 Ceolfride Abbot
               26 Wulsy AbbotIotaneus Conf. *
               27 Sigebert King *
               28 Lioba Abbesse
               29 Cogan Abbot. *
               30 Honorius Bishop.
            
            
               OCTOBER
               1 ROger BishopTran. Guthagō
                  Wasnulph Conf.
               2 Transl. Thom. of Hereford
               3 Ewaldi Martyrs.
               4 Edwyn King Mart.
               5 Conwalline Abbot *
               6 Ywy Conf.Comine Abbot *
               7 Osith Virg.Transl. Hugh B.
               8 Transl. EloquiusKeyna Virgin
               9 Robert Bishop.Gislen Conf.
               10 Pauline BishopIohn Conf.
               
                  
11 Edilburge AbbesseCanicke Abbot
               12 Wilfrid Bishop.
               31 Transl. Edward K.Colman Martyr
               14 Transl. Burchard Bishop.
               15 Transl. Oswald B.Tecla Abbesse
               16 Lullus Bishop.Gallus Abbot
               17 Ethelbrit Mart.Ethelred Mart.Tran. Ediltrude.
               18 Mo
                     •
                  o Martyr
               19 Fridesuyde VirginTransl. WidebrordEthbyn Abbot
               20 Wendelm Abbot.
               21 Vrsula Virgin
               22 Mellon BishopCordula Virg.Dovatus Bish.
               23 Syra Virgin *
               24 Maglore Bish.Maxentia Virg. *
               25 Ardwine Conf. *
               26 Eatta Bishop.Albuine Bish.
               27 Transl. Romwald B.
               28 Symon ApostleAlfred King.
               29 Eadsine BishopMotiser Conf. *
               30 Egelnoth Bishop
               31 Foillan Bishop
            
            
               NOVEMBER
               1 Transl. Boniface B.
                  Richard Ermite *
               2 Vulganius Bishop.
               3 Wenefride VirginTran. Edith Virg.
               4 Clare Martyr.
               5 Malachy Bishop.
               6 Winocke Abbot.
               7 Willebrord Bishop.Florentius Bishop.
               8 Willehade Bishop
               9 Congilia Abbesse *
               10 Iustus BishopIo
                     •
                  n Bishop
               11 Bertuine Bishop.
               12 Liu
                     〈…〉
                  nus BishopLebuine Conf.
               13 Kilian Bish. Conf.
               14 Tran. ErconwaldLaurence BishopDubri
                     •
                  ius Bishop
               15 Macloue BishopEdmund Bishop
               Margaret Qu.
               
                  
17 Hugh BishopHilda Abbesse
               18 Fulke Confess. *
               19 Ermenburge Queene
               20 Edmund K. Mart.Humbert Bishop.
               21 Columban Abbot
               22 Osmane Virgin *
               23 Tathar Er
                     〈…〉
                  e *
               24 Eanflede Queene *
               25 Telean Bishop *
               26 Egbert Abbot *
               27 Oda Virgin
               28 Edwold Conf.
               29 Barucke Ermite *
               30 Withbuge Virgin *
            
            
               DECEMBER
               1 DAniel Confess. *
               2 Neede Virgin *
               3Lucius KingBirine Bish.Eloquius Conf.
               4 Osmund BishopEmerita Virg.
               5 Christine Virgin *
               6 Congellus Abbot*Floremina Virg.*
               7 Odwald Abbot.*Gallanus Conf.*
               8 Conception of B. Virg.Agatha Queene *
               9 Ethelgine Abbesse *
               10 Chined Ermite *
               11 Geruadius Bishop *
               12 Elfred Virg. *
               13 Iudocus ErmiteEdburge Virgin
               14 Mimborine Abbot *
               15 Transl. Hilda Virg.
               16 Bean BishopTibbe Virgin *
               17 Tetta Abbesse *
               18 Winibald Abbot
               19 Macharias Abbot *
               20 Comogel Abbot *
               21 Edburge Abbesse *
               22 Hidelide Virgin *
               23 Imbware Virgin *
               24 Ruthius Conf. *
               25 Gregory Conf. *
               26 Ethelfrede Virg. *
               27 Gerrard Confess. *
               28 Transl. Elphege Bishop.
               29 Thomas of Canterbury
               30 Eustach Abbot *
               31 Eternane Conf. *
            
         
         
            
            AN ADVERTISMENT OF THE AVTHOR to the Catholicke Reader.
            
               WHERAS all Bookes (good Reader) of what subiect soeuer, that are published to the view of the world, must passe the censures and iudgments of many sortes of people; I haue thought it not amisse before thou enter any further into the contentes, to giue thee two or three short aduertisments in this place; as well therby to preuent all occasions of misconstruction or cauill, that any man, perchance, may take against this little worke or Sanctiloge of myne; as also the better to informe thy vnderstanding, concerning diuers doubtes or other difficultyes, that in the reading therof may happily occurre vnto thee.
            1. First then I would haue thee to vnderstand, that what I haue heere set downe in this ensuing Martyrologe concerning the liues and miracles of these glorious and renowned Saintes of our Great-Britany, and of the Ilands belonging therunto; I haue done the same with all truth, sincerity & conscience, to my knowledge: not contenting my selfe with bare wordes and relations only; but haue in the margents quoted also the bookes and places of the Authors, out of whome I haue gathered al that is heere alleaged. Neyther haue I vsed any other Authors herin, but such as are approued by the Sea Apostolick, or at leastwise permitted by the same reiecting all Apocryphall Legends or other fabulous Historyes, that may be any way suspected of the least note of falsity or errour whatsoeuer.
            2 Secondly I haue not taken vpon me in this Catalogue or Calendar to make an vniuersall Martyrologe, but haue gathered togeather only the ancient Saintes, Martyrs, Confessours & Virgins of our three Kingdomes, England, Scotland
               
& Ireland: Yet for that, besides these of our owne, there are some others also of foraine Nations, by whome our said Countreys haue receyued some notable or peculiar benefit, either publicke or priuate; as hauing byn our Apostles or Patrons, eyther by way of preaching, teaching, protection, or otherwise in the cooperation to our Conuersion, and consequently to be by vs honoured and reuerenced for such, as all our Cath. Ancestours and forfathers haue done before vs, and as we see all other Catholicke Countreys round about vs to do the like in the same case: These (I say) I haue thought good to accompt as our owne, & togeather with our owne to place thē on their proper festiuall dayes, to the end we may as well with due honour obserue their Memoryes and Solemnityes: as also therby auoyd the vngratefull obliuion of so great & inestimable benefits receyued by them and their merits.
            3. The third Aduertisement may be, that wheras it hath pleased God to giue vnto our little Dominions so many glorious Saintes, both Martyrs, Cōfessours & Virgins (besides these later of our dayes, whose Names I haue also put downe in a Catalogue a part by thēselues, in the later end of this booke) who may be more then sufficient, to make a whole and complete Calendar, throughout euery Moneth, placing on euery day one; yet for that a great number of our ancient Saintes haue no proper festiuityes in our English Catholicke Church, and many of them forgotten and almost out of memory, by this vnfortunate fall of our Countrey, frō the true and ancient Catholicke faith, and vnion of the Sea Apostolicke: I haue thought it most conuenient for the more full accomplishing and perfecting of a Martyrologe, that where any day falleth out to be altogeather voyd; there to place one or more of the forsaid ancient Saintes, whose publicke celebrity hath not byn hitherto kept; & therof to make a Commemoration only (which in the Roman & other Martyrologes is often vsed) noting the same with the signe of an Asteriske or Starre in the Margent, to the end it may be knowne and obserued

of the Reader. And where none of these forsaid Markes, so noted, is to be found; then vpon that day is put the true festiuity of the Saint, whome there thou shalt find placed.
            4. And lastly, I do not meane by this ensuing Martyrologe to introduce any other publicke obseruation or festiuity of any of the Saintes heerin by me set downe, then that which the Catholicke Church of England hath in formertymes, and doth also at this present celebrate: but only my intention is to lay forth the summe of their liues and miracles as briefly as I may, for the increase of deuotion in the Catholicke people, and for the duty and reuerenced owe vnto them both: leauing the rest to euery mans pri
                  〈…〉
               re and particular deuotion, as he shall, by reading the same, be affected to their glorious veneration. Wi
                  〈…〉
               ing hartily all such Catholickes of our said Coūtreys, to whose hands this little worke may chance to come; that if they haue any other notes, concerning these our ancient Saintes lying by them, they would vouchsafe, eyther to impart the same vnto me, or be pleased themselues, by reuiewing this small labour of myne, to publish the same anew, and a
                  〈…〉
               end my imperfections heerin, if any shalbe found; as well for the honour of the glorious Saintes themselues, as the publike vtility of these our Kingdoms and Countreys. Farewell.
            
               I. W.
            
         
         
            ERRATA
            
               
                  
                     Pag. 140
                     Monassery lege
                     
                     Monastery
                  
                  
                     294
                     Eaetta
                     Eatta.
                  
                  
                     295
                     venetion
                     veneration.
                  
                  
                     326
                     Roall.
                     Royall
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE MONETH OF IANVARY.
            
               
                  A The first Day.
               
                  AT Glastenbury-Abbey in * 
                  Somersetshire the Commemoration of the Sayntes Midwyne and Eluane Confessors, Bar on. in Annal. Eccl. an. 183. ex antiquis monum. Eyseng. cent. 2. p. 6. dist. 6. 10. Capgrau. in Catal. Sanctor. Britan. Registr. Monast. Glascon. who being two noble auncient Britans by byrth, were sent by King Lucius of Britany to Rome to Pope Elutherius, to treat of his Conuersion to Christian faith, and being there both baptized by the said Pope, & S. Eluane made a Bishop, they were sent backe againe into Britany, togeather with Fugatius and Damianus, who baptized the King and the greatest part of his Nation, in the yeare of our Lord 183. And after they had much laboured in teaching and instructing the new flocke of Christ in our Iland for many yeares, full of

sanctity of life, and venerable old age, they both ended their happy dayes, about the yeare of Christ, an hundred nynty and eight, & were buried at Glastenbury, as the ancient Records of that Abbey do witnesse,
               
                  And in other places of many holy Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins; to whose prayers and merits, we humbly commend our selues.
               
               This last clause is alwayes thus to be repeated in the end of euery day.
            
            
               
                  B The second Day.
               AT Lichfield in Staffordshire the Commemoration * of A thousand holy Martyrs, of the British Nation, who newly conuerted Bed. l. 1. hist. An. c. 7. in fin. Mat. VVestmonast. in histor. Anglic. 10. Rouse de nomine Ciuit. Lichfeldiae. Humfr. Lhuide infragm. descrip. B
                        〈…〉
                     an. to the faith of Christ, and being Disciples and followers of S. Amphibale Priest, that suffered in the persecution of Dioclesian Emperour, and present at his Martyrdome neere vnto the towne of S. Albanes in Hartfordshire, fled thence for feare of like torments; but being ouertaken at Lichfield, they were all in hatred of Christian Religion, there most cruelly put to death, by commandement of the President of Brittany, about the yeare of Christ three hundred and foure. The place where they suffered, was afterward called Cadauerum campus, which is as much to say as Lich-field in English, & where the forsaid

Citty is now built, and therof taketh his auncient name and denomination. And in other places of many holy Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, &c.
               
            
            
               
                  C The third Day.
               IN Cornwall the Cōmemoration of S. Meliorus Martyr, sonne to Melianus Duke of that * Prouince, who being his Fathers only sonne and heyre, and secretly made a Christian, Io. Capgrau. in Catalog. Sanctor. Britan. Anno Domini 411. ex antiquis monum. Prouinc. Cornub. was by a brother-in-law of his called Rinaldus a pagan, cruelly murdered, partly in hatred of his faith and Religion, and partly to inioy his inheritance. He first cut of his right hand, and then his left legge, and last of all his head, about the yeare of Christ foure hundred and eleuen. His body was buried in an old Church in Cornwall, wherat in signe of his innocency, it pleased God forth with to worke many miracles; where also his reliques were kept with great honour and veneration, euen vntill our dayes.
            
            
               
                  D The fourth Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Croniacke 
                  * Confessor, who borne of a very noble

parentage in that Kingdome, tooke a Religious habit, and became a Monke of Io. Le
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        ••
                     us Epis. Rossen. l. 5. 
                        •
                     ist. Scot. Arnold. wion in addit. ad lib. 3. Lig. vit
                        •
                     e lit. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . the venerable Order of S. Benedict, where in all kind of 
                     •
                  anctity of life, and Monasticall discipline, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fifty. His memory is yet very famous amongst the Catholickes, aswell of the Scottish, as the Irish Nation; in both which Kingdomes in former tymes, many Churches and altars haue byn dedicated in his honour. It is heere, and in many other places to be obserued, that the Irish and Scottish Historiographers do oftentymes disagree about the natiue Contrey of diuers Saintes mentioned in this Martyrologe; For that in aunciēt tymes the Iland of Hybernia being called Scotia, hath caused a great confusion, especially amongst forrayne wryters, who for want of knowledge heerin, do often confound the one nation with the other.
            
            
               
                  E The fifth Day.
               AT VVestminster by London, the deposition of S. Edward King and Confessour, who being yet in his Mothers wombe, was elected, A
                        〈…〉
                     ed. Ri
                        •
                     uall. in eius vita. Pol. Virgil. l. crowned, and annoynted King by S. Peter the Apostle, as it was miraculously reueyled to S. Brituald Bishop of VVinchester,
                  
that liued at the same tyme. He was very 8. Matt. Paris. an. 1069. Surius tomo 1. vit. Sanct. hac die. Petr. in Catal. Rom. Martyr. & alij. famous for working of miracles, especially in curing a disease of swelling in peoples throtes, which was afterward therof called the Kinges-euill. His body being taken vp thirty six yeares after his death, was found as flexible and vncorrupt, as when it was first buryed. He was Canonized for a Saint by Pope Alexander the third, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred threescore and three. His translation was wont to be kept holy-day throughout England vpon the thirteenth day of October, of whome in that place we haue set downe a larger Narration.
            
            
               
                  F The sixt Day.
               AT Bologne in France the Commemoration * of S. Peter Confessor, who being Ven. Beda lib. 1. histor. Gent. Angl. cap. 33. Arnold. VVion in appēd. ad lib. 3. lig. vi
                        ••
                     . by S. Augustine our English Apostle ordayned Abbot of a new Monastery neere vnto Canterbury, which K. Ethelbert of Kent had founded, and going ouer into France, was by tempest of sea, drowned neere to the coast of Bologne, where the Inhabitāts finding his body, buried it in an obscure place: but a certaine miraculous light from heauen being seene euery night to shine theron, the people began to inquire further what he

was; and at last hauing intelligence from England, that it was the forsaid Abbot, they tooke vp his body, and translated it with great solemnity to Bologne, and there with due veneration placed it in a Church, wherat in signe of his sanctity and holines of life, miracles are said to haue byn forthwith wrought. This happened about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and seauen.
            
            
               
                  G The seauenth Day.
               AT London the festiuity of S. Ced Confessor and second Bishop of that Sea brother to S. Chad of Li
                        ••
                     field, who by his Beda lib. 1. 
                        •
                     ist. Angl. cap. 21. 22 23. 24. 25. Et lib. 4. Cap. 3. Catal. Episco. Lōdinens. apud wi
                        •
                      l. 2. lig. vit
                        •
                     . continuall preaching to the Mercians and Eastsaxons, conuerted many thousands to the faith of Christ, and is worthily called their Apostle. The Sea of London being voyd for many years after the death of S. Mellitus, he was at length consecrated therto, at the intercession of Sigebert K. of the Eastsaxons, who was newly conuerted to the Christian faith. And afterwards building a goodly Monastery at a place called Lestinghen in the Prouince of the Deires, and replenishing the same with many monks, at last in great sanctity of life, full of venerable old age, he ended his blessed dayes, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and foure, and was buried

in his forsaid new Monastery, where he desceased. S. Bede recounteth, that when afterward his brother S. Chad died, his soule was seene to descend from heauen, with a troupe of Angells, to accompany the same to paradise.
            
            
               
                  A The eight Day.
               AT London the deposition of S. Guithelme Bishop and Confessor, who borne of a noble bloud in our I
                     •
                  ād, & in the Primitiue Matth. westmonast. an Domini 435. Gauf. Mo
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪ l. 6. cap. 4. & 5. Church of Britany ordayned Archbishop of London, was very famous for preaching the Christian faith to the Pagans of our nation: And after a most Saintly life, full of miracles, in a good old age, he most blessedly departed this world, about the yeare of Christ foure hundred and threescore.
               THe same day at Yorke the Translation of S. VVilliam Confessor and Bishop of that Sea, kinsman to K. Stephen of England, who after he had most patiently endured many Calendar secundū vs
                        〈…〉
                      S
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ac die. iniuryes and wrongs, yea and banishment also from his bishopricke and flocke, being againe restored by Pope Anastasius the fourth, in great holines of life, he ended his blessed dayes, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand, one hundred, fifty and foure. His venerable body being, after many yeares, taken vp

on this day, was with great solemnity translated to a more eminent place of his owne Cathedrall Church of Yorke, wherat, in signe of his innocency, through his merits, it pleased God to worke miracles.
            
            
               
                  B The ninth Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Brituald Bishop and Confessor, who being constituted the first Abbot of the Monastery of Rheaculse in Kent, now called Reaculer, which holy K. Ethelbert of that Prouince Bed. l. 5. 
                        •
                     ist. cap. 9. Ioan. Tritem. de vir. Illstr. Polid. Virgil. l. 4. & 6. 
                        •
                     istor. Angl. had founded soone after his Conuersion, was thence promoted to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, and succeeded S. Theodore in that Sea, which when he had gouerned for almost fourty yeares, in great sanctity and holines of life, full of venerable old age, he gaue vp his soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and thirty; and was buryed at Canterbury.
               
               THE same day and same place the deposition of S. Adrian Abbot, who borne in Beda l. 4. cap. 1. & 2. & l. 5. cap. 21. Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. Sigebert. in Chrou. in Asricke, and sent into England with S. Theodore of Canterbury aboue named, by Pope Vitalian; after he had taught the Christian faith in our Iland for nyne and thirty yeares togeather, full of sanctity of life & miracles, he departed to our Lord, in the yeare of

Christ, seauen hundred and ten, and was buryed in S. Augustines Church at Canterbury.
               
               THE same day also at Po
                        •
                     toise in France the Translation of S. Iudocus (cōmonly called in English S. Ioyce) who descended of a noble Brittish bloud, forsooke the world, and De hac Transl. vid. Calend. se
                        •
                     . vsum Sarum, hac die. became an Ermite in France, where in all kind of most godly life and conuersation, he ended his blessed dayes. His body being taken vp, on this day, threescore yeares after his death, was found as flexible and vncorrupt, as if it had byn buryed the day before. And being put into a costly shrine, was placed in a more eminent roome of the same Church, about the yeare of Christ seauen hundred and thirteene, wherat it pleased God to worke many miracles.
            
            
               
                  C The tenth Day.
               AT Brige neere Paris in France, the Commemoration * of S. Sethird Virgin and Abb
                     •
                  sse, daughter to Annas King of the East-angles, and sister to S. Edilburge Virgin, who in her yong yeares went ouer into France and became a Religious womā there in a monastery at the forsaid towne of Brige, vnder the Catal. Abbatis. Monast. Brigens. care of her said sister that then gouerned the same; after whose death, she was made Abbesse

of the whole Monastery; where in very great sanctimony of life, ioyned with Bed. l. 3. cap. 8. 
                        •
                     ist. Angl. most godly Conuersation and Monasticall discipline, she yielded vp her blessed soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and threescore: And was buryed in the same place.
            
            
               
                  D The eleuenth Day.
               AT VVorcester the deposition of S. Egwine Confessor, & third Bishop of that Sea, who being a man of very austere life, made a payre of iron-shackles, locked them close Ranulph Cestrens. in eius vita. Matth. VVest. anno. 712 Florent. VVigor. in Chron. anno 708 Molan. in addit. ad Vs
                        •
                     a. hac die. & alii. about his legges, then cast the keyes therof into the Riuer of Seuerne, an so went to Rome with O
                        ••
                     a King of Mercia; desiring of God, that the said shackles might not be loosed from his leges, vntill he had made satisfation for all the synnes of his youthfull yeares: and in his returne backe, as he came ouer the sea, vpon a suddayne a fish leaped into the shippe, wherin he sayled; which being taken and killed, the forsaid keyes of the shackles that he had throwne into the riuer, were found in the fishes belly; the which being brought to the Blessed Bishop, he forthwith applyed them to the shackles that were about his legges, and straight vnlocking them, to the

admiration of the behoulders, he came ioyfully home to his Bishopricke. He founded the famous Abbey of Euesham neere VVorcester, & endowed it with great reuenewes & possessions, procuring from Rome diuers priuiledges and franchises for the same, of Pope Constantine, by the meanes of K. Coenred and K. O
                        ••
                     a, that then resided in that Citty for deuotion sake. And after many other workes of piety, famous for miracles, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and sixteene: and was buried at Euesham.
               
            
            
               
                  E The twelfth Day.
               AT VVire-mouth in the Bishopricke of Durham, the deposition of S. Benedict 
                  Bed. l. 4. cap. 4. & l. 5. cap. 20. Mat. Pa
                        •
                     is. & VVestm. anno Domini 703▪ Molan. in addit. ad Vs
                        •
                     a. Abbot, surnamed Biscopus, who being descended of a noble parentage in our Iland, went to Rome, and after his returne thence, built a goodly Monastery at the Riuer-banke of VVire in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, wherin our famous S. Bede was afterward brought vp. He founded there also a goodly Church, dedicating the same to the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. And after a second voyage to Rome, to procure priuiledges for his said Monastery, full of sanctity and holinesse of life, he ended his venerable

dayes, about the yeare of Christ seauen hundred and three, and was buryed in the forsaid Church which himself had built, wherat it pleased God to worke many miracles.
            
            
               
                  F The thirteenth Day.
               AT Glasco in Scotland the deposition of S. Kentigerne, Abbot and Confessour, Sonne to King Eugenius the third of Scotland, 
                  Io. Lest. Epis. Ros. l. 4. de gest. Sco. Chron. Britan. & VViō in Mart. Benedict. hac die Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. & alij. who being created Bishop of Glasco, soone after resigned that dignity, and built himselfe a Monastery in the same Kingdome, gathering togeather six hundred Monkes, whome he instructed in all kind of vertue and good learning, and was a myrrour to the Christian world. And when he had thus cōtinued for very many yeares, full of venerable old age, ioyned with sanctity of life and miracles, he gaue vp his blessed soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and eight, and was buryed in the same place.
            
            
               
                  G The fourteenth Day.
               IN North-wales the Commemoration of * 
                  S. Beno Priest and Confessor, who leading Acta S. Wenefridae apud Surtom. 6. 3. Nouemb. Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum in lect. S. Wenefridae. & R. B. in eius vita M. S. in Collegio Angl. Audomarop. an Eremiticall life in the West part of England,
                  
was by an angell admonished to go into VVales to a noble man called Trebuith, S. VVenefrides Father, who gaue him a part of his lands and possessions to build a Monastery, as also his daughter VVenefride to be instructed and brought vp in a Religious manner: whose head being soone after cut of by Cradocus sonne to Alane King of the same Contrey, for not yielding to his vnlawfull lust, he miraculously set on againe, she liuing fifteene yeares after. He ended his venerable life full of sanctity and miracles, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and threescore: whose body hath alwayes byn had in very great reuerence in our iland, especially of the Ancient Britanes of VVales.
               
            
            
               
                  A The fifteenth Day.
               AT Mailros in the Kingdome of Northumberland, the Commemoration of Blessed * 
                  Alfred Confessour, and eighteenth King of Bed. l. 5. cap. 13. wernerus Rolwincke in fasciculo temporū. VVion. lib. 4. ligni vitae. that Prouince, who being a most vertuous Prince, in the one and twentith yeare of his raigne, contemning all worldly pompe and honour, to the admiration of all Christendome, both he and his wife the Queene, with mutuall consent entred into Monasteryes, & became Religious, she being veyled a Nunne at a place called Dormundcaster, two

miles from Peterburrow; and he taking the habit of a Monke in the forsaid Monastery Paulus Morigia ord. Iesu. de Vir. Illustr. Monac. Plat. l. 2. de bono stat. Rel. of Maylros, where in great sanctity of life & obseruance of Monasticall discipline, he spent the rest of his dayes, and finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and twenty, and was buryed in the same place.
            
            
               
                  B The Sixteenth Day.
               AT Tyn-mouth in Northumberlād the deposition of S. Henry Confessor and Eremite, who borne in Denmarke of very honourable parents, came ouer into England, and obtayned leaue of the Prior of Tyn-mouth to lead a solitary or Eremiticall life in the Iland of Cochet, where he liued many yeares with only bread and water, and afterward he came to eate but thrice in the weeke, and three dayes also a weeke he kept sylence. On a tyme he would haue gone to Durham, but had no boate to passe ouer the riuer of Vita eius extat in veter. Codice Antuerpiae, in custodia cuiusdam Nobilis viri, vbi festiuitas eius ponitur hac die. 
                  VVire; Wherfore being solicitous how to get ouer, a boate that was fastened on the other side of the water, brake loose, and of it selfe came ouer vnto him, wherin he passed. Towards the end of his dayes, he got a swelling in one of his knees, through ouer much praying, which growing to an vlcer, at last

brake, and when certayne little wormes crept therout, he would take and put them in againe, saying: Go into your inheritance, where yow haue byn nourished, &c. And so perseuering in a most godly and Saintly life for a long tyme, when the houre of death drew neere, he went into a little Chappell in the same iland, and taking the belrope in his hand, when he had rung it, he departed this life. A monke of the next Monastery hearing the bell ring, made hast thither, and found him dead, sitting vpon a stone with the belrope in his hand, and a candle standing lighted by him, which did yield so cleere a light that it dazeled the eyes of the behoulders. His body was brought to Tyn-mouth, and there buried in the Church of our B. Lady, neere to the body of S. Oswyn King and Martyr, in the yeare of Christ 1120. which yeare also he died.
            
            
               
                  C The seauenteenth Day.
               AT Canterbury the Commemoration of * 
                  S. Milwyde Virgin, daughter to Merualdus King of Mercia, and sister to the Saintes Milburge and Mildred Virgins, who contemning Matth. VVest. an. Dom. 676. all pleasures and delightes of this world, became a Religious woman in a Monastery in Kent, neere vnto Canterbury,
                  
which holy King Ethelbert of blessed memory had foūded, where in great sāctimony of Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl. Ranulph Cestrens. lib. 4 cap. 18. & alij antiquiores. life and pious conuersation, she yielded her soule vp to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and sixteene. She had also a brother called Meresine, a man of great holynes of life, liuing about the same tyme, of whome there is made often mention in our ancient Historiographers of Britany and England.
            
            
               
                  D The eighteenth Day.
               AT Sutrium in Tuscany the Deposition of Petrus in Catalog. l. 2. cap. 88. Vincent. in speculo. l. 23. cap. 2. 3. 4. & 5. Molan. & Mart. Rom. hac die. 
                  S. Deicola Abbot and Confessor, who borne in Scotland of a noble parentage, and hearing of the vertues and sanctity of S. Columbane the Great, then liuing in Italy, went ouer vnto him, became his disciple, and was afterward made Abbot there of a new Monastery, called S. Martins, erected in a towne of Tuscany, commonly named Sutrium, where in great sanctity and holines of life, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred fourscore and eleuen. *
               
               THE same day in Suetia the Commemoration Adam Bremens. in hist. Su
                        〈…〉
                     ca. l. 2. cap. 22. of S. Vlsride Bishop and Martyr, who being an English man by byrth, and of great learning & knowledg in the scriptures,

went ouer into the low Countreyes Cranz. in Metrop. & Baron. in Annal. ad annū citat. first, and thence into Suetia to preach the Christian faith, which when he had done most feruently, and with great fruite of his holy labours for some yeares, he was there finally put to death, by the enemyes of Christ, and so obtayned a palme of martyrdome, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand thirty and foure.
            
            
               
                  E The ninteenth Day.
               AT VVorcester the deposition of S. VVolstan Bishop and Confessour, who being brought vp from his youth in the Abbey of Matth. VVest. an. 1095. & Mat. Paris. eode an. Pol. Vir. l. 9. Sur. tom. 1. Malmes. & Florēt in hist. Calend. sec. vsū Sarum hac die, & alij omnes. 
                  Peterburrow, and afterward made a monke in the Monastery of VVorcester, was finally created Bishop of the same Citty in the tyme of K. Edward the Confessour, but being after deposed, through falfe & slaunderous accusations, by K. VVilliam the Conquerour, and Bishop Lanfranke, was by a miracle that himselfe wrought at S. Edwardes body in VVestminster, in the presence of many people, againe restored to his Bishopricke, where in very great sanctity and holines of life, he perseuered to the end of his venerable dayes, which happened in the yeare of Christ, one thousand nynty and fiue, and was buryed in his owne Cathedrall Church of VVorcester.
                  
This day was afterward cōmāded to be kept holy, in his memory, throughout England.
               THE same day in Suetia the passiō of S. Hē
                     ry Martyr & Bishop of Opslo, who going Io Mag. l. 19. in histor. Goth. c. 3. Molan. in addit. ad Vsu. Mart. Rom. & Breuiar. Sueticum hac aie. our of England, to preach the faith of Christ in those partes, was honourably intertayned of the King of Suetia, by whose counsell & direction he made war against the Finlanders & subdued thē, wherby the whole countrey of Finland was cōuerted to the Christiā faith & he became their Apostle. He was afterward slayne by the Pagā people of the same Countrey, being stoned to death, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand, one hundred fifty and one. His body was afterward translated to Opslo, and there kept in his Cathedrall Church vntil the dayes of Martyn Luther, when as his sacred Reliques were prophaned, beatē to dust, & cast into the ayre
            
            
               
                  F The twentith Day.
               AT Ramsey-Abbey in the Ile of Ely the Cō
                  memoratiō of S. Elsled Virgin & Abbesse, * who descēded of a noble family, & daughter to Ethelwold an Earle in the Prouince of the Rob. Bucklād in eius vita ex Antiquis monumentis 
                  East-Angles, after her Fathers death, contēned all worldly & transitory prefermēts, & became a Nunne in the Monastery of Ramsey, which her said Father had lately founded, vnder the Gouermēt of S. Merwyne then Abbesse

therof, after whose descease, & Elwyne 
                  Monast. Rams. in vitis SS. Mulierū Angl. pag. 242. that succeeded her, she was chosen Gouernesse of that house, & confirmed in office by holy King Edgar of blessed memory, wherin she so excelled in all kind of vertue, workes of mercy, & Monasticall discipline, that her name was famous throughout Englād, both aliue & dead. It happened vpō a tyme, before she was chosen Abbesse, that being in the Church at Mattins, before day, with the rest of her sisters, & going into the middest according to the custome, to read a lesson, the candle wherwith she saw to read, chāced to be put out, & therupon wanting light, there came frō the fingers of her right hād such an exceding brightnesse vpō the suddaine, that not only herselfe, but all the rest of the Quire also might read by it. Another time also it fell out (her charity being so exceeding great & bountifull towards the poore) that through the large reliefe of the needy, her coffers were greatly emptied, in so much that the Procuratour of the house, did checke her somwhat sharply for excessiue lauishnes. She with many teares, was silent & made moane to her supreme Lord, crauing his assistance herin: And her prayers were not in vayne. For the empty chestes were againe miraculously filled as before by Gods gracious recompence & approbation of her charitable beneficence & liberality. She died in all

sanctimony and holines of life: about the yeare of Christ nyne-hundred fourscore and twelue, & was buryed in our B. Ladyes Church of the same Monastery, which her Father had also built.
            
            
               
                  G The one and twentith Day.
               AT Virdune in France the deposition of S. Malcalline Abbot and Confessour, who being an Irishman by byrth, and descended of a noble stocke, went ouer into Append. ad Cron. Frodoar. Abb. Arnold. VVion l. 3. ligni vitae in Mart. Bened. hac die. 
                  France in his youth; and there entring into a Monastery, became first a monke of the order of S. Benedict, and afterward was made Abbot of Michells at Virdune, where in very great sanctity of life and other vertues, especially in the exercise of Monasticall discipline, in a good old age, he gaue vp his soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred threescore and eighteene. His body was buried in the same Monastery, where the same is yet preserued with great honour & veneration of the inhabitants therabout.
            
            
               
                  A The two and twentith Day. *
               
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire the Commemoration Matth. VVest. an. 1045. in hist. Angl of S. Brituald Confessour and Bishop of that Sea, who of a monke of the venerable order of S. Benedict, was ordayned

Bishop of VVinchester; In which dignity after Pol. Vir. l. 8. Arnold. VVion l. 2. ligni vitae in Catalog. Epis
                        •
                     op. VVintonienfium. he had continued for many years, full of singular vertue and holines of life, he ended his venerable old dayes, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and fourty. He liued in the beginning of King Edward the Confessors raigne; of whome it is wrytten, that he had a miraculous reuelation, how that he saw the said King Edward, being yet in his Mothers wombe, elected King, crowned and annoynted by S. Peter the Apostle, and ordayned to raigne foure & twenty yeares, & finally to dy without issue. Moreouer in that vision he seeming to demaund of S. Peter, who should raigne next after him, it was answered him againe, That the Kingdome of England was Gods Kingdome, and he then would prouide a King for it. His body was buried at VVinchester, wherat many miracles, by his merits, are recorded to haue byn wrought.
            
            
               
                  B The three and twentith Day.
               AT Mailros vpon the Riuer-banke of * 
                  Tyne in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, the Commemoration of S. Boysill Confessour and Abbot of that famous Monastery, Ven. Bed. in vita S. Cuthber. cap. 6. & 8. wherin S. Cuthbert was brought vp, and vnder whome he first put on his Religious habit, whose great holynes of life, and singular

vertues especially in the gift of Prophesy, haue byn famous in tymes past Et lib. 4. cap. 27. & lib. 5. cap. 10. hist. Angl. throughout our whole Iland. And when he had for many yeares most exemplarly gouerned that Monastery, being by an angell admonished of his death, he ioyfully departed this transitory life, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threscore and ten and was buryed in the same Manastery. Cuthbert succeeding him in his office.
            
            
               
                  C The foure & twentith Day.
               AT Beneuentum in Italy the passion of S. Sophias Bishop & Martyr, who being a noble Britan by birth & sonne to Guelleicus 
                  Io. Capg. in Catal. Sanctorū Britan. Antiq. Monumēta Ec. Beneuēt. Triūph. Eccl. Col. Anglic. Romae. King of North-wales, became first a mōke, & then Abbot of a Monastery, which himselfe had built in VVales with his owne inheritāce; and lastly hauing byn three tymes at Hierusalem to visit the holy sepulcher of Christ, & scauen tymes at Rome on pilgrimage, was for his knowne vertues and innocency of life, created Bishop of Beneuentum in Italy, where stāding at the altar at Masse, was by a wicked fellow in hatred of Christian beliefe thrust through the body with a lauce, & so receyued a crowne of Martyrdom about the yeare of Christ, foure hundred & nynty, & in the raigne of King Arthur of Brittany, whose

Kinseman he is said to haue byn. Ex anti. Monum. Prou. Monum. & in vita S. Keyn. Virg. apud R. Bucklād, de vit. SS. Mulierum Angl.
               
               THE same day in Monmouthshire, the festiuity of S. Cadocke Martyr, nephew to Bragham King of Brecknocke, and Cosyn to S. Dauid Bishop of Meneuia, whose memory is famous, euen vntill this day in our Iland of Great Brittany, especially in the forsaid Prouince of Mōmouth in South-VVales, where there are yet remayning Churches & Chappells dedicated in his honour. He suffered about the yeare of Christ 500.
            
            
               
                  D The fiue & twentith Day.
               THE Conuersion of the glorious Apostle S. Paul, by whome our Iland of great Theodoret. in Epist. ad Tim. & in Psal. 116. & lib. 9. de curād. Graec. affect. Sophron. Serm. de Natal. Apost. Arnol. Mirmā. in Theat. 
                  Brittany hath receyued no small fauour. For that according to diuers ancient wryters, in the fourth yeare of Nero the Emperour his raigne (the Iewes being by his Edict banished Rome) he personally came into Brittany, and there preached the faith of Christ. Venantius Fortunatus a most holy and learned mā wryting aboue a thousand yeares agone of S. Paules perigrination, saith of him:

                     Transijt Oceanum, vel qua facit Insula portum,
                     Quasue Britannus habet oras, atue vltima Thule.
                  
               
               After this he returned againe to Rome

where at last both S. Peter and himselfe, on one, and the selfe same day, receiued the reward of their labours, by Martyrdome, in the yeare of Christ, threescore and nyne.
               THE same day in Ireland the Commemoration * of S. Eoglodius Monke and Confessour, who descended of a noble parentage Hector Boet. de gest. Sco. Ioā. Lest. in hist. Scot. & alij. in that Kingdome, and disciple to S. Columbe the Great, came with him ouer into Scotland, and was his coadiutor in teaching and preaching the Christian faith to the Pictes, that then inhabited that Countrey, where famous for sanctity of life, and other vertues, finally rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, foure hundred fourscore and seauen.
            
            
               
                  E The six and twentith Day.
               AT Barking in Essex the Commemoration * of S. Theorithgid Virgin, who descended of a very noble Brittish stocke, became a Bed. in hist. Gēt. Angl. l. 4. cap. 9. Molan. in appēd. ad vsuar. Religious woman in the Monastery of the forsaid towne of Barking vnder the care of S. Edilburge the first Abbesse therof, & sister to S. Erconwald Bishop of London, who had newly founded that Abbey; where in great sanctimony of life, and feruour of spirit, she gaue vp her blessed soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred

seauenty and eight: vnto whome S. Edilburge appearing, as she lay on her death-bed, told her, with most sweet and comfortable words, that the tyme now drew neere, that she should be deliuered out of the prison of this world, into the ioyes of eternall blisse.
            
            
               
                  F The seauen & twentith Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. 
                  * 
                  Palladius Bishop and Confessour, who being a Roman by birth, was sent thither in the yeare, foure hundred and eleuen, by Prosp. in Chron. an. Dom. 431. & 434 Bed. l. 1. cap. 13. Barō. tom. 4. Annal. an 429. 
                  Pope Celestine, to reduce that Nation from certaine errors and heresyes, which Pelagius the Brittan had sowed among them; where being ordayned Bishop and Primate of Scotland, he instructed the people for many yeares in all good learning and other Catholicke cerimonyes, according to the Roman vse; and lastly full of venerable old age, in great sanctity and holines of life, he gaue vp his soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, foure hundred and fourty.
            
            
               
                  G The eight & twentith Day.
               IN the ile of VVight in Hampshire, the Commemoration of the Saintes called * 
                  Arwaldi, Brothers and Martyrs, who being

two noble yong men, descended of the bloud Royall of the South Saxons, & brothers Vē. Beda lib. 4. Histor. Angl. c. 16. Matth. VVest. an. 687. to the King of that Iland, were taken prisoners by Ceadwall King of the Geuisses & VVestsaxons who being but newly baptized, were by him commanded to be slaine in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore & seauen. Their bodyes were decently, interred in a Church of that Prouince by S. Cymber Abbot of Redford in Hampshire, by whome they had a little before byn baptized & instructed in the Christian faith, wherat in signe of their Innocency, it pleased God forthwith to worke miracles.
            
            
               
                  A The nine & twentith Day.
               IN Cornwall the deposition of S. Gildas Confessor Pol. Vir. l. 1. hist. Angl. Gul. Neubrig. in hist. Mart. Rom. Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. & alij hac die. and Abbot of Bangor in North-wales, who after he had written many famous bookes as well for the illustratiō of the Vniuersall, as our Primitiue Church of Brittany, became an Eremite, & lead a most strict, and seuere kind of life in the mountaynes of Cornwall, where full of venerable old yeares he rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ 581. He is famous yet among the Cornishmen of Englād especially for his writings, amgonst whome also there haue byn many Churches & altars dedicated, in his honour.
            
            
               
               
                  B The thirtith Day.
               AT Fulda in the higher Germany the deposition Io. Trit. de vir. Illustr. ord. D. Benedict. l. 3. cap. 244. Pet. Cratepol. de Epis. Germ. VVion in Mart. Bened. of S. Amnichade Confessour, who descended of a noble parentage in Scotland, forsooke the world, went ouer the sea, and trauailing into Germany, at last became a monke in the Monastery of Fulda, which had byn founded by S. Bonisace an English-man, for the Scottish nation; where liuing a most Godly and exemplar life, when he was ready to die, a great light was seene, and Angelicall voyces heard in his Cell, the which continued a long tyme after at his Sepulcher, and were heard of all that came to visit it. He died about the yeare of Christ, one thousand fourty and three: and lieth buryed at Fulda in the forsaid Monastery.
            
            
               
                  C The one & thirtith Day
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Adaman Priest and Confessour, who being Prefect of the Monastery of Nunnes Bed. l. 4. histo. Angl. cap. 25. in the towne of Coludon (now called Coldingham) in the Marches of Scotland, was of such rare and singular austerity

of life, that it is wrytten of him, that he tasted meate but only twice in the weeke, to Tritem. de vir. Illustr. l. 3. cap. 124. Ioā. Lesl. Epi. Ros. l. 4. de gest. Scot. wit, Sundayes and Thursdayes; and often spent whole dayes and nights in prayer and contemplation, vntill his dying day; which happened about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourscore. This man is different from the other S. Adaman of the same name, that instructed the Scottishmen, about the obseruation of Easter, whose festiuity is put downe afterward vpon the second day of September.
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF FEBRVARY.
            
               
                  D The first Day.
               
                  IN Ireland the deposition Laur. Dunel. in eius vita apud Sur. tom. 1. Catal. Scripto. Britan. Marian. Scotus in Chronic. Girald. Cambr. in Histor. Chron. Hyber. Rom. Martyr. Mol. & alij omnes hac. die. of S. Brigit Virgin, borne in the County of Kildare in a towne called Fochart, who in testimony of her virginity, touching the wood of an Altar, the same presently in the sight of many people, became greene againe, and began to bud forth a fresh: and after many other miracles done, in signe of her sanctimony and innocency of life, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred and fourty. There was a fayre Church erected in her honour in the Citty of London, which vntill this day is yet remayning, commonly called S. Brides, as also many others both in

                  England, Ireland and Scotland. And in the ile of Man, where it is recorded that somtymes she liued, there is an ancient Towne & Church of her Name, still retayning the vulgar denomination of S. Brides. Her body was interred at the Towne of Dunne, in the Prouince of Vlster, in the tombe, togeather with the venerable bodyes of S. Patricke and and S. Columbe, which was afterward miraculously reueyled to the Bishop of that place, as he was praying one night late in the Church, about the yeare of Christ 1176. ouer which, there shined a great light: Of whome one wryteth thus.

                     In 
                           Aliter. Hitres in Duno, &c. Burgo Duno, tumulo tumulantur in vno,
                     Brigida, Patricius, atue Columba pius
                  
The same Monument was afterward destroyed in the raigne of K. Henry the eight, by the Lord Leonard Gray Viceroy or Deputy of that Kingdome, to the great lamentation of all Ireland.
               
            
            
               
                  E The second Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Laurence Confessour and Bishop of that Sigeb. in Chron. Bed. l. 2. hist. Angl. cap. 4. 6. & 7. Matth. VVest. in hist. Pol. Vir. l. 2. cap. 4. 6. 7. Sur. tom. 1. de vit. SS. Sea, who comming into England with S. Augustine and his fellowes to preach the Christian faith, succeeded him in his Sea of Canterbury, which when he had gouerned

most worthily, for diuers yeares, in great sanctity and holines of life, he rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and seauenteene, and was buryed in the Porch of the Church at Canterbury, neere to the body of S. Augustine, at whose tombe, it pleased God afterward to worke many miracles.
               THE same day at Hohemburge in the higher Germany, the deposition of S. Burchard Bishop & Confessour, brother to S. Swithin of VVinchester, who being first a mōke in England, went ouer into Germany to S. 
                  Egilwardus in eius vita apud Sur. tom. 5. 14. Octob. VVion in Notis ad Mart. Bened. 14. Octob. 
                  Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, and thence to Rome, where by Pope Zachary he was consacrated Bishop of VVirtzburgh in Franconia, and sent to that Sea: where after he had spent fourty yeares in propagating the Christian faith, ended his blessed dayes in a monastery at Hohemburge, which himselfe had founded, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred fourscore and eleuen.
            
            
               
                  F The third Day.
               AT Hamburge neere Ely in Cambridgshire, the deposition of S. VVereburge Virgin, daughter to VVulherus King of Mercia, who despising all worldly delightes, became a

Religious woman in the Monastery of Nunnes at Ely, vnder S. Audry her aunt, and Author Cōtinua. hist. ven. Bed. Vincent. in spec. l. 5. cap. 28. Rob. Buckl. in eius vita lib. M. S. de vitis SS. mulier. Angl. Stous in Annal. sub Gul. Rufo. anno. 5. Abbesse therof, where in all kind of exemplar good life and sanctimony, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse in the yeare of Christ, six hundred seauenty & fiue. Vpon her death-bed she commanded her body to be buryed at Hamburge, but contrary to her will it was carried to the Monastery of Trickingham, where the gates fast locked, the same was kept and watched very carefully. But see a wonder. They which were appointed to watch the same, fell into a deepe sleepe, so as the people of Hamburge comming in the night for the body, the gates, both of the Monastery and Church, were opened of themselues without mens hands; and taking it away without any resistance, they interred it at Hamburge, as before her death she requested. The same being taken vp againe, nyne yeares after her death, was found altogeather vncorrupt, her very garments not so much as any whit perished: where God testifying her Holines by many miracles, was therby greatly glorified in this his Virgin. It is recorded that her body was afterwards translated to Chester, where in the tyme of K. VVilliam Rusus was erected a goodly Monastery in her honour, by Syr Hugh Lupus Earle of Chester, and S. Anselme Archbishop of Cāterbury, in the yeare of Christ 1092
            
            
               
               
                  G The fourth Day.
               AT Sempingham in Lincolneshire the deposition of S. Gilbert Confessour, who Molan. in ad
                        •
                      it. ad 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ar. Gul. Neubrig. l. 1. cap. 16 Arnold. Wion in Martyr. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . & alij 
                        ••
                     es hac die. descended of an honourable parentage, was the first founder of the Order of Religous men in England called Gilbertines, where he built thirteene Monasteryes of that order, to wit, eight of women, and fiue of men. And after a most godly and sainctly life, full of venerable old yeares, he departed this world, about the yeare of Christ one thousand one hundred and fifty. His body was buryed in the said Monastery of Sempingham neere Deeping in Lincolnshire, where for a long tyme it was kept with great veneration, for the often Miracles that were wrought therat:
               THE same day at Huncourt in the Territory of Cambray in Hennalt, the passion of Mola
                        〈…〉
                     n addit. ad vsuar. & in Indic. SS. Belgij Hereb. in sastis SS. 
                  S. Liephard Bishop and Martyr, who borne in our iland of Great Brittany, and there made Bishop in her primitiue Church, wēt on pilgrimage to Rome, and in his returne homward foure miles from Cambray, was slayne by certayne pagan theeues. His feast is celebrated in the Church of Cambray on this day with an office of three lessons.
            
            
               
               
                  A The fifth Day.
               AT Lewis in Sussex the deposition of S. Iohn Confessour, of the Order of Chanons-Regular, whose integrity of life and holy Conuersation hath byn famous in Herebertus in fastis SS. hac die. tymes past, both at home and abroad. His life is extant in wrytten hand in a Monastery of the Low-Countreys, as testifieth the Reuerend Father Herebertus Rosweydus of the Society of Iesus in the preface to his worke intituled, Fasti Sanctorum, whose festiuity he putteth downe on this day.
               THe same day at Glastenbury in Somersetshire 
                  * the Cōmemoration of S. Indractus Martyr, who descended of the bloud-royall of Ireland and cōming thence on pilgrimage to Glastenbury in England, with a further intention Gul. Malmes. in eius vita. Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Britania. to visit Rome, was with nyne other Companions, and his owne sister, called Drusa, slayne at Stapwich in the same Prouince by certayne wicked fellowes of the VVestsaxons, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred & eight, whose bodyes, being brought to Glastenbury Abbey with great solemnity, were there very honorably interred, wherat it pleased God, in token of their Innocency to worke Miracles.
            
            
               
               
                  B The sixt Day.
               AT Rome the Commemoration of Blessed * 
                  Inas King of the VVestsaxons and Confessour, who leauing the care of his Pol. Vir. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 4. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . cap. 5. Matth. VVest. an. Dom. 727. O
                        •
                     l. Malmes. derebus gestis Regū Ang. in Ina. Arnol. VVion l. 4. ligni vitae. Io. Sto. in Anna. Angl de regno VVestsaxonum. 
                        •
                     abulae Eccl. S. Petri Romae. Kingdome to his kinsman Ethelhard, went to Rome, where he erected a Schole for the English nation, as also a fayre Church therto belonging in honour of our blessed Lady, neere to the hospitall of Sanctus Spiritus, in the Burgo or suburbes of S. Peters, both which were afterwards consumed by fire. He was the first King of our nation, that ordayned throughout his Dominions, that euery family should once a yeare giue a penny to the Church of Rome, in honour of S. Peter the Apostle, which contribution continued euer synce, euen vntill our dayes, commonly called by the name of Peter-pence. He founded the Abbey of VVells with the Cathedrall Church, dedicating the same to God and S. Andrew the Apostle. He new builded also the Abbey of Glastenbury, which was the fourth building of that Monastery. Besides, the said Godly King did there in like manner, erect a Chappell, plated all ouer with siluer and guilt, with ornaments also and vessels (saith the Story) of gould and siluer. To the building of which Chapp
                     •••
                  ,

ne gau
                     •
                  , in weight, two thousand six hundred forty pounds of siluer; and to the aultar, two hundred thr
                     •
                  escore and foure pounds of gold: A Chalice with the patin, ten pound of gold: a Censar eight pound: two candlesticke
                     •
                  , twelue pound and a halfe of siluer: a couer for the Missall, or (as then they vsed to call it) the Ghospell-booke, twenty pounds: vessels for wyne and water to the a
                     •
                  tar, thirty pounds of gold: a holy water pot, twenty pound of siluer: Images of our Sauiour, our Bl. Lady, & the twelue Apostles, one hundred threescore and fifteene pound of siluer, and twenty eight pound of gold: A pall for the altar, and ornaments for the Monks of gold and pret
                     •
                  ous 
                     〈…〉
                  nes curiously wrought. All which he gaue (saith the Author) to that Monastery; but the same was afterward in this last age, by commandement of K. Henry the eight, defaced, spoyled, and robbed of all the forsaid, and infinite other treasure. And after all this, the forsaid King Inas going in person to Rome, and performing the things aboue mentioned, tooke finally vpon him the habit of a Monke, where in great sanctity and holines of life, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ 727. and was there buryed in the entrance of S. Peters Church, as the ancient Tables & Records therof do declare.
            
            
               
               
                  C The seauenth Day.
               AT Luca in Italy the depos
                     •
                  tion of S. Richard King and Conf
                     •
                  ssour, sonne to Lotharius King o
                     •
                   
                  Kent, who, sor the loue of Sur tom. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . vi
                        •
                     . SS. Democh. l. 2. de sa
                     
                        〈…〉
                     if. Mis s
                        〈…〉
                     . Mart. Rom. Wi
                        〈…〉
                      l. 4. 
                        •
                     igni 
                        〈◊〉
                      Molā. & 
                        •
                     ij 
                        •
                     nes hac die. Christ, taking vpon him a long peregrination, went to Rome for d
                     •
                  notion to that Sea, and in his way homward, died at Luca, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and fifty, where his body is kept vntill this day with great veneration, in the Oratory or Chappell of S. Frigidian, and a
                     •
                  orned with an Epitaph both in verse and pros
                     •
                  . That in verse is this.
               
                  Hi
                        •
                      Rex Richardus requiescit Sceptriser almus;
                  Rex suit Anglorum, regnum tenet ille Pol
                        •
                     rum:
                  Regnum dimisit, pro Christo cuncta reliquit
                  Ergo Richardum nobis dedit Anglia Sanctum.
                  Hic genitor Sanctae Walburgis Virginis almae,
                  Et Willebaldi Sancti, simul & Winibaldi;
                  
                  Suffragijs quorum det nobis regna Polorum.
               
               The same day at 
                     
                        •
                     ondó the deposition of S. Augulus Bishop & Martyr, who in the persecution

of Dioclesian the Emperour, for peaching the Christian faith in our Iland Martyr Rom. Marcel lin. l. 28. Calend. se
                        •
                     . vs
                        〈…〉
                     m Sarū & Molan. hac die. of Great Brytany, was put to death, by the enemyes of truth, about the yeare of Christ three hundred & fiue, a little after the death of S. Alban.
               
               IN like manner the same day at Rhemes in 
                     •
                  rance the Translation of S Helena Mother to Constantine the Great, who borne in Colchester of Essex, according to the ancient traditions of the Britans, and daughter to Sigeb. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Chron. 849. Almannus Monach. de eius Translat. Molan in addit. ad Vsuard. hac die M
                        •
                     nalog. Grae. 21. Maij. 
                  Coclus Prince of Britany, was famous for building of Churches in honour of Christ, and his Saintes. She died at Rome when she was fourscore yeares of age, and was afterward on this day translated to Rhemes, where her sacred reliques are kept w
                     •
                  th great veneration. Her Memory hath byn very famous in tymes past in the Greeke Church, whose celebrity is there kept vpon the 22. of May, together with her Sonne Constamine.
               
            
            
               
                  D The eight Day.
               AT Strenshalt in the Kingdome of the * 
                  Northumbers, the Commemoration of of S. Edelsled Virgin & Abbesse, daughter to Oswyn King of the same Prouince, who, by her Father being dedicated vnto God for a famous

victory, which he obtayned against the cruell Penda King of the Mercians, was cō
                  mitted Bed. l. 4. cap. 26. VVion. l. 4. ligni vitae. Ingulph. de Croyland. Hereb. Rosweyd in fast. SS. for her education to S. Hilda Abbesse of a Monastery amongst the Northumbers, called Hartesey; and when she came to riper yeares, she founded for her selfe another Nunry in the same Kingdome, called Strenshalt, and was made Abbesse therof, where in all kind of profound humility & sanctity of life, ioyned with other vertues, she gaue vp her soule to her heauēly spouse, about the yeare of Christ six hundred and seauenty. Her body was buryed in the same Monastery, wherat for many ages following it pleased God to worke wonderous miracles.
            
            
               
                  E The ninth Day.
               IN the territory of Liege in the lower Germany, the passion of S. Menigold Martyr, Molā. in Indi
                        •
                     ulo SS. Belgij & in addit. ad Vsuard. hac die. who borne in England, and descended of a very noble parentage, became first a Captaine in the French and German warres, & afterward an Eremite; vnto whome Arnulph the Emperour gaue a little territory neere to the banke of the riuer of Mosa, where he built himself a cottage or Oratory for his deuotion. And as he was going one day to the Church, was slaine in hatred of Christiā
                  
saith, by certaine notorious malefactors & enemyes therof, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred. His body was afterward translated to Huis, neere Cull
                        •
                     n, vpon the fifteenth day of lune, where togeather with the body of S. Domitian Bishop, the same is kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants of that place.
            
            
               
                  F The tenth Day.
               AT Wiccij 
                  VVorcester the Translatiō of S. VVilfrid the second of that name, Confessour & Bishop of Yorke, whose great sanctity and holines of life it pleased God to manifest by the incorruption of h
                     •
                  s body, which being reueyled to S. Oswald Bishop of VVorcester to remayne interred in the Monastery of Rippon in Yorkeshire, then decayed & destroyed by the Danes, was by him sought for & foūd whole & incorrupt, togeather with the venerable bodyes of siue Reuerēd Abbots, Tilbert, Borwyn, 
                  Ven. Bed. l. 5. cap. 24. & in Epitome. Sur. to. 5. in Vita S. Oswaldi 1
                        •
                     . Octob. & alij. 
                  Albert, Sygred and VValden; all which S. Oswald trāslated to his Cathedrall Church of VVorcester, & there with great veneration and honour interred them, wherat it pleased God also in signe of their sanctity to worke miracles. He died about the yeare of Christ seauen hundred & thirty. This S. VVilfrid is different from the other of the same name,

whose festiuity is kept vpon the 12. of October.
               
            
            
               
                  G The eleuenth Day.
               AT Tyre in Syria the Commemoration * of Blessed VVilliam Bishop and Confessor, who being an Englishman by byrth, became first a monke of the venerable Order Gul. Tyrius lib. 13 cap. 23. & l. 4. cap. 11. wion
                        •
                      l. 2. ligni vitae, in Catal. Epis. Tyriensium. of S. Benedict, and was afterward sent into Palestine, and made Prior of the Monastery of the holy Sep
                        〈…〉
                     er in Hierusalem: And in the yeare of Christ one thousand, one hūdred & thirty, he was cōsecrated the first Archbishop of Tyre in Syria: which function when he had inioyed six yeares, in all sanctity of life and vertuous conuersation, he ended there his happy dayes, in the yeare of our Lord, one thousand one hundred thirty & seauen.
               THE same day in Breckneckshire of VVales 
                  * the Commemoration of S. Canoch Confessor, Rob. Buckl. l. M. S. de vitis SS. Mulierū Anglie. in vita S. Keynae virg. fol. 90. who being sonne to Braghan King of Brecknocke, & great Vncle to S. Dauid Bishop of Men
                        ••
                     ia, was very famous for holines of life in those partes, about the yeare of Christ foure hundred fourscore and twelue, and whose memory is yet famous amongst the ancient Britans of our Iland, especially in South wales. He had a brother called S. Cadocke, that was a Martyr, & a sister named S. Keyn
                        •
                     , who liued about the same time, in great opinion

of sanctity, as the Records of their liues yet extant, do demonstrate.
            
            
               
                  A The twelfth Day.
               AT Durham in the Bishopricke, the Commemoration o
                     •
                   
                  S. 
                        •
                     dilwald Bishop and * Confessour, who being first a m
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  e then T
                        •
                     item. l. 4. d
                        •
                     vir. Illustr. ord. D. Benedict. cap. 179. Matth. VVest. an. 738. VVion. 2. ligni vitae. Abbot of the Monastery of Mailros in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, was lastly promoted to the Bishopicke of Lindisserne (now translated to Durham) and succeeded S. Edbert in that Sea; which when he had gouerned, like a worthy pastour of his flocke, for almost fourty yeares, in great sanctity of life and vertues therto agreeable, full of venerable old yeares, he finally reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred thirty and eight: and was buryed at Lindisserne.
               
            
            
               
                  B The thirteenth Day.
               AT 
                     
                        •
                     ly in Cambridgshire the deposition of S. Ermenild Queene, wise to VVulherus King of Mercia, who after the death of her Matth. west. an. Do. 676. Vincent. in specul. husband, became a Religious woman in the Monastery of Ely, vnder her owne Mother S. Sexburge, who at that tyme was Abbesse

therof and after her said Mothers descease, Litaniae sec. vsum Sarun. Molā. in ad
                        •
                     it ad Vsuard. hhc 
                        •
                     ie. she was elected in her place, where famous for sanctimony and holines of life, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundredthreescore and eighteene.
               ALso the same day at Herbipolis. 
                  VVirtzburgh in Germany, the Translation of S. K
                        •
                     lian Bishop and Martyr, who descended of the bloud royall of Ireland, for the loue he bare to his neighbour-Countreyes, came thence Petrus Gaseli
                        〈…〉
                     . in suo Martyrologio hac die. Democh. l. de sacrif Missae cap. 35. tomo 2. wion in Martyr. Bened. with three other Companiōs into Flaunders, & so went into Germany, where he was ordayned Bishop of VVirtzburgh: which Sea when he had held for few yeares, diligently attending to his flocke, he was slayne, togeather with his three forsaid Companions, by the enemyes of Christian saith in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore and seauenteene. His body being buryed at VVirtzburgh, was afterward on this day taken vp, and translated to a more eminent place of the same Church, where be
                     •
                  ore it lay; but his principall festiuity is celebrated vpon the eight day of Iuly.
            
            
               
               
                  C The fourteenth Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Con
                        ••
                     ane Confessour, who borne in the * 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  e Kingdome, and des
                     ••
                  nded of a noble parentage, d
                     •
                  spised all pleasures of this world, & retyring himself to a Monastery, became a Religious man of the Order of S. 
                  Io. Lest. Epis. R
                        •
                     ssens
                        •
                     . 4. de gest. Scot. Arnol. wion in addit. ad l. 3. lig
                        •
                     i vit
                        •
                     . 
                  Benedict in one of the Ilands of Or
                        •
                     ades neere Scotland, where in all kind of exemplar good life, learning and vertuous conuersation, in a good old age, ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourty. His memory hath by
                     •
                   famous, euen vntill th
                     •
                  se our dayes, throughout the whole Iland of Great Britany, but especially amongst the Scottish nation: amongst whome also, diuers Churches and altars haue in tymes past, byn erected and dedicated in his honour.
            
            
               
                  D The fifteenth Day.
               AT Vexouia in Goth-land the deposition of S. Sigfride Bishop and Confessour, who being Archdeacon of the Church of Yorke, was sent by King Alfred of England into Gothia, to preach to the pagan people of that

Countrey, whome he conuerted to the Christian faith, togeather with their King Ioan. & Olaus Magnus in hist. Goth. l. 7 cap. 16. 19 & 20. Molan in addit. ad Vsuard. hac die 
                  Olaus, and so became their Apostle. He was afterward made Bishop of Vexo
                        •
                     ia and Metropolitan of Goth
                     •
                  a, which Sea when he had gouerned most worthily for many yeares in great sanctity and holines of life, full of venerable old age, he went to rest in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and two, and was buryed in his owne Cathedrall Church of Vexouia, where his body was kept with great honour and veneration of that nation, for the myracles that were wrought therat, vntill these later yeares of schismes and heresyes in those Prouinces.
            
            
               
                  E The sixteenth Day.
               AT VVerdt in Cleeu-land the deposition of S. Tancone Bishop and Martyr, who Ioan. L
                        〈…〉
                     s Episcop. Ros. l. 5. de gest. Scot. Cranz. in Metrop. cap. 22. l. 1. VVion hac die in Martyr. Bened. borne of a noble bloud in Scotland, was first a monke, and then Abbot of a Monastery in the same Kingdome, called Amarbaricke, and being very desirous to help his neighbour-Countreys for their soules health, went ouer into Flaunders, and thence into Cleeu-land, and there was made Bishop of VVerdt, where preaching continually and propagating the Christian faith, he was at last slayne by the barbarous and incredulous

people of that Prouince in hatred therof, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred. His body was buryed at VVerdt.
               
            
            
               
                  F The seauenteenth Day.
               AT Lindisferne in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, the depos
                     •
                  tion of S. Finan 
                  Beda l. 3. hist. Angl cap. 21. 22 & 25. Gul. Malmes. in histor. Martyr. Rom. Molan. & alij omnes. hac 
                        •
                     ie. Bishop and Confessour, who being first a monke of S. Columbes M
                     •
                  nast
                     •
                  ry in the Iland of Hoy by Scotland, was ordayned Bishop of Lindisferne, and succeeded S. Aidan that Sea, where in all kind of godly conuersation & sanctity of life, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and threescore. He is called the Apostle of the Mercians (or middle Englishmen) by whose endeauours in preaching, a great part of that Kingdome was first conuerted to Christian faith, togeather with their Prince Peda, sonne to the notable persecutor Penda, who with many great Larles & Lords of Mercia, was at the in
                     ••
                  ance of holy King Oswyn of Northumberland, by him baptized, at Ad Murum. 
                  Barwicke, as S. Bede and other English Historiographers do recount. There are many Churches both in England and Scotland dedicated in his honour.
            
            
               
               
                  G The eighteenth Day.
               AT Saltzburge in Bauaria the Commemoration * of S. Iohn Confessour & Bishop of that Sea, who being a monke of an old Monastery neere VVinchelsea in Sussex, went Ioan. Tri tem. lib. 4 cap. 105. wion l. 2. ligni vitae in Catal. Epis. Saltzburg. ouer into Germany to S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, with whome he remained for a tyme, and after going to Rome, was by Pope Gregory the third created the first Bishop of Saltzburge, and sent thither: which sea when he had most worthily gouerned and preached the Christian faith for fourteene yeares togeather, and brought many thousands to the true worship of God, in great sanctity of life and venerable old age, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ seauen hundred fifty and seauen, and was buryed in his owne Cathedrall Church of Saltzburge.
               
            
            
               
                  A The ninteenth Day.
               AT Hagustalde in the Kingdome of the * 
                  Northumbers, the Commemoration of S. Acca Confessour and Bishop of that Sea, who being one of S. VVillebrord his coadiutors, Bed. l. 5. cap. 21. 22 23. & 24. and going ouer with him into Saxony
                  
and Frizeland for the conuersion of those nations; was sent backe againe into Englād Matth. VVest. an. 734. & 792. Molā. 
                        •
                     n Indi
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     o SS. Belgij to the Consecration of S. Switbert, and there detayned and ordayned Bishop of Hagustalde, by S. VVilfrid the second of Yorke: which pastorall function whē he had most worthily performed for many yeares, in great sanctity of life and godly conuersation, full of venerable old age, he reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred thirty and six.
            
            
               
                  B The twentith Day.
               IN the ile of Thanet in Kent the deposition of S. Mildred Virgin, daughter to Merualdus King of Mercia, who contemning the vayne Pol. Vir. l. 4. histo. Angl. M
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     n. in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •
                     d Vsuard. Rob. B
                        〈…〉
                     l. in 
                        •
                     ius vita l. M. S. pag. 150. pleasures of this world, went ouer, in her tender yeares, into France, and there dedicated her selfe to God in a Monastery of Virgins, at Kale; but afterwards returning into England, and gathering togeather seauenty other Virgins, was consecrated Abbesse of a new Monastery erected in the ile of Thanet, by S. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, where famous for sāctimony of life, & miracles, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hūdred threscore and foure. The forsaid Monastery was afterward burned by the Danes, with many

others in our Iland. There is yet to be seene a fayre Church dedicated in her honour in London in the Poultry, commonly called S. Mildreds; as also an old Chappell yet stāding, erected likewise in her honour in a village or Flaunders called Milàn, three miles distant from the Citty of S. Omers.
               
               THE same day at Haselburrow in VViltshire the deposition of S. 
                  aliter wilfrick. 
                  Vlfricke Confessor and Eremite, whose wonderfull life in prayer and abstinence, togeather with working of Miracles, was very famous throughout England about the yeare of Christ, one Math. west. & Paris. in historijs ad 
                        •
                     mū Do. 1154. thousand one hundred fifty and foure, about which tyme also he died; and was buryed in a little Oratory at the forsaid village of Haselburrow, which himselfe had built, at whose body many miracles are recorded to haue byn wrought.
            
            
               
                  C The one and twentith Day.
               IN the Ile of Wight in Hampshire the commemoration * of S. Cymbert Bishop and Confessour, who being a monke of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, & Abbot of the Monastery of Redford in the same Prouince, was in the raigne of Ethelhard King of the Vē. Beda l. 4. cap. 16. Trit. l. 4. c. 178▪
                   
                  VVestsaxons ordayned Bishop, and placed in the 
                     •
                  le of VVight, where he confirmed the

people in the Christian faith, which S. 
                  Arnol. wion l. 2. ligni Vitae. 
                  VVilfride of Yorke, had there planted some twenty yeares before, in the tyme of his banishment from that Sea, where in all kind of most godly conuersation and sanctity of li
                     •
                  e, he gaue vp his blessed soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and thirty.
            
            
               
                  D The two and twentith Day.
               AT Gaunt in Flaunders the Translation of S. Gudwall Bishop and Cōfessour, who Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. 6. It
                        ••
                     ij. Sigeb. in Chron. an. 958. Sur. to. 3. in vit. SS. being a noble Britan by birth, & ordayned Bishop in that Primitiue Church, preached incessantly the faith of Christ with great profit in our Iland. He built many Monasteryes and became himselfe a Father of an hundred and fourscore monkes. And after all this, thirsting the good of his neighbour-Countreyes, he went ouer into the lower Germany, and there taught the Christian faith in like manner, with no lesse profit then in Britany. And last of all, full of venerable old age, in great sanctity and holinesse of life, he rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, three hundred and fourty, and was one of the first of our Iland that preached the Christian faith in Flaunders. His body hauing byn brought into

                  England, was afterwards on this day, in the second persecution of the Danes, translated to Gaunt by Arnulph Earle of Flaunders, and S. Gerard Abbot, in the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred and threescore. Where the same is still preserued with great veneration of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  E The three and twentith Day.
               AT Monasterium 
                        ••
                     nelockense. 
                  VVenlocke in Shropshire the Translation of S. Milburge Virgin, daughter to Merualdus Prince of Mercia, whose great sanctimony & innocency of life, it pleased God Gotzel. Monac. in 
                        •
                     ius vi
                        •
                     a. Ma. west. an. Do. 676. Pol. Vir. l. 4. histo. Vincent. in specul. l. 25. Petr. in Catal. Gul. Malmes. in hist. Angl. & alij omnes 
                        •
                     ac die. to manifest vnto the world, after her departure, by the manifold miracles wrought at her body, which being miraculously reuealed to a certaine godly man, in the raigne of K. VVilliam the Cōquerour, was takē vp, and found sound & vncorrupt to the admiratiō of the behoulders; and being put into a costly shrine, was kept in the Monastery of VVenlocke, which she had built with her owne inheritance, vntill the tyme of King Henry the eight, when the same was destroyed. She departed to our Lord about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and foure, vpon the six and twentith day of May, but her feast is commonly celebrated on this day, both in England and other Countreys.

Her life is wrytten at large by Gotzelinus a monke of the Monastery of S. Bertin, in the Citty of S. Omers in Artoys.
            
            
               
                  F The foure & twentith Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposion of S. Ethelbert King of Kent and Confessour, who Bed. in Epit. & in hist. cap. 25. & deinceps. Item in hist. lib. 1. VVest. Martyr. Rom. Molā. & alij ōnes hac die. first of all other Princes in our Iland, after the Britans, receyued the Christian faith, by the preaching of S. Augustine and his fellowes, sent from Rome by Pope Gregory the Great. He built many goodly Churches and Monasteryes in his dominions, and among the rest S. Augustines at Canterbury, S. Andrewes at Rochester, and S. Paules at London. He departed this life in the yeare of Christ, six hundred and sixteene, and was buryed at Canterbury.
               
               THE same day in Scotland the depositiō of Gas
                        •
                     l. in catal. SS. et in M. S. Calendar. Wion. in Martyr. Bened. 
                  S. Berectus Confessour, who leading a Monasticall life in that Kingdome, was famous for sanctity of life & working of miracles, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and fourteene, about which tyme also he ended his blessed dayes, and was buryed in Scotland.
               
            
            
               
               
                  G The fiue & twentith Day.
               AT Perone in Picardy the Translation of S. Furseus Abbot and Confessour, sonne Sur. to. 1. Bed. l. 3. hist. c. 19. Ay
                        〈…〉
                     ode g
                        •
                     st. Fra. l. 1. c. 18. Trit. de vir. Ill
                        〈…〉
                     st. Petr. in Catal. l. 11 cap. 130. & alij. to K. Philtan of Ireland, who comming into England to Sigebert King of the Eastangles, built there a Monastery, and gathered many monkes togeather, instructing them in all kind of vertue and good learning. And then leauing the care therof to his brother, called Foillan, he went ouer into France, and there built another Monastery at Perone, where in his venerable old dayes, full of great sanctity and holines of life, he departed to our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and thirty. His body was buryed in the same Monastery, of whome the Monkes of that place, haue many particular hymnes in their Office: the which being taken vp afterwards, was on this day translated to a more eminent place of the forsaid Church of Perone, where the same is kept with great veneration, for the miracles, that are recorto haue byn wrought therat.
            
            
               
               
                  A The six and twentith Day.
               AT Constance in the higher Germany the Commemoration of S. Iohn Bishop & * Confessour, who borne in Scotland, and descended there of a noble parentage, became Bellef. in Cosmogr. Democh. de Sacr. Missae cap. 35. tomo 2. wion l. 2. lignivitae in Catal. Epis. Constant. in that Kingdome first a monke of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, and thence went ouer into France to S. Gallus Abbot, that then was famous in those partes, of whome being throughly instructed in all kind of Monasticall discipline, was at last ordayned Bishop of Constance, where after many yeares of most approued vertue and sanctity of life, he happily reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and foure, and was buryed in his owne Cathedrall Church of Constance.
               
            
            
               
                  B The seauen & twentith Day.
               AT Lichfield in Staffordshire the Commemoration of Blessed Sexulfe Bishop and * Confessour, who being the first Abbot of the Monastery of Medshamsted (now called Beda l. 3. hist. Angl Tritem. l. 4. devir. 
                  Peterburrow) by whose persuasion VVulferus K. of Mercia had newly founded the same, was ordayned Bishop of Lindisserne in the

Kingdome of the Northumbers, and afterward Illustr. ord. D. Benedict. cap. 158. Matth. VVest. an. 700. translated to Lichfield in the place of VVinsrid that was deposed by S. Theodore of Canterbury. In both which Seas, he most worthily behaued himselfe in teaching and instructing his flocke for many yeares: And at last full of venerable old age, ioyned with sanctity of life, he departed to our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred.
               THE same day in the Prouince of the Eastangles in the Diocesse of Ely, the Cō
                  memoration * of S. Alnoth Martyr, who being heardsman to S. VVereburge Abbesse of the Rob. Buckl. in vita S. Wereb. in libr. de vitis SS. Mulierū Anglic. Nunry of Ely, became an Anchoret, leading a most strict and seuere recluse life for the loue of God: whome when he had so serued for some yeares, he was slayne by certaine wicked theeues in hatred therof, and so receyued his crowne of Martyrdome, about the yeare of Christ 670.
            
            
               
                  C The eight & twentith Day.
               AT Yorke the deposition of S. Oswald 
                  Senat. Brauon. in eius vita. wion in Mart. Bened. hac die. Bishop & Cōfessour, nephew to S. Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, who being first made Chanon of VVinchester, & then Bishop of VVorcester, was lastly promoted to the Archbishopricke of Yorke, whose godly vertues and innocency of life, was afterward

declared by the manifold miracles wrought at his body. Amongst other works Sur. to. 5. 15. Octob. Calend. sec. vsum Sarum. of Charity, he was wont euery day to giue dinner to twelue poore men or pilgrims, seruing them at table with his owne hands, wash their feet, giue them money in almes, and alwayes at Easter to giue them new apparrell. He died on this day in the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourscore and twelue, and was afterward translated to VVorcester vpon the fifteenth of October, on which day his principall festiuity is celebrated in our Catholicke Church of England, of whome also, in that place, we haue made a large Relation.
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF MARCH.
            
               
                  D The first Day.
               
                  AT Meneuia in Penbrookshire 
                  Gaufr. Monum. in hist. Britonū Pol. virg. l. 3. Mat. West. an. 872. Gir. Cambr. in eius vit. Breuiar. sec. vsū Sar. alijque omnes hac die. the deposition of S. Dauid Bishop and Confessour, sonne to Xantus Prince of VVales, and Vncle to the valiant, King Arthur, who was so famous for working of miracles in his life tyme, that he became a great pillar, and vphoulder of the British Primitiue Church, especially in extinguishing the Reliques of the Pelagian heresy. He translated his Bishopricke (which was at Carleon vpon V. ske) vnto Meneuia (now called in the British tongue of his name, Twy Dewy, & in English S. Dauids) where finally after he had built twelue Monasteryes, and replenished

the same with monkes, being of the age of an hundred fourty & six yeares, he ended his blessed dayes, & was buryed in his owne Church, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred fourscore & twelue. It is recorded by the British antiquityes, that by his prayers, he obtayned the heate and vertue that the waters of Bath in Somersetshire haue in curing and asswaging many deseases, though others do assigne it to haue byn found out long before. He was afterward canonized for a Saint by Pope Ca
                        〈…〉
                     us the second.
               THE same day at VVerdt in Cleeu-land the Marty. Rom. Bed. l. 5. cap. 21. Sur. tom. 2. vit. SS. Molā. in Indiculo SS. Belgij Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Cranz. Metrop. l. 1. & alij deposition of S. Suitbert Confessour, and first Bishop of that Sea, Sonne to Sigebert Earle of Nottingham, who going ouer into the lower Germany and thence into Saxony & Frizland with S. VVillebrord and his company to preach the Christian faith, was there elected Bishop of VVerdt, and sent backe into England to be consecrated; and then returning to his Sea, after much fruite wrought in that haruest, in great sanctity and holines of life, he reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hūdred & seauenteene. His body is kept at VVerdt, where he died, with great veneration of the inhabitants. He was canonized by Pope Leo the third.
            
            
               
               
                  E The second Day.
               AT Lichfield in Staffordshire the deposition Beda in Epit. & in hist. l. 3. ap. 28 & deinceps. Matth. VVest. an. 657. Marty. Rom. & alij hac die. of S. Chad Confenour and Bishop of that Sea, whose most exemplar life, togeather with working of manifold miracles is yet famous throughout England. The Cathedrall Church (or Minster) of that Citty, is dedicated to our Blessed Lady and S. Chad. There is also a VVell neere to the same Church, commonly called S. Chads VVell; In the bottome whereof, lieth, vntill this day, a cleere great marble stone, wheron S. Chad was wont to kneele and pray in his Oratory; the water of which Well, is very wholsome & soueraigne for many diseases. He died in the yeare of Christ, six hundred threscore and foure, and lieth burved in his owne Cathedrall Church of Lichfield.
               
               THE same day at VVerdt in Cleeu-land the deposition of S. Willeicke Abbot and Marcel. in vita S. Simiberti cap. 16. Molan. in addi
                        •
                     . ad Vsuar. et in Indic. SS. Belgij Confessour, who going out of England with S Switbert and his company to preach the Christian faith to the Pagans of the lower Germany and Saxony, was constituted Abbot of a monastery at VVerdt, which S. Switbert had newly founded, where after the reaping of a fertile haruest in the conuersion of infinite soules to God, full of sanctity &

miracles, reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ 727.
            
            
               
                  F The third Day.
               AT Tauracum in little Britany the deposition o
                     •
                   
                  S. VVenlocke Abbot and Confessour, who descended of the royall bloud of o
                     •
                   Great Britany, and nephew to Francanus 
                  Sur. to. 2. Molan. in addit. ad Vsuar. et in Indic. SS. Belgij wion hac die, & alij Viceroy of that Kingdome, went ouer into litle Britany, and was ordayned Abbot there of an ancient Monastery called Tauracum, whose li
                     •
                  e replenished with sanctity and miracles, was famous, aswell in our Kingdome, as in France and Flanders, about the yeare of Christ, foure hundred and fourscore, about which tyme also he reposed in our Lord. His body was afterward translated to Gaunt in Flanders in the Normā persecution, and there is kept vntill this day with great veneration of the Inhabitants, for the oftē miracles that haue byn wrought therat.
            
            
               
                  G The fourth Day.
               AT Perone in Picardy the deposition of S. Eurseu
                        •
                     
                   Abbot and Confessour, sonne to Philtan King of Ireland, who cōming into

England to Sigebert King of the Eastangles, built there a goodly Monastery, and filled the same with monkes, wherof himselfe was ordayned Abbot. And then after a Sur. in eius vita. Bed. l. 3. cap. 91. histor. Aymo de gest. Frā
                     corum l. 1. cap. 18. wion hac die, & alij while leauing the care therof to his brother Foillan, he went ouer into France and built another Monastery at Perone, where in most godly and saintly exercise of life, he died on this day, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred thirty and six. His body is preserued yet in the same Monastery with great veneration for the frequent miracles that haue byn wrought therat.
            
            
               
                  A The fifth Day.
               IN Northumberland the Commemoration of * 
                  S. VVilgise Confessour, a noble man of that Prouince, and Father to the famous S. VVillebrord, who casting from him the cares Alcuinus in vita S. wil
                     
                        •
                     ebror. apud Sur. tom. 6. die 7. Nouē
                     
                        •
                     ris & in eius vita. of this world, became an Eremite, leading a solitary & seuere life in the Kingdome of Northumberland, where he built him a little Cottage or Oratory in honour of S. Andrew the Apostle, in which when he had l
                     •
                  ued many yeares, in continuall fasting, watching and prayer, full of sanctity of life, and venerable old age, he finally went vnto our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred thirty and six. S. Alcuine Maister to

                  Charles the Great, wrote his life in Elegiacall verse, as himsel
                     •
                  e witnesseth in the li
                     •
                  e of S. Willebrord, where also in the end therof, he recounteth a miracle wrought by S. VVilgise, about the mu
                     •
                  tiplication of wyne.
            
            
               
                  B The sixt Day.
               AT Secking on the Rhene in the lower Ioan. Lesla us Episcop. Ros. l. 4. de rebus Scoticis. Petr. Cratepol. de Epis. 
                        •
                     ern. Molā. in addit. ad Vsuara. Gasel. hac 
                        •
                     ie. &c. 
                  Germany, the deposition of S. Frodoline (otherwise called Winsred) Abbotand Confessour, sonne to Conranus King of Scotland, who going ouer into Flaunders and Germany for the conuersion of those people to Christ, was ordayned Abbot of a Monastery, called Secking, situated vpon the riuer-banke of Rhene, where after he had conuerted many thousands to the faith of Christ, in all kind of vertue and sanctity of life, he ended his venerable aged dayes, about the yeare of our Lord, fiue hundred threescore and foure.
               THE same day at Dormundcaster two miles from Peterburrow in Northamptonshir
                     •
                  , the deposition of the Saints Kinisdred and Kiniswide, Virgins and sisters, daughters to Penda K. of Mercia, who being dedicated Math. VVest. an 7. 5. Pol. virg. l. 4. hist. to God, euen from their infancy, despised all worldly preferments, and entring into a Nunry at the forsaid towne of Dormundcaster,
                  
there only studied how to serue Ranulph. Cestrens. l. 5. hist. c. 18. Rob. Buck. de vitis earū hac die. their Lord, in all kind of vertuous conuersation and Sanctimony of life vntyll their dying day, which happened about the yeare of Christ, six hundred thirty and foure. Their bodyes were afterward translated to Peterburrow, where S. Ethelwold Bishop of of VVinchester built a goodly Monastery in their honour, about the yeare of our Redemption, nyne hundred and fourscore.
            
            
               
                  C The seauenth Day.
               IN North-wales the Cōmemoratiō of S. Deifer 
                  * Confessour, who borne of a noble Acta S. wenefr. 3. Nouem. apud Sur. & Breui. sec. vsum Sarum in lectio. S. wenefr. & antiq. Monum. Cambriae. British stocke, contemned the vanityes of this world, and became an Eremite, leading for many yeares, a solitary and seuere kind of life, in all vertue and humility in the North of Wales; where among other miracles which he wrought, one is recorded, that by his prayers, he raised out of the ground a fountayne of cleere water very soueraigne for many diseases. He died in great sanctity and holines, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and foure, about which tyme also S. Wenefride was famous in those partes for the miracles wrought at her body; and with whome this holy man Deifer had byn very conuersant, whilst she liued.
            
            
               
               
                  D The eight Day.
               AT Dunwich in Suffolke the deposition of S. Felix bishop & Confessor, who comming out of Burgundy where he was borne, was by S. Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury sent to preach the Christian faith to the Eastangles, where he cōuerted the whole Prouince, togeather with their King Sigebert, & Vē. Beda l. 2. cap. 15. & l. 3. cap. 20. VVest. an. 632. Marty. Rom. Molan. & alij. so became their Apostle: and last of all was ordayned Bishop of an old Citty called Dunmocke (otherwise Dunwich) which at this day is more then halfe consumed by the sea. This holy man founded in that Prouince, Monasteryes, Schooles, and Churches. And after a most Saintly life full of miracles, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fifty, & was buried in the Abbey of Soam in Cambridgshire, foure miles from Ely, from whence in the Danish persecution, he was translated to the Monastery of Ramsey.
               
            
            
               
                  E The ninth Day.
               AT Yorke the Commemoration of S. Bosa Confessour and Bishop of that * Sea, who being a monke of the Monastery

of Strenshalt in the Kingdome, of the Vē. Beda l. 4. histo. Cap. 12. Math. West. in stor. histo. Tritem. l. 4. cap. 4. wion. l. 2. ligni vitae in Catal. Episcop. Eboracēs. 
                  Northumbers, was at the instance of Egfride King of that Prouince, ordayned Bishop of Yorke, and placed in that Sea, in the roome of S. Wilsride, who then liued in exile in the Ile of Wight, being expulsed the Dominions of Northumberland by the forsaid King: which when he had gouerned most worthily for nyne yeares in all kind of good learning and vertue, and S. Wilsride restored againe, he willingly returned to his Monastery, & there in great sanctity of life, and heauenly contēplation he spent the rest of his dayes, and finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ seauen hundred.
            
            
               
                  F The tenth Day.
               AT Vissenaken in the lower Germany the deposition of S. Himeline Confessour, who borne in Ireland and there descended of Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. & in Indic. SS. Belgij Antiqua Monum. Hyber. a noble bloud, and allied to the famous Bishop S. Romwald of that Nation, despising this transitory world, went ouer into the lower Germany and there led an Eremiticall life in the Montaynes neere vnto Thene in the Duchy of Brabant, where he was very famous for sanctity of life and other vertues; the same being manifested afterward, by the manifold signes and miracles at his

death, which fell out about the yeare of Christ seauen hundred and threscore. His memory is vntill this day very famous in the forsaid towne of Vissenaken, where his body remayneth, and is greatly honoured by the frequent concourse of such as dayly come to visit the same.
            
            
               
                  G The eleuenth Day.
               AT Tyn-mouth in the Kingdome of the Northumbers the Translation of the venerable body of S. Osuyne Martyr, and King of the Deires in the same Prouince, who being impiously slayne in hatred of Christian faith Vē. Beda in Epit. & l. 3. hist. cap. 14. west. an. 641. 745. & Paris. ibi. & alij. by Osway King of the Berniciās, it pleased God to manifest his innocency, by the wonderfull miracles wrought afterward at his body, which being on this day found out, was taken vp, and with great solemnity and veneration translated to a Church of our Blessed Lady in an old towne of the same Kingdome, now called Tyn-mouth, where afterward was a godly Monastery erected in his honour, and where his principall festiuity was wont in Catholicke time to be celebrated on the twētith of August, on which day he was Martyred in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and one.
            
            
               
               
                  A The tweluth Day.
               AT Rome the deposition of S. Gregory Pope and Doctor, who for his admirable workes and labours in Gods Church, was surnamed the Great. He sent S. Augustine 
                  Bed. l. 2. cap. 13. Paul. 
                        〈…〉
                     c. de gest. 
                        •
                     ongobard. l
                        •
                     . cap. 11. & 12. Mart. Rom. Breuiar. sec. vsi
                        •
                     m Sarum. et alij ōnes hac die. with other Monkes into England, for our Cōuersion, who landing in the Ile of Thanet, and intertayned by King Ethelbert of Kent of blessed memory, within a while conuerted that Prouince to the saith of Christ, togeather with the said King Ethelbert, and by little and little the whole Realme of England. The memory of which our Apostle S. Gregory, hath byn very famous in former tymes in our Countrey, whose feast was wont to be kept holyday, in diuers partes of the Land, where also are many goodly Churches and monuments yet remaining, erected and dedicated in his honour. He died in the yeare of Christ, six hundred and foure; and lieth buryed in S. Peters Church at Rome.
               
               THE same day in Scotland the Commemoration * of S. Fethno monke and Confessour, who being a disciple of S. Columbe 
                  Hect. Boeri
                        〈…〉
                     s in 
                        •
                     ist. Scot. Ioā. 
                        •
                     est. l. 4. Ilid. the Great of Ireland, came with him ouer into Scotlād, togeather with eleuē other Cō
                  panions, all Irishmen, to preach the Christian

faith to the Pictes that then inhabited that Kingdome, where after their conuersion from Idolatry to the true knowledge of Christ, famous for sanctity of life and other vertues, he there ended his blessed dayes about the yeare of Christ 580.
            
            
               
                  B The thirteenth Day.
               IN Scotland the Cōmemoration of S. Vigane 
                  * Confel
                     •
                  our, who de
                     •••
                  nded of a very honourable parentage in that Kingdome, became there a monke of the Venerable Order Arnol. Wion. l. 2. ligni vitae. de script. Ord. D. Benedict. of S. Benedict, of the Congregation of Cluniacke, whose great learning and vertue, hath not only i
                     〈…〉
                  rated very much the Order of his Religion, but the whole iland also where he was borne▪ There is yet extāt in diuers libraryes of Europe, a famous worke of his, intituled, Sermones ad populum, which he wrote about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and two, about which tyme also in great sanctity of life and venerable old age he departed to our Lord, and was buryed in Scotland.
               
            
            
               
               
                  C The fourteenth Day.
               A
                     •
                   
                  Lindisserne in the Kingdome of the * 
                  Northumbers, the Commernoration of S. Ceolnulph King of that Prouince and Confessour, who leauing the care of his Kingdome Matt. West. an. Do. 733. Continuator hist. V
                        •
                     n. Bedae l. 1. cap. 9. & in. Epit. an. 737. to Eadbert his kinsman, and reiecting all worldly pleasures and titles, became a monke in the Abbey of Lindisserne, where in all kind of 
                     〈…〉
                   and exemplar good life he spent the rest of his dayes, and finally in a good old age there gaue vp his soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred thirty and seauen. He was afterward buryed in the same place, neere to the Venerable body of S. Cuthbert Bishop of that Sea, at whose tombe many miracles are recorded to haue byn wrought in witnesse of his sanctity.
            
            
               
                  D The fifteenth Day.
               AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the festiuity Arnold. Mirman. in theat. Conuers. Gentium Doroth. insynopsi. of S. Aristobulus Bishop and Martyr, who being a noble Roman by birth, and one of the first Christians of that Citty, as appeareth by S. Paul his salutation of him, in his Epistle to the Romans, was created

Bishop by S. Peter the Apostle, and sent by him into Britany to preach the Christian Baron. i ad no
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                      Martyr. Rom. hac die. 
                  
                     •
                  aith; whereafter he had brought very many erring sheep to Christes fould, most gloriously ended his blessed dayes by Ma
                     •
                  tyrdome, about the yeare of Christ threscore and ten. His memory hath byn famous in our Ilād vntill these later tymes of schismes and heresyes, as being one of our first Apo
                  
                     •
                  tles and Patrons.
            
            
               
                  E The sixteenth Day.
               AT Ridall-Monastery the Commemoration of Blessed Alred Abbot and Confessor, * whose great learning and vertue hath much illustrated the Catholicke Church of Arnold. W
                        〈…〉
                     n l. 2. 
                        〈…〉
                     ligno 
                        •
                     it
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Catal. scrip. Ord. D. Benedict. & ali. Christ, but especially our Iland of Great Bri
                        •
                     any, where he was borne, liued, and died. He was first a monke of the venerable Order of S Benedict, and afterward became Abbot of an ancient Monastery called Rhieuallis, (now vulgarly Ridall) where in great sanctity of life, he ending his blessed dayes, reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred threescore & foure. He wrote the life of King Edward the Cōfessour, besides very many other lear
                     •
                  ed and p
                     •
                  ous bookes to the number of one and twenty: all which are yet extant

to be seene in diuers Libraries, as well in England, as other Countreyes of Europe.
               
            
            
               
                  F The seauenteenth Day.
               IN Ireland the deposition of S. Patricke 
                  Prosp. Aquit. insua hist. Mar. Scot. an. 432. Sige. in Chron. an. 491. Guliel. Neubrig. l. 3. cap. 19. Ioan. Capgr. in Catal. SS. Britāniae Bishop and Confessour, Apostle of that I
                     •
                  and, who borne in the Territory of Bristow in Somersetshire, & brought vp at Glastenbury, went ouer, in his youth, into France to S. Martyn his Vncle then Bishop of Towers, who was brother to S. Patrickes Mother, of whome he was instructed in learning and other vertues: & afterwards going to Rome, was there consecrated Bishop by Pope Celestinus, and sent backe to preach the Christian faith in Scotland, which he did for a tyme with great fruit of his labour; and thence he went into Ireland because at that tyme the greatest part of the Scotts inhabited that Kingdome) where he conuerted the whole Iland, and so became their Apostle, working wonderous miracles among them. He liued an hundred and two and twenty yeares, obtayning by his prayers, that no venemous creature should liue or breed in Ireland, and died in the yeare of Christ, foure hundred fourscore and one. His body was first interred in the towne of D
                        •
                     n, in the Prouince of Vlster, and afterward translated to the Archbishops

Sea of Armachan in the same Kingdome, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand, one hundred, threescore and seauenteene, as the ancient Records of Ireland do declare.
            
            
               
                  G The eighteenth Day.
               AT Corse-castle in the Ile of Purbecke in Sur. in eius vita. tom. 2. Pol. virg. l. 6. histo. Angl. Westan. 978. Martyr. Rom. & alij ōnes hac die. 
                  Dorcetshire the passion of S. Edward K. of the VVestsaxons and Martyr, who through the trechery of his step-mother Queene Alfred (desyrous that her owne sonne Ethelbert should be King was slayne by certayne souldiers hired by the forsaid Queene to that purpose, whilst he was on hunting, in the yeare of Christ, nyne hūdred threescore and eighteene. His body was first interred at VVarham, and after at Shastesbury, wherat it pleased God in witnesse of his Innocency to worke many miracles. And last of all the same was translated to Glastenbury-Abbey in the yeare of Christ, one thousand and one.
               THE same day in Ireland the deposition Vincent. in speculo l. 29. c. 11. & 12. Wion. l. 2. ligni vitae. of S. Christian Bishop and Confessour, who borne in the same Iland, became there first a monke of the Order of Cisterce, and scholler to the famous S. Malachy Archbishop & Primate of that Kingdome, & afterward

Abbot of Mellisonte, and last of all Bishop, where in great sanctity of life he ended his Bernard. in vita S. Malach. blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ one thousand one hundred fourty and eight, whose memory is yet famous throughout Ireland.
               
            
            
               
                  A The ninteenth Day.
               AT Derby the Commemoration of S. 
                  * 
                  Alkmund Martyr, sonne to Alred King of Northumberland, who being slayne in a battayle against the Duke of VVil
                        •
                     on in the behalfe Ranulph. Cestrens. l. 5. c. 28. & alij nostrat. of the Viceroy of VVorcester, named Ethelmund, that pretended to recouer certayne lands, that VVolstan Duke of VVilton detayned from him wrongfully, his body presently began to do miracles; which being seene, and witnessed, the same was translated to Derby, and there with great veneration interred most solemnly in a Church erected in his honour, and called afterwards of his name, S. Alkmunds, which in former Catholicke tymes, hath byn a famous pilgrimage, especially for the Northerne people of England. He suffered in the yeare of Christ, eight hundred.
            
            
               
               
                  B The twentith Day.
               AT Lindisserne in the Kingdome of the Northumbers the deposition of S. Cuthbert 
                  Vē. Beda l. 4. cap. 26. 27. 28. 29. & 30. Abbo Floriac. inprolog. ad vit. S. Edmūdi Regis. Vincent. in speculo Sur. to. 2. hac die cū Mart. R
                        •
                     m. & ali som. i bus. Bishop and Confessour, who descended of the Kings bloud of Ireland, became a monke first of the famous Monastery of Mailros, in the Marches of Scotland, and afterward was ordayned Bishop of Lindisserne: which Bishopricke, after he had gouerned some two yeares, he resigned, and became an Eremite, leading a most strict and seuere kind of life, in the Iland of Farne, and so continued vntill his dying day: which happened about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore and eight. He was very famous for sanctity and working of miracles both aliue and dead.
               THE same day, and same place the deposition of Blessed Herebert Priest and Cōfessour, a man of great holinesse of life, who often repayring to S. Cuthbert aforsaid, alwayes vsed his counsell and direction, Bed. l. 4. cap. 29. hist. Angl. for the affayres both of his body and soule. And one day S. Cuthbert telling him, that himselfe was shortly to leaue this world & passe to the other; Herebert fell downe at his feet, and importunely besought him that he might also passe to the next life with him,

that had so long inioyed his company heere on earth. At whose earnest intercessiō, S. Cuthbert falling to his prayers, finally obtayned the same. And so with in a while after, they both falling sicke, went both to our Lord vpon the one and selfe same day and houre, in the yeare of Christ, 688. and were both buryed at Lindisserne.
               
            
            
               
                  C The one and twentith Day.
               AT VVerdt in Cleeu-land the Commemoation * of S. Isenger Bishop and Martyr, who descended o
                     〈…〉
                   a noble Scottish family, Cranz. Metrop. l. 1. cap. 29. wion. l. 2. ligni vitae in Catal. E
                        •
                     is. Werdensium. contemned the vanityes of the world, and became first a monke in that Kingdome, of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, and afterward Abbot there of the Monastery called Amarbaricke, which whē he had gouerned for diuers yeares, mooued with zeale of conuerting his neighbour-Countreyes, went ouer into Flanders and Germany, and being there ordayned Bishop o
                     〈…〉
                   
                  VVerdt, was a little after slayne in defence of the Christiā faith, by the infidels of that Countrey, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred twenty and foure. His body being brought to VVerdt, & there interred in his owne Cathedrall Church, was kept for a long tyme with great honour & veneratiō of the Inhabitātes.
            
            
               
               
                  D The two and twentith Day.
               AT Sherborne in Dorcet
                        •
                     hire the Commemoration of S. Hamund Bishop of that * Sea and Martyr, who in the Danish persecution Matth. west. ad ānum D. 871. in hist. maiori Ang. vnder the Captaynes Hingar & Hubba, was for the Confession of Christ most barbarously slayne at Merdune, by those Tyrannicall Pagans, who in the vastation of England, spared neyther Ecclesiasticall nor Religious person whatsoeuer. His Martyrdome happened about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred threescore and eleuen, and in the raigne of Alfred King of the VVest saxons.
               
            
            
               
                  E The three and twentith Day.
               AT Lindisserne the Commemoration of * Blessed Fgbert King of the Northumbers 
                  Contin. Epitom. Vē. Bedae an. 758. Pol. virg. l. 4. hist. west. an. 757. wiō. l. 4. ligni vitae. & alij. and Confessour, who after he had gouerned that Prouince most laudably for twenty yeares, contēned his Crowne & dignity of a King, leauing the same to his sōne Oswulph, & entring into the Abbey of Lindissern aforsaid, became there a monke of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, where in very great sanctity of life, humility, obseruance of Monasticall discipline and other vertues, he

finally ended his peaceable dayes in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred threescore and eight. He endowed the Archbishopricke 
                     •
                  f Yorke, whilst he was King, with gr
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  newes, where also he founded a worthy Library, and furnished the same with all good Authors that could then be gotten.
            
            
               
                  F The foure & twentith Day.
               AT Canterbury the depositiō of S. Lanfrāke Confessour, and Archbishop of that Math. west. an. 1089. Pol. Vir. Petr. in Catal. l. 6. c. 4. et 7. Vinc. in speculo Tritem. de Vir. Illustr. l. 2. & 3. Sea, who borne at Pauia in Lombardy, became first a monke of the Abbey of Becke, & then Abbot of Cane in Normandy, and afterward ordayned Archbishop of Canterbury, at the request of King VVilliam the Conquerour; whose most pious life, & good learning, ioyned with extraordinary charitie to the poore, and assistance of the Church of England, is yet memorable throughout the Christian world. Of this man there is a story recorded, how that in his yōger dayes he trauayling by the way, & chācing to be robbed by theeues, tooke the same so impatiently, that by no means he could be pacified for a tyme: but at lēgth cōming to himself againe, he brake forth into these words: VVhat? haue I so much learning & knowledge both in Philosophy,

Diuinity and Scriptures, and yet haue not learned to be patient in aduersity? Surely, 
                        〈…〉
                     uall not cease vntill 
                  Hier. Platus l. 2. de bono status Religiosi. 
                  I fynd out that learning. And vpon this, he presently went into France, and thence into Normandy, where comming to the Abbey of Becke, he lay secretly for many yeares in that Monastery, being reputed for an Idiot and simple man, vntill at length his learning and wisdome being discouered, he was made Prior of Becke, and presently afterward Abbot of S. Stephens in Cane aforsaid, and finally Archbishop of Canterbury. He died in the yeare of Christ, one thousand fourscore and nyne, and was buryed in his owne Church at Canterbury.
               
            
            
               
                  G The fiue & twentith Day.
               AT Norwich in the County of Norsolke the passion of S. VVilliam Mareyr, who being a boy of the same Citty of some ten 10. Capgr. in Catal. SS. Britā. Gul. Nubrig. l. 3. cap. 7 8. 9 Geor. Lilius in hist. anno 1235. Vincent. in specul. yeares old, was by his Father set an apprentice to a glouer of the same towne, whome the Iewes of Norwich secretly stealing away, crucified on a Crosse in despite of Christ & his blessed Mother, vpō the feast of her Annū
                  ciation. His body they cast into a wood or thicket, neere to the said Citty, which being foūd & brought vnto the towne with a sollemne procession of the Clergy, was placed

in the great Church, or Minster of that Sea, and there was wont, to be kept with great veneration. His Martyrdome happened in the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred forty and six, in the eleuenth yeare of the raigne of K. Stephen.
               
            
            
               
                  A The six and twentith Day.
               AT Bardney in Lincolnshire the Commemoration * of Many holy Monkes Martyrs, who in the first Danish persecution in our Iland, were slayne by those Pagan people in Ingulph. de Croyland in histor. 10. Stous Annal. Angl de Reg. west sax. pag. 100. their owne Monasteryes in hatred of Christian Religion. At what tyme also the said Danes ranging abroad the Countreyes, slew (saith the Story) the Abbot & the Monkes of the Monastery of Croyland, and fiered their Church, and houses belonging thervnto. At Peterburrow also they made the like slaughter of Religious persons; and comming to the Nunry of Ely, they put the Religious Virgins all to the sword without compassion, and so receyuing theyr Crownes of Martyrdome, they went vnto our Lord. All which happened in our Countrey, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred threescore and ten.
            
            
               
               
                  B The seauen & twentith Day.
               IN Scotlād the depositiō of S. Archibald Abbot & Confessour, descended of a very noble Arnold. Wion in Mart. Benedict. & Oasel. ex antiq. S
                        〈…〉
                      Monum. hac ai
                        •
                     . parentage in that Kingdome, whose rare 
                     〈…〉
                  e & conuersation togeather with the singular gifts of clemency towards the poore and orphanes, hath in former tymes byn famous both in England and Scotland. His feast is recounted to haue byn celebrated on this day, by the ancient Records of Scotland and Ireland: among both which Nations, many altars, and some Churches also, haue heertofore byn dedicated in his honour. He florished about the yeare of Christ seauen hundred and eight, about which tyme also he desceased.
            
            
               
                  C The eight & twentith Day.
               IN the Marches of VVales the Translatiō of Io. Capgr. in Catal. SS. Britā. Molan. in addit. Vsuard. the glorious 
                     •
                  ody of S. Fremund King and Martyr, sonne to Ossa King of Mercia, who setting aside his crowne and kingdome for the loue of Christ, in the second yeare of his raigne, became an Eremite in a little Ilād of the Marches of VVales, called in the British tongue Illesage, where at last he was slayne by

                  Osway the Apostata, in hatred of Christiā Religion, Wion haec die in Mart. Benedict. in the yeare of Christ, seauē hundred fourscore and sixteene. He being afterward canonized for a Saint in the yeare of our Lord 1157. and raygne of King Henry the third, his body was taken vp on this day, & translated to a more eminent place of the same Church where it lay before, wherat it pleased God to worke miracles. His principall festiuity is celebrated vpon the eleuenth day of May, of whome in that place, we haue made mention againe.
            
            
               
                  D The nine & twentith Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Baldred Confessour, whose memory in ancient * tymes hath byn very famous in that Io. Maior de gestis Scot. l. 2. cap. 7. ex antiq. Scot. Monum. Kingdome. For that he hauing sometymes preached to the people of three villages neere adioyning one to the other in Scotland, called Aldham, Tiningham and Preston, was so holy a man of life, that when he was dead, the people of ech village, contended one with another which of thē should haue his body, in so much, that at last, they not agreeing therabout, tooke armes, and ech of them sought by force to enioy the same. And when the matter came to issue, the said sacred body was found all whole in three distinct

places of the house where he died; so as the people of ech village comming thither, & carrying the same away, placed it in their Churches, and kept it with great honour and veneration for the miracles, that at ech place it pleased God to worke. He liued in the tyme of S. Kentigerne and S. Columbe the Great, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and ten, about which tyme also he gaue vp his soule to rest in our Lord.
            
            
               
                  E The thirtith Day.
               AT VVerdt in Cleeu-land the depositiō of S. 
                  Io. Lest. l. 5. histo. Scot. Albert. Cranz. Metrop. l. 1. c. 20. Wion in Mart. Bened. hac die. 
                  Pattone Bishop of that Citty and Confessour, who descended of a worthy bloud in Scotland, was first made Abbot of the Monastery called Amarbaricke in the same Kingdome, and thence going ouer into the lower Germany and Saxony, was at last consecrated Bishop of VVerdt, where in great sanctity of life and other vertues, diligently attending to his flocke & preaching the Christian faith among them, he ended his venerable old dayes, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred threscore and two, and was buryed in his owne Cathedrall Church at VVerdt, where his body was wont to be kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
               
                  F The one & thirtith Day
               AT Malmesbury in VViltshire the Translation of S. Adelmus Bishop & Confessour nephew to Inas King of the VVestsaxons, who trauayling in his youth into France and Italy, through his diligence in studdies, Gul. Malmes. de pontif. Angl. Bed. l. 4. cap. 19. Calendar. sed. vsum Sarum hac die. Catal. Episcop. Sireburgensium. attayned to great learning, both in the Greeke and Hebrue tongues, but especially in Diuinity. In the knowledg wherof, he was in his dayes accompted excellent. After his returne into England, he first became a monke of the Order of S. Benedict at Malmesbury, and then Abbot of the whole Monastery: and afterward going to Rome with King Ceadwall, he was there created Bishop of Sherborne by Pope Sergius, and sent backe to that Sea: where after great labours taken in the Gouernment therof, and many notable bookes wrytten for the instruction of men in Christian life, he finally reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and nyne: whose body was afterward solemnly on this day translated to Malmesbury, and there kept in Catholicke tymes with great honour and veneratiō, for the manifold miracles, that are recorded to haue byn wrought therat.
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF APRIL.
            
               
                  G The first Day.
               
                  AT Pontoyse in France the Commemoratio of the Saintes Sadoch & Adrian, Priestes & Confessours, * who being Irishmen by In vita. S. Ri
                        〈…〉
                     ij. Abbatis apud Sur. to. 2. die 26. Apr. de vitis SS. birth, came ouer into France to preach the Christian faith to the people and inhabitants of Picardy, where they were honourably receyued and intertayned by S. Richarius a noble man of that Countrey, and afterward Abbot of Pontoyse. And when they had laboured in that new haruest for many yeares, and reaped therin most aboundant fruite, in the conuersion of infinite soules from their Idolatrous superstitiō to the true worship of one

God, they finally ended their happy dayes in a venerable old age, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and forty. Their sacred Reliques are kept vntill this day by the Religious men in the forsaid Monastery of Pontoyse, with great veneration of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  A The second Day.
               AT Coldingham in the Marches of Scotland 
                  * the Commemoration of S. Ebba Virgin and Abbesse, daugher to Ethelfride King of Northumberland, and sister to S. Oswald and Rob. Buckland in eius vita l. man. Serful. 156. de vitis SS. mulierū Angl. 
                  Osway Kings of the same Prouince, who cōtēning the vanities of the world, became a Religious woman, and receyued the holy veyle of chastity at the hands of Blessed Finan Bishop of Lindisserne: but afterward building two goodly Monasteryes of her owne, one vpon the riuer of Derwent, called of her name Ebbecester, and the other at the forsaid Coldingham, she became Abbesse of the later, and ruled the same in all perfection and holines of life, hauing very many noble and vertuous virgins vnder her; amōg whome, S. Audry Queene and flower of the Ile of Ely was one. And after she had heaped vp store of heauenly treasure, in a good old age, she went to her spouse, about the yeare

of Christ, six hundred fourscore and foure, whose memory hath in tymes past byn very famous both in England & Scotland, where many goodly Churches and Chappels haue byn erected and dedicated in her honour; and one yet standing to be seene in Oxford, commonly called S. Tabbes; as also in the forsaid Marches of Scotland neere to Coldinghā, there is a little port or hauen in the promō
                  tory of that Prouince, still retayning the name of S. Tabbes-head.
               
            
            
               
                  B The third Day.
               AT Chichester in Sussex the deposition of S. Richard Confessour and Bishop of Matth. West. & Paris. an. Dom. 1253. Sur. to. 2. Breu. sec. vsion Sarū. Mart. Rom. & alij. that Sea, whose wonderfull life and doctrine, ioyned with the greatnes of his miracles, hath byn sufficiently manifested to the Christian world. He was borne at VVich in VVorcestershire, and died at Douer in Kent, the ninth yeare of his Presulshippe, and yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and three. Whose body being brought to Chichester, so shined with miracles, that among others, it is recorded, that three dead men, were at the same, by his meritts, againe raised to life. He was canonized for a Saint, by Pope Vrban the fourth seauen yeares after his death, and of Christ 1260.
               
                  
THE same day at Eureux in France the deposition of S. Burgundosora Virgin and Abbesse, who descended of a noble Brittish bloud and disciple to S. Columbane the Great Bed. to. 3. Operū. Sur. to. 3. Vit. SS. in vita S. Columb. Mart. Rom. & Molan. of Ireland, was by him sent ouer into France & there made Abbesse of a Monastery, which he had built at Eureux, where in great sanctimony of life she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hūdred & ten. S. Bede hath wryttē her life at large, wherin he recounteth many worthy and memorable actes of hers, especially for the obseruation of Monasticall discipline, wherin she excelled.
            
            
               
                  C The fourth Day.
               IN Cornwall the Commemoration of S. 
                  * 
                  Guier Priest and Confessour, who leading an Eremiticall, and seuere kind of life in Matth. Paris. in hist. Maiori ad An. 871. ex antiq. monum. Britanniae. that Prouince, and being companion to S. Neoth (by whose counsell the Vniuersity of Oxford was founded) that liued in those partes with him in the tyme of King Alfred, was very famous for sanctity of life, and working of Miracles both aliue & dead. His name is yet very memorable, and frequent among the Cornishmen, where in times past, haue byn many altars erected, and dedicacated in his honour. He died about the yeare

of Christ, eight hundred threescore and eleuen.
            
            
               
                  D The fifth Day.
               IN Scotland the deposition of S. Tigernake Bishop and Confessour, whose godly life, Molan. in addit. ad Vsuard. 
                        •
                     ac die. Antiq. Monum. Regni Scotiae. and doctrine, hath not only illustrated that Countrey, where he was borne, but his neighbour-Kingdomes also round about: And therfore his memory not vnworthy to be recorded among the other Saints of our Iland, that hath byn made worthy of so glorious a Patron. He died in all sanctity & holines of life, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and thirty, and was buryed in Scotland.
               
               THE same day in Suetia the Commemoration * of S. Gotebald Bishop and Confessour, Adam. Bremens. i
                        •
                      hist. Gothorū l. 2. cap. 2
                        •
                     . Baronius to. 10. Annal. who being an Englishman by birth, went ouer into Norway and Sueueland and there propagated the Christian faith with aboundant fruite of his holy labours, for many yeares; and finally in great holines of life, there rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and foure.
            
            
               
               
                  E The sixt Day.
               IN Ireland the deposition of S. Celsus Confessour Mart. Rom. hac die. Bernard. in vita S. Malach. and Bishop of Connerthen in the same Kingdome, whose godly life, full of sanctity and miracles, hath byn very famous in former ages, both at home, and abroad. He was predecessour to S. Malachy in his Bishoppricke, and died in the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred twenty and eight. *
               
               THE same day at Hexam in Northumberland 
                  Gul. Malmes. l. 1. de reg. Angl. Symon Dunelm. in chron. 788. Asser meneuēs. an. 789. the Commemoration of S. Ethelwold, King of the same Prouince and Martyr: who being wickedly slayne in the Ciuill warres among his owne subiects, and his body brought to the Church of Hexam, it pleased God in signe of his innocency in that cause, to worke many miracles therat; which being seene, and diligently examined, the same was with great solemnity & veneration honourably reconded in the said Church as beseemed so pretious a treasure. He suffered about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred.
            
            
               
               
                  F The seauenth Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Sigene Abbot and Confessour, who descended * of a very noble parentage in that Kingdome, became a monke of the venerable Io. Les
                        •
                     . Episco. Rossens. l. 4. de gestis Scot. Wion in addit. ad l. 3. ligni vit. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Order of S. Benedict, in a monastery of one of the Ilands of Orcades, belonging to that Prouince, wherof afterward himselfe was made Abbot. In which office he so behaued himselfe in sanctity of life, good learning and reformation of Monasticall discipline, that his name was famous aswell throughout Scotland at home, as in England, Ireland and other Countreyes abroad. He liued about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and threescore, about which tyme also he reposed in our Lord.
            
            
               
                  G The eight Day.
               AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the Commemoration of S. Duuianus Confessour, * & scholler to S. Ioseph of Arimathia, who being a noble man of Britany ioyned himselfe to S. Ioseph, and lead a solitary life with him and his companions, in the Iland of Auallonia (now called Glastenbury) which King

                  Aruiragus of Bri
                        •
                     any had graunted vnto them; where being very famous for sanctity of Ioan. de Kirkst. at in Monasticis Eyseng. cent. 2. part. 3. dist. 4. life and miracles in that first Primitiue Church of our Countrey, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, one hundred and eleuen. His body was buryed at Glastenbury, and there conserued with due veneration vntill the dayes of K. Henry the eight, in whose raigne that Monastery deca
                     〈…〉
                  ed. He was very nobly borne, and one of the first Christians of our Iland, that exercised a solitary or Eremiticall life, after the comming of S. Ioseph of Arimathia into Britany.
               
            
            
               
                  A The ninth Day.
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire, the Commemoration * of S. Frithstan Confessour & Bishop of the same Sea, who forsaking the Matth. west. an. D. 932. & 935. Pol. Virgil. l. 6. Ranulph. Cestrensis l. 6. c. 6. de offie. & Missa defunctorū
                   burden of that dignity, betooke himselfe to a solitary kind of life, in a village neere to the said Citty of VVinchester: In which he constantly perseuered in all sanctity and holinesse of life to his dying day, which happened in the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred thirty and three, and was buryed at VVinchester, where his body was wont to be kept in Catholicke tymes, with great honour and veneration. There is a story recorded, how

that S. Frithstane was wont euery day to say masse, and office for the dead; and one euening as he walked in the Church-yard reciting his said office, when he came to Requiescant in Pace; the voyces in the graues round about, made answere aloud, and said
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  B The tenth Day.
               AT Paderborne in the higher Germany the deposition of S. Paternus Confessour, Ioan. Tritem. de vir. Illust. l. 3. cap. 324. Lest. l. 5. hist. in fine. wion in Mart. Benedict. hac die. who borne in Scotland of a worthy bloud & despising all wordly things, gate him ouer into Germany, and there became a Monke of the Order of S. Benedict in a Monastery of the forsaid towne of Paderborne, where, by diuine prophesy, he fortold the burning therof by causall fire, wherin himselfe, being in his Cell, was also cōsumed to 
                     〈…〉
                  shes, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand fifty and eight. His memory is very famous, vntill this day, both in Germany, where he liued, and in Scotland also where he was borne.
               THE same day in Suetia the passion of S. Eschillus Bishop and Martyr, who going Ioan. magnus in hist. Goth. l. 18. c. 11. out of England with S. Sigfrid and his Nephewes, to preach the Christian faith to the Sueuians, after he had laboured for many yeares

incessantly in that kind, and brought many thousands to the true worship of God, was A nnales Sueuici & Breua. Suev. by the 
                     〈…〉
                  redulous Pagā people of that coū
                  trey, stoned to death, as he was preaching the word of 
                     〈…〉
                  e, vpon Good Fryday; And therby deserued to be crowned with Martyrdome vpon the same day, that our Blessed Sauiour suffered for the Redemption of mankind. This happened about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and sixteene, and in the raigne of King Edmund of England, surnamed Iron-side.
               
            
            
               
                  C The eleuenth Day.
               IN the Ile of Crowland in Lincolnshire the deposition of S. Guthlacke Confessour and Faelix Croland. Gul. Ramefius & Petr. Blesens. in eius vit. west. an. 714. Sur. to. 2. Pol. Vir. l. 4. Mar. Rom. & Molan. Eremite, who being in his youth a souldiour, and of good parentage, became weary of the world, and retyred himselfe to the Monastery of Ripendowne (now called Rippon) in Yorkshire, where be tooke first the habit of a monke, & shortly after became an Eremite in the forsaid Ile of Crowland. In which kind of life he continued in so great austerity of fasting, praying, & pennace, that he deserued twice a day for fifteene yeares togeather to enioy the glorious sight of his good Angell, working wonderfull miracles both aliue and dead. He departed this

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
world in a venerable old age, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and fourteene, and was buryed in Cro
                        〈…〉
                     and Abbey.
            
            
               
                  D The tweluth Day.
               AT Roane in France the Commemoration of Blessed Hugh Co
                     〈…〉
                  ssour & Bishop of that Sea, who being an Englishmā by birth, * & Abbot of Reading in Barkshire, was thence Mattl
                        〈…〉
                     . West. in hist. 
                        〈…〉
                     aiori and an. Christ. 11.30 Chron. Cluniacense &c. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . in the time of K. Henry the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , promoted to the Bishopricke of Roane; in which dignity he so worthily behaued himselfe; for 
                     〈…〉
                  x and thirty yeares togeather, that his name was famous in those dayes throughout all France. He died in great sanctity of life and miracles about the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred threescore and six. This man is different from the other S. Hugh, Bishop of the same place, whose fes
                     〈…〉
                  all day is celebrated vpon the nynth of this moneth.
               THE same day at Alaxion, also in France, the Commemoration of S. Mechtild 
                  * Virgin, who descended of the bloud Ro all of Scotlād, fled thēce secretly, with her yōgest Rob. Buchland in eius vital. M. S. de. vit. SS. Mulierum brother Alexander in base attire, into France, where placing him as a Brother in the Monastery of Cistercian Mōkes at Fone, she wēt herself to a village nyne myles of, called Alaxion & there made her a little Cottage of stickes

and rushes, liuing in great seuerity and pennance, manteyning herself with the labour Angl. ex. antiq. momon. Galliae. of her owne hands till her dying day, which happened about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and two hundred. The townesmen of Alaxion buryed her body with great solemnity and veneration, God glorifying the same by many Miracles.
            
            
               
                  E The thirteenth Day.
               AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the Commemoration * of S. Elsled Virgin, and Neece to King Ethelstane of England, whose Osbert. Monac. in vita S. Dunstani apudSur. to. 3. 19. Maij. west. an. Do. 929. wonderfull vertues, and holines of life, togeather with working of miracles, haue in tymes past, byn famous in our Iland. She built herselfe a little Oratory, by the counsell of S. Dunstan, neere to the Church of our Blessed Lady at Glastenbury, in which she liued in continuall prayer, watching and fasting, vntill her dying day. And when vpon a tyme her vncle K. Ethelstane, that was there on hunting, came to visit her, & with a great company, stayed and dined with her, she hauing but one little vessell of drinke (called meath) set the same before him and his trayne; of which when euery one had dronke his fill, the said vessell was notwithstanding as full as before. She ended

her blessed dayes about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred thirty and six, and was buryed at Glastenbury.
               
            
            
               
                  F The fourteenth Day.
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire, the Commemoration of Blessed Ethelnulph King * of the VVestsaxons and Confessour, whose godly acts in propagating and increasing the Christian faith in our Iland, is not only famous to all posterity, but may be an example also and myrrour to all other Christian Card. Baron. in Annal. tom. 10. Matth. West. an. 854 & 857. Paris. an. 1257. Pol. Vigil. l. 5. hist. Gulielm. Mal mes. de re gib. Angl. Princes of Europe. He made the tenth part of his Kingdome free from all tributes and and exactions, and gaue it to the Church in honour of our Blessed Lady, and other Saints of God; as also he sent euery yeare three hundred Markes to Rome, one hundred to S. Peters Church, another hundred to S. Paules, and the third to be bestowed in almes at the Popes discretion. And at last went thither himselfe in pilgrimage, togeather with his yongest sonne Alfred, whome he cōmitted to Pope Leo for his education; And there among other deeds of Charity, he reedified the English-schoole that had byn a little before consumed by fire. And soone after his returne backe into England in most godly wise, he reposed in our Lord, about

the yeare of Christ, eight hundred fifty and seauen. Matthew Paris a monke of S. Albans, and a very graue Author, numbreth him among the canonized Saints of our Nation. His body was with all solemnity & veneration honourably reconded in the Cathedrall Church of VVinchester, where it yet remayneth among the Monuments of our Saxon and English Kings.
            
            
               
                  G The fifteenth Day.
               AT Yorke the Eleuation of the glorious & venerable body of S. Oswald, Bishop Matth. West. an. Do. 1002. Arnold. wion in Mart. Benedict. Calend. sec. vsum Sarum hac die. of that Sea and Confessour, who trauayling in his yonger dayes into France, became there first a monke in the Monastery of Floriacke, & returning into England, was afterwards ordayned Bishop of VVorcester, and lastly, at the intercession of K. Edgar, preferred to Yorke where in great sanctity of life and miracles he ended his blessed dayes, in the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourscore and twelue. His body in the yeare 1002. was on this day with all solemnity and reuerence taken vp by Aldulph his successour in that Sea, and set in a more eminent place of the Cathedrall Church of Yorke, but afterward translated to VVorcester. He built the famous Abbey of Ramsey in the ile of Ely, as also a goodly

Church at VVorcester, which he dedicated to our blessed Lady.
            
            
               
                  A The sixteenth Day.
               AT Cullen in the higher Germany the Translation of part of the venerable body of S. Alban Protomartyr of Great-Britany, which togeather with other Reliques Hist, Conuent. S. Panta. impressa Coloniae. 10. Lidg. Monac. Buriens. in eius Vita. Molan. in addit. ad Vsua. 
                        •
                     ac die. Gerard. Leigh in rudimentis Insigniū de Albano. being first carried thence to Rome by S. Germā
                   Bishop of Auxier in France, when with S. Lupus he came into Britany to expell the Pelagiā
                   heresy, was afterwards brought backe to Cullen by Thcophania wife to the Emperour Otho the second, and there very honourably placed in the Monastery of S. Pantaleon, where the same is yet kept with great veneration of the whole Citty. This S. Alban in his youth before his conuersion to Christian faith, being Lord of Verolame (now called S. Albans) went to Rome, and there made a Royall Chalēge of Iustes for the honour of his Realme, where before all others he had the price, and thereupon was made knight of the Bath by the Emperour Dioclesian, and high Steward of the Britans; who were then vnder the subiection of the Romans. And after his returne home, being made a Christian by S. Amphibale Priest, was for that cause shortly after apprehended, and

put to death at the forsaid towne of S. Albans in Hartfordshire, about the yeare of Christ, three hundred and three. Fortunatus in his excellent Booke of Virginity speaking of Martyrs, among others, commendeth S. Alban thus:
               
                  Albanum egregium foecunda Britannia profert. There was a goodly Church and Monastery afterwards erected at S. Albans in his honour by Ossa K. of the Merciās, wherin the said body of S. Alban was placed; the which was in our last age, destroyed by K. Henry the 8. his commandement, with hundreds more in our Iland.
            
            
               
                  B The seauenteenth Day.
               AT Fulda in the Diocesse of Mentz in the * higher Germany, the Commemoration of S. Marianus Cōfessour, who borne in Scotland, 
                  Arnol. wion. l. 2. ligni vit. de script. Ord. D. Benedict. Sixtus Senens. in biblioth. lib. 4. & descended of a good parentage in that Kingdome, went ouer into Germany and tooke first the habit of a Monke of the Order of S. Benedict, in the Monastery of S. Martins at Cullen, and afterward at the forsaid towne of Fulda, in an Abbey, which S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz had sometimes founded for the Scottish nation, where in great holines and sanctity of life, he reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, one

thousand and threescore, and raigne of K. Edward the Confessour of England. He wrote many learned bookes which he left behind him to posterity, and are extant to be read in diuers libraryes of Europe: The Catalogue wherof yow may see set downe by diuers Catholicke writers in print.
            
            
               
                  C The eighteenth Day.
               IN the Marches or borders of Scotland the Commemoration of S. Oswyn Confessour, who descended of a noble British parentage, * contēned the vanityes of this world, & 10. Trit. l. 3. c. 118. Arnol. Wion in Append. ad l. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ligni vitae became a monke in an ancient Monastery called Lesting (which S. Chad of Lichsield had sometymes founded) in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, where giuing himself to continuall fasting, prayer and other bodyly pennāce, famous for sanctity of life and miracles, he departed this transitory world, and reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threscore and ten, whose name and holinesse haue byn very memorable in former tymes in our iland of Great Britany, especially among the Northerne people, and borderers of Scotland.
               
            
            
               
               
                  D The ninteenth Day.
               AT Green-wich in Kent the passion of S. Elphege Bishop and Martyr, who being Sur. to. 3. bac die. Pol. Vir. l. 7. Mar. Rom. & Molā. in addit. ad Vsuard. Ioan. Capgr. in Catal. SS. Augl. Breu. Sarū & alij ōnes hac die. first Abbot of an ancient Monastery neere Bath in Somersetshire, was thence promoted to the Bishopricke of VVinchester, & after to Canterbury. And when the Danes came to inuade his Church of Canterbury, and demaunding of him three thousand markes of money, he like a good Pastour of his flocke, manfully resisted, refusing to giue the said summe from his Church. Wherfore after seauen moneths imprisonment, and diuers kinds of torments, he was finally stoned to death at the forsaid towne of Green-wich by the enemyes of truth, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand and twelue; whose body was first brought to London, and afterward translated to Canterbury. About this tyme also (as it is recorded) were slayne by the said Danes, for the Christian faith, six and thirty monkes of S. Augustines Monastery in Canterbury, and eight thousand of the lay people in other places of England.
            
            
               
               
                  E The twentith Day.
               AT Rome the deposition of Blessed Ceadwall King of the VVestsaxons and Confessour, who before he was yet a Christian himselfe, so much reuerenced the Christian Bishops, and Clergy of the Church of Vē. Beda l. 4. histo. c. 12. 15. et 16. & Epit. ad an. Dom. 688. west. an. 686. 687. 688. & 689. 
                  England, that when he had subdued the Ile of VVight, being Pagan, he gaue the fourth part therof to S. VVilfride (at that tyme expulsed from yorke) wherin he caused him to preach & plant the Christian faith; & afterwards wēt himselfe to Rome, & was there baptized by Pope Sergius, where within a few dayes, being yet in his Albes, he departed to our Lord on this day, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore and nyne. His body lieth buryed in the entrāce of S. Peters old Church at Rome, as the ancient Tables and Records therof do declare, wherof you may read S. Bede more at large in his history of England, where he setteth downe two Epitaphes engrauē ouer the forsaid Kings tombe, the one in verse, the other in prose in memory of so famous an act to all posterity. That in verse is this.
               
                  Culmen, opes, sobolem, pollentia regna, triumphos, Bed. l. 5. bist. c. 7. Exuuias, proceres, mania, castra, lares;
                  
                     
Quaeue Patrum virtus, & quae congesserat ipse Ceadual Armipotens, liquit amore Dei.
                  Vt Petrum, Sedemue Pe
                           •
                        ri Rex cerneret hospes, Cuius fonte meras sumeret Almus aquas,
                  Splendificumue iubar radianti carperet haustu, Et quo viuisicus sulgor vbiue sluit.
                  Percipiensue alacer rediui
                        •
                     ae pramia vitae. Barbaricam rabiem, nomen & inde suum.
                  Conuersus conuertit ouans, Petrumque vocari Sergius Antistes iussit, vt ipse Pater.
                  Fonte renascentis, quem Christi gratia purgans, Protinus ablutum vexit in arce Poli.
                  Mira fides Regis, Clementia maxima Christi, Cuius consilium nullus adire potest.
                  Sospes enim veniens supremo ex Orbe Britanni, Per varias Gentes, per freta, perue vias,
                  Vrbem Romuleam vidit, Templumue verendum Aspexit Petri, mystica dona gerens.
                  Candidus inter o
                        •
                     es Christi socialibus ibit, Corpore nam tumulum, mente superna tenet.
                  Commutasse magis Sceptrorum insignia credas, Quam Regnum Christi promeruisse vides.
               
               THE same day at Ersord in the higher Germany, the Translation of S. Adlar Bishop and Martyr, who being an Englishman by birth, and a monke in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, went ouer into Germany 
                  Petr. Crat
                        •
                     pol. de Epise. Germa
                     
                        •
                     iae. with S. Boniface to preach the Christian faith to that Pagan Nation, where being consecrated Bishop of Erford, he was, togeather

with S. Boniface, and fifty others, slayne by the barbarous people, at a towne called Trit. l. 3. c. 173. & l. 4. c. 183. de vir. Illustr. Wion. hac die. 
                  Dockum in Frizland, for the defence of Christian faith, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred fifty and foure. His body was afterward on this day translated to Ersord, and there is kept with great Veneration of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  F The one and twentith Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Anselme Bishop & Confessour, who borne Io. Trit. de vir. Illust. & seript. Eccles. Syxt. Senens. in biblioth. l. 4. Pol. Virg. l. 11 histor. Mart. Rom. & Molan. hac die. at Augusta in Burgundy, came thence into Normandy to the Abbey of Becke, and there became first a monke, then Prior, and lastly Abbot of the said Monastery. And being afterward promoted to the Sea of Canterbury, gouerned the same most laudably, vntill the tyme of King VVilliam Rufus, by whome he was banished the Realme, but againe restored by King Henry the first. He celebrated two famous Councells at London. And after a most holy life ioyned with great piety & learning, full of venerable old age, he ended his blessed dayes, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred & nyne, and sixteenth yeare of his Gouerment: and was buryed in his owne Cathedrall Church of Canterbury, at the head of his predecessour

                  Lanfranke, at whose body it hath pleased God to worke many miracles.
            
            
               
                  G The two and twentith Day.
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire the Commemoration * of S. Birstan Confessour and Bishop of that Sea, whose godly life and miracles, haue much illustrated our Iland of Matth. West. in hist. maiori ad an. Do. 944. & 965. 
                  Great Britany. There is a story recorded, how on a tyme after his death he appeared to S. Ethelwold his successor in the Sea of VVinchester, togeather with S. Birine and S. Swithin, all in great glory, & told him: That he who was made worthy of so great glory in heauen, had no reason to be de
                        •
                     rauded of his honour on earth. After which tyme S. Ethelwold caused his body to be kept with more veneration & reuerence then before. He died in great sanctity and holynesse of life, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred forty and foure, and was buryed at VVinchester.
               
            
            
               
                  A The three and twentith Day.
               THE Celebrity of S. George Martyr, whose feast, for that he is Patron of England, 
                  Mart. Rom. & ōnes alij 
                        •
                     ac die. hath alwayes byn kept holy, and serued with a double office throughout our whole

Realme in former Catholicke tymes, according to the vse of Sarum.
               
               THE same day at VVimborne in Dorsetshire the Passion of S. Etheldred King of the Sea. Chrō. an. Do. 872. Ingulph. de Croland in histor. Marian. Scot. & Io. Stous in Anna
                     
                        〈…〉
                     bus. 
                  VVestsaxons and Martyr, who in the Danish persecution, was slayne by the Tyrannicall Pagans, in hatred of Christian Religion, at an old Towne in the west part of England called VVhittingham, in the yeare of Christ, eight hundred threescore and twelue. His body was brought to the Monastery of VVimborne, and there entombed with great veneration, as is yet to be seene by his Epitaph, recorded by our English Historiographers, thus: In hoc loco requies
                        •
                     it corpus S. Etheldredi Regis VVestsaxonum Martyris, qui anno Domini octingentesimo septuagesimo secundo, vigesimo tertio die Aprilis per manus Dacorum Paganorum occubuit.
               
            
            
               
                  B The foure & twentith Day.
               AT Canterbury the depositiō of S. Mellitus Bishop & Confessour, who being sent Bed. l. 1. c. 20. & 30. & l. 2. c. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 7. Sigeb. in Chron. Mart. Rom. & alij omnes hac die. into England by S. Gregory the Great, with three other Copanions to assist S. Augustine in the haruest of soules, was shortly after his comming first created Bishop of London, and afterwards gouerned the Sea of Canterbury, where in all venerable sanctity of life and

miracles, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred twenty and foure: and was buryed neere to his predecessours S. Augustine and S. Laurence, in the North porch of his Cathedrall Church of Canterbury.
               
               THE same day in the Monastery of S. Bed. l. 3. c. 27. & l. 5. cap. 3. Marcell. in vita S. Simibert. Molan. & alij. 
                  Columbe in Scotland, the deposition of S. Egbert Abbot and Confessour, who descended of a noble British linnage, sent S. VVillebrord and his fellowes into Flanders and Germany, to preach the Christiā faith; as also gaue instructions to the monkes of Scotland, about the obseruation of the feast of Easter. And finally in great sanctity of life and miracles reposed happily in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred twenty and nyne.
               ALso the same day at S. I
                        •
                     es in Hūtingtonshire the inuētiō of the venerable body Matth. West. an. Dom. 1001. Andr. Leucāder & Gotzelin. in eius vita. of S. Iuo Bishop & Confessour, who comming out of Persia into Englād, there preached the Christian faith; & dying about the yeare of Christ, six hundred, was afterward on this day found out, and taken vp by Alwyn Earle of the Eastangles, and most honourably, and with great veneration entombed and placed in the Abbey of Ramsey, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand and one, and raigne of King Ethelred of England.
               
                  
MOreour the same day at Canterbury the Trāslatiō of S. VVilfrid Bishop of Yorke and Confessour, whose body in the second Danish persecution, was on this day translated Calend. sec. vsum Sarum. to Canterbury, from Rippon in Yorkeshire, where he was first buryed, by S. Odo Archbishop of that Sea, and there with great solomnity & veneration, placed in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fifty and seauen, wherat it pleased God to worke miracles. His principall festiuity is celebrated in our English Catholicke Church vpon the tweluth day of October.
               
            
            
               
                  C The fiue & twentith Day.
               AT VVancourt in the Territory of Arras in * Chron. Lamberti de Loos Monach. Camerac. ex antiq. monum. Eccles. Wācor
                     
                        •
                     ens. & Attrebatensis. the lower Germany, the Commemoration of S. Obodius Confessour and Eremite, who descended of a very noble parentage in Ireland, and contemning the vanityes of the world, in his youth, went ouer into the Low-Countreyes, & there lead a solitary and Eremiticall kind of life in the aforsaid Territory of Arras, to the great edification of the Inhabitants of that place; where finally in great sanctity and holines of life, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred; whose body is yet cōserued

in the said towne of VVancourt, with great honour and veneration of the people dwelling therabout, as Patron of that Village.
            
            
               
                  D The six and twentith Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of the Saints Modane and Midane Brothers and * Confessours, who borne in the same Kingdome, and there descended of a worthy family, contemned the vanityes of the world, Io. Les
                        •
                     . Epis. Rossensis l. 5. de gest. Scot. ex antiq. monum. Wion. in addit. ad l. 3 ligni vitae. and became Religious monkes of the venerable Order of S. Benedict in their owne Countrey, where in all kind of good learning, vertue, and sanctity of life, they finally, in a good old age, reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and foure. Their memory hath in former Catholicke tymes byn famous throughout Scotland and Ireland, where many aultars and Oratories haue byn dedicated in their honour, as the ancient Records of those Kingdomes do declare.
            
            
               
                  E The seauen & twentith Day.
               AT Heydentine-Monastery in the higher * 
                  Germany the deposition of S. Walburge Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to S. Richard
                  
King of England, who after the death of her Father, being sent for by S. Boniface Archbishop Io. Trit. de vir. Illustr. Ord. D. Bened. l. 3. c. 250. Anton. Demochar. l. 2. Sacrific. Missae. Arnold. Wion in Mart. hac die. Mart. Romanū die 1. Maij. of Mentz and her vncle, was by him made Abbesse of the forsaid Monastery of Heydentine, where in very great sactity & working of miracles she gaue vp her soule to her heauēly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, seauē hūdred threscore & sixteene Her body was afterward translated to Eyst, and there placed in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty (neere to the venerable body of S. VVillebald her owne brother;) out of which there distilleth vntill this day, a most sweet and pretious oyle, very soueraigne for many diseases. Ouer whose tombe is engrauen in marble this short Epitaph.

                     Filia Regis erat, sed egenam se faciebat,
                     Diues vt Christo, regnaret semper in ipso.
                  
The feast of this her Translation is celebrated in Germany vpon the first of May with great solemnity and deuotion of the people of Eyst. She was canonized for a Saint by Pope Adrian the second.
            
            
               
                  F The eight & twentith Day.
               AT VVerdt in Cleeueland the Commemoration * of S. Kortill Bishop and Martyr, who borne of a noble parentage in

                  Scotland, became first a monke in that Kingdome Albert. Cranz. Metrop. l. 1. ca. 26. Wion l. 2. ligni vitae in Catalog. Episcop. Werdēs. of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, in an anciēt Monastery there called Amarbaricke, wherof he being soone after made Abbot, went ouer into the Lower Germany and Saxony to propagate the Christian faith newly planted in those partes; and being there ordayned Bishop of VVerdt, was a little after in hatred of the same Christian faith, slayne by the incredulous and barbarous Saxons, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and twenty. His body was buryed at VVerdt aforsaid, and there kept in former tymes with great veneration.
            
            
               
                  G The nine & twentith Day.
               IN Northwales the Commemoration of S. Senan Confessour, who descended of an * ancient and noble British bloud, contemned the vanities of the world, and became Acta. S. Wenefr. Virginis in diu
                        〈…〉
                      Codic. & in. lectiō. eiusdem Sanctae, in Breuiar. Sar. an Eremite, leading a solitary and seuere kind of life in the North of VVales neere to the Teritorry of S. Wenefrides Father, by whome S. Wenefride her selfe was often visited, and after her death lay many yeares buried neere to his body, vntill her translation to Shrewsbury. He liued in great sanctity and fame of miracles in the yeare of Christ, six hundred and threescore, about which tyme

also he happily reposed in our Lord. His memory hath in former Catholicke tymes byn very famous in our Iland of Great-Britany, but especially among the Welch-men. And in Cornwall, there is yet a Village and Hauen of his name, commonly called S. Senans.
               
            
            
               
                  A The thirtith Day.
               AT London the deposition of S. Erconwald Confessour and Bishop of that Sea, Io. Trit. l. 4. de vir. Illust. Bed. l. 4. hist. c. 6. Mart. Rom. Molan. & omnes hac die. sonne to Offa King of the Eastsaxons, who being first Abbot of Chertsey in Surrey, which himselfe had built, was thence promoted to the Bishopricke of London, wherin he so excelled in all sanctity and holines of life, that it pleased God to manifest the same to posterity, by the wonderfull miracles wrought by him both aliue & dead. He deseased in the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and fiue, and was buryed at London. He founded another goodly Monastery of Nunnes at Barking in Essex, wherof he ordayned his owne sister Edilburge Abbesse. The feast of his Translation was wont to be kept in our Countrey in Catholicke tymes, with great solemnity, vpon

the fourteenth of Nouember (in which place we haue againe made mention of him) especia
                     •
                  ly in the Diocesse of London, where it was appointed holy-day, as the ancient Recordes of S. Paules Church do declare.
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF MAY.
            
               
                  B The first Day.
               
                  AT S. Assaphs in Flint-shire of VVales the deposition Arnol. Wion in Mart. Benedict. ex Chrō. Britan. Molan. in addit. ad Vsua. of S. Assaph Confessour and first Bishop of that Sea, who of a monke and disciple of S. Kentigerne Abbot of Glasco in Scotland, was ordayned Bishop of an old towne in Northwales named Elgoa, but afterwards called S. Assaphes of his owne name, where he excelled in all kind of vertue and singular holines of life vntill his dying day, which happened in a venerable old age, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred fourscore and sixteene.
               THe same day at Fossis in the Territory of Namures in the lower Germany, the

deposition of S. Vltan Abbot and Confessour, sonne to Philtan King of Ireland, & brother to Bed. l. 3. c. 19. Sigebert. in Chron. Vincent. in specul. & Wion. hac die. S. Furseus and S. Foillan, who going ouer into France and Flanders, built a Monastery or hospitall for the intertaynment of poore pilgrims at a place called Fossis in the forsaid Territory of Namures, which he obtayned of S. Gertrude Abbesse of Niuelle. And after infinite workes of piety and deuotion in that kind, he there finally went to our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and threescore, and was buryed at Fossis.
               
            
            
               
                  C The second Day.
               IN the lower Germany the festiuity of S. German Bishop and Martyr, who being He
                        •
                     iber. Rosweyd. Soc. Iesu in Tab. fast. SS. hac die. an Englishman by birth, went ouer into the low Countreyes to preach the faith of Christ, where finally for his reward, he receyued a Crowne of Martyrdome. His life is to be read at large in wrytten hād, extant in a Monastery of the Low-Countreyes, as testifieth a Reuerend Priest of the Society of Iesus, whose festiuity he appointeth on this day, in his booke intituled, Fasti Sanctorum &c.
               
               THE same day at Padstow in Corn-wall the Commemoration of S. Piran Confessour, * who borne in Ireland of a Kings bloud,

for the loue of God contemned the world, and became an 
                     •••
                  mite in that Kingdome, leading (for many yeares) a very str
                     •
                  ct and seuere kind of life, in so much that it pleased Chron. Hyber
                        •
                     . & 
                        •
                     ntiqn
                        •
                     om
                        •
                     m. Lee
                        ••
                     s. T
                        ••
                     sco. God to worke by him many miracles. Among which, one is recorded, that with the flesh of three kyne, he sus
                     •
                  ayned ten armyes of nē for eight daye, as also raysed diuers dead men to life. And after all this he came ouer into England, and liued at Padslow in Corn-wall, where in great sanctity of life, he finally reposed in our Lord, and where in like manner his body hath byn kept with great solemnity and veneration, in a Chappell of the forsaid towne o Padslow, which Chappell is there to be seene vntill this day.
            
            
               
                  D The third Day.
               AT Mailros in the Kingdome of Northumberland, the deposition of S. Wal
                        •
                     er 
                  Io. Mel
                        •
                     . in ad li
                        •
                     . ad vst 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •
                     est. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 6. de
                        ••
                     st. Scot. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Da
                        •
                     idem. Regem. Abbot and Confessour, sonne to Dauid King of Scotland, who forsaking the dignities and honours of the world, and refusing the Archbishopricke and Metropolitan Sea of S Andrewes in the same Kingdome, became a monke and afterwards Abbot of the goodly Monastery of Mail
                        •
                     os, situated in the Marches of Sco
                        •
                     land, in the Kingdome of the Northumbers,
                  
where in very great sanctity of life and working of miracles, he ended his blessed da
                     •
                  es, about the yeare of Chri
                     ••
                  , one thousand and one hundred. His memory is yet famous throughout the whole Realme of Sco
                        •
                     land, where many Chappells and altars haue in Catholicke tymes byn dedicated in his honour, but now quite destroyed and defaced by the enemyes of Gods truth, to the great lamentation of the Christian world.
            
            
               
                  E The fourth Day.
               AT Bardney in Lincolnshire the Commemoratiō 
                  * of Blessed Ethelred Con
                     •
                  essour, Bed. l 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •
                     ist. 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     . 20. & in Epito ad An. Do. 704. Pol. Vi
                        •
                     . l. 4. Mat. W
                        •
                     st. an. 692. et 705. and King of the Mercians (or middle Englishmen) who after he had ruled that Kingdome most laudably for thirty whole yeares togeather, left the same to Cocured his Nephew, contemned the world, and tooke the habit of a monke in the Monastery of Bardney of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, and afterward became Abbot of the same p
                     •
                  ace, where he so greatly excelied in all kind of vertue and sanctity of life, that his name was very famous in those dayes throughout England. He died about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and ten, and was buryed in in the same Monastery.
            
            
               
               
                  F The fifth Day.
               AT Shepton in Warwickshire the Commemoration * of S. Algi
                        •
                     e Queene, mother to King Edgar of blessed memory and Monarch of England, who so greatly excelled in Matth. West. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Do. 943. & 955. & 974. piety, deuotion, and other eminent vertues whilst she liued, that her body in the yeare of Christ, nyne hūdred threescore and fourteene (which was some thirty yeares after her death) being miraculously reueyled at Shepton, it pleased God to worke many miracles therat, in testimony of her holinesse, & increase of deuotion in our Iland of Great Britany.
               
               THE same day in Ireland the Commemoration * of S. Scandalâus mōke & Confessour, disciple to S. Columbe the Great of that He
                        •
                     t. Boet. de gest. Sco. & Les
                        •
                     . ibid. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 4. histor. & alij. Nation, who comming ouer into Scotland with a dozen other Companions in company of the forsaid S. Columbe, for the Conuersion of the Pic
                        •
                     es, who then inhabited that Kingdome, was famous for sanctity and holines of life, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred and four score, about which tyme also he reposed in our Lord.
            
            
               
               
                  G The sixt Day.
               AT Lindis
                        •
                     erne in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, the deposition of S. Edbert Confessour and Bishop of that Sea, who Vē. Beda. l. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 29. et in vita S. Cuthb. Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij omnes hac die. taking vp the venerable body of S. Cuthbert eleuen yeares after his death, and finding it altogeather vncorrupt, put the same into a new coffin, and said: Happy were that man, who might lye in the old; and within a few dayes after, full of sanctity and holines of life, he being called out of this world, was himselfe layd therin, according to his wish. At whose body it pleased God to worke many miracles in token of the innocency of his life. This happened in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore and eighteene.
               THE same day at Landaffa in Clamorganshire, 
                  Matth. west. an. 507. Gauf
                        •
                     . Monum. l. 9. c. 4. et 13. 
                        •
                     ist. vet. Brit. Humfr L
                        〈…〉
                     ide i
                        〈…〉
                     ag. des
                        •
                     ript. Britan. the Translation of S. Dubritius Bishop and Confessour, who being somtime Archbishop of Carleon vpon Vske and Metropolitan of the Britans, resigned the said Sea to S. Dauid, & became an Eremite, leading a very strict & seuere kind of life in the moū
                  taynes of VVales, vntill his dying day; which happened about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred and twenty. His body was first buryed in the Iland of Bardsey, & afterward

on this day translated to Landa
                        ••
                     a, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred and twenty.
            
            
               
                  A The seauenth Day.
               AT Beuerl
                        ••
                     
                   in Yorkeshire the festiuity of S. 
                     
                        •
                     oh
                        •
                     
                   Bishop and Confessour, commonly called 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Iohn of Beuerley, who after he had gouerned the Sea of Yorke in great sanctity Be
                        〈…〉
                     . 5. c. 2▪ 3. 4. & 6. 
                        〈…〉
                     . de vi
                        •
                     . I
                        〈…〉
                     r. 
                        〈…〉
                     . s
                        •
                     c. vs
                        •
                      S
                        •
                     r. M
                        〈…〉
                     t. R
                        〈…〉
                     . M
                        ••
                     ā. & alij. and holines of life, for the space of three and thirty yeares, famous for miracles, he ended his venerable old dayes, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred twenty and one. His body was first buryed at Yorke, but afterward with great honour and solemnity translated to Beuerl
                        •
                     y, by Bishop Alred his successour, and there interred in the Monastery which himselfe had built, where with great veneration the same was preserued euen vntill our dayes, and visited of many, especially for the great miracles that it hath pleased God to worke therat by his merits. The forsaid Monastery of Beuerley, was afterward, by licence of the Pope, made a Sanctuary, in the raigne of King Registr. E
                        〈…〉
                     e 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Ethelstane, who placed a certaine Chayre of stone in the Church, neere vnto S. Io
                        〈…〉
                     s body, vpon which, this ins
                     •
                  ription was engrauen: Hae
                        •
                      sedes lapidea di
                        〈…〉
                     ur Freed-stoole,

                  id est, Pacis Cathedra; ad quam reus sugiendo perue
                        •
                     iens, o
                        〈…〉
                     odam 
                        ••
                     be
                        •
                      securitate. This festiuall day of his was afterward in a Councell of Bishops held at London in the yeare 1416. appointed to be kept holy-day in his memory throughout England.
               
            
            
               
                  B The eight Day.
               AT Mus
                        ••
                     i
                        •
                     ht in the Territory of Liege, the 
                     •••
                  tiu
                     •
                  ty of S. Wyre Cōfessour, d
                     •
                  sc
                     •
                  ded of a noble bloud in Scotland, who being ordayned Mar
                        •
                     . in vita S. Simiberti apud S
                        •
                     ri
                        •
                     m. Mart. Rom. Molā. in addit. ad Vsuar. et in Indic. SS. Belgij Bishop of the Deiri, in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, went ouer into the lower Germany, where he became Cōfessor to Duke Pepin of Brabant, labouring incessantly in teaching and preaching the Christian faith. And finally in great sanctity and venerable old yeares, he departed this life, at the Monastery of S. Odilia neere Ruremond, vpon the Riuer of Mosa, about the yeare of Christ seauen hundred thirty and one. His body was translated afterward to Maestricht, and there with great veneration of the Inhabitants is kept in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty.
            
            
               
               
                  C The ninth Day.
               AT Vindecine among the Zwitzers in the higher Germany the deposition of S. Beatus Confessour and Apostle of Zuizerland, who being sonne to a nobleman of Britany, 
                  B. Rhena. in 
                        •
                     ist. German. l. 3. Eys
                        ••
                     . Ce
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . part. 5. Mart. Rom. Vsuard. Annales Heluet. wēt to Rome in the primitiue Church, partly on pilgrimage, & partly to be better instructed in the Christian faith. And as he returned backe, he began to preach to the Zwitzzers in Heluetia, and conuerted many of them to the saith of Christ, wherby he became their first Apostle. He died there in an Oratory which himselfe had built, where also his body was buryed, and many miracles wrought therat, about the yeare of Christ, one hundred and eleuen, and was the first Saint of our Nation we read of, that died out of Britany.
               
            
            
               
                  D The tenth Day.
               AT Durham in the Bishopricke the Translation of the venerable Body of S. Bede 
                  
                     •
                  ri
                     •
                   and Confessour, by whose wrytings the Christian world hath byn much illustrated. When he was but seauen yeares old, he was committed for his education

to S. Benedict, Abbot of the Monastery of Matth. West. an. 737. Author Cōtin. eius hist. l. 1. cap. 7. Trit. de vir. Illust. Molan. hac die. Arnol. Wion l. 5. ligni vit. cap. 101. ex antiq. monum. Eccles. Dunelmens. 
                  VVyremund, and afterward became a mōke in the same place, seruing God therin all the dayes of his life, as himselfe testifieth in the end of his fifth booke of the history of England. And being at last admonished of his death, by an Angell, when the tyme drew neere, which was on the feast of our Sauiours Ascension, kneeling downe vpon the pauement of his Cell, and singing, Gloria patri, & silio, & spiritui sancto &c. haue vp the ghost, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred threscore and six. His body was afterward on this day translated to Durham, and there with great veneration placed in the Tombe togeather with S. Cuthbert, with this old inscription or Epitaph:
               
                  Beda Dei famulus, Monachorum nobile sydus,
                  Finibus è terrae profuit Ecclesiae.
                  Soles iste Patrum scrutando per omnia sensum,
                  Eloquio viguit, plurima composuit.
                  Annos in hac vita ter duxit vitae triginta,
                  Presbyter officio, vtilis ingenio.
                  Iunij septenis viduatus carne Kalendis
                  Angligena, Angelicam commeruit patriam.
               
               His principall festiuity is kept in our English Catholicke Church vpon the 27. of this moneth according to the vse of Sarum, on which day he died.
            
            
               
               
                  E The eleuenth Day.
               IN the Marches of VVales the passion of S. Fremund King and Martyr, sonne to Ossa King o
                     •
                   the Mercians (of Middle 
                     〈…〉
                  glishmen) Ioan. Cap
                        ••
                     r. in Catal. S
                        •
                     . Britan. Molā. in addit. a
                        •
                      Vsuar. Matth. Pa
                        •
                     is. dei
                        ••
                      Canonizat. an. Do. 1257. who after a y
                     •
                  are and a halfe, that he had ruled his Kingdome, left the same, and for the loue of Christ became an I remite in the Marches of VVales, in a l
                     •
                  ttle Iland there, called in the Brit
                     •
                  sh tongue 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      sage, where togeather with two vertuous priests he liued a very holy and exemplar kind of life, vntill King Os
                        ••
                     ay, that was fallen from the Christian saith, in hatred therof, secretly killed him, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hūdred threescore & nyne. He was afterward canonized for a Saint in the yeare, one thousand two hundred fifty and seauen, and raigne of King Henry the third of England; whose memory in Catholicke tymes, hath byn very famous in our Iland, especially among the ancient Britans of North-VVales.
               
            
            
               
                  F The tweluth Day.
               AT Lincolne the deposition of S. Remigius Confessour and Bishop of that Sea, fa
                  
                     •
                  ou
                     •
                  
                  
for sanctity of life and learning. He 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   world in the yeare of Christ, 
                     〈◊〉
                   thousand fourscore and eleuen: whose 
                     〈◊〉
                   being on this day interred with great 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and veneration, in his Cathe
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Church of Lincoine, it pleased God in Matth. West. an. Do. 1091. Pol. Vir. l. 10. histor. Mat P r. an. 1253. & 1255. Sto. in Annal. in vita Guliel. primi an. 1086. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ony of his holynes to worke wonderous signes 
                     •
                  nerat, especially in the raigne of King Henry the third, when as all England went on pilgrimage thither, for the great miracles that were thē dayly wrought. He built two famous Monasteryes by the help of King VVilliam the Cōquerour, the one at Battaile in Sussex, the other at Cane in Normandy, which later he consecrated to S. Stephen the Protomartyr. And was the first that trāslated the Bishopricke of Dorchester to Lincolne, where he built a goodly Cathedrall Church, and adorned the same (saith Stow) with Clarkes that were approued both in learning and manners.
            
            
               
                  G The thirteenth Day.
               AT the Monastery of Ramsey in the Ile * of Ely, in the Prouince of the Eastangies, the Commemoration of S. Merwyne Virgin, who being a womā of great sanctimony & holinesse of life, was by King Edgar of blessed memory, constituted Abbesse of a new

Monastery, which by the help of Alwyn Earle of the Eastangles, S. Oswald Bishop of Yorke 
                  Matth. West. in hist. maiori ad An. Do. 967. & de eius Electione ibid. had newly 
                     •
                  ounded at Ramsey, where in all vertuous conuersation and exemplar good li
                     •
                  e, especially in the obseruation of Monasticall discipline, full of miracles, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred and fourscore, where her body was also interred, and kept for a long tyme with great veneration. This forsaid Abbey of Ramsey is different from another of the same name, which in tymes past hath byn also very famous in our Iland, being situated in Wiltshire, where vntill this day the ruines therof are remayning to be seene.
            
            
               
                  A The fourteenth Day.
               AT Pollesworth in VVarwickshire the Commemoration of S. Edith Virgin, and * sister to holy King Edgar of blessed memory, Acta. S. Edithae iunior is apud Sur. to. 5. die 16. Sept. Matth. West. in hist. &c. who being a woman of rare vertue, was ordayned Abbesse of a Monastery at the forsaid place of Pollesworth, which S. Modwene of Ireland had built with the goods of her owne inheritance; where in all kind of sanctimony of life, and godly conuersation, full of miracles, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred & fourscore.

This woman is different from another S. Edith of the same name, whose festiuall dayes are celebrated vpon the sixteenth of September, and third of Nouember, and was daughter to the forsaid Edgar, and Abbesse of VVilton, commonly called by the name of Edith the yonger, and Neece to this, of whome here we haue made mention.
            
            
               
                  B The fifteenth Day.
               AT Ghele in Brabant the festiuity of S. Dympna Virgin and Martyr, daughter Sur. to. 3. de vit. SS. 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ie. Molā. in adait. ad Vsuar. et in Indic. SS. Belgij Rob. B
                        •
                     ckl. in eius vita. Mart. Rom. & alij o
                        〈…〉
                     es. to a pagan King of Ireland, who being secretly instructed in the Christian faith by S. Gereberne a Priest of her owne Nation, after the death of her mother the Queene, her Father would haue married her, and made her his wife: which thing the holy Virgin abhorring, stole priuily away into the lower Germany, whither her Father following her, and finding her out, cut of her head, with his owne hands, togeather with the head of S. Gereberne in hatred of Christian Religion, about the yeare of Christ, 600. Her body is honourably reconded at Ghele, and there is kept with great veneration, wherat it hath pleased God to shew infinite miracles, in signe of her innocency, especially in casting out Diuells, as

well to his owne glory, as increase of deuotion in the Christian world, & especially in the low Countreys. S. Gereberns body was interred at the towne of Santen vpon the riuer of Rhene, and there has Reliques were kept, whiles that place was Catholicke, with great veneration of the dwellers therabout.
            
            
               
                  C The sixteenth Day.
               AT Burdeaux in Gascoyne of France the deposition of S. Symon Confessour, an Englishman by birth, and Generall of the Spec
                        〈…〉
                     n 
                        •
                     ratr. Carmelit. Io. Molā. in addit. ad vsuar. hac die. Religious men called Carmelites, who as he prayed to the blessed Virgin, she appeared with a troupe of Angells, holding vp the Scapulare or Coole of his Order in her hāds, and said: That whosoeuer died in that habit should be saued. He desceased at Burdeaux in the visitation of his Generallship, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand, fifty and two, where his body is yet kept with great veneration, God hauing, through his merits, adorned the same with many miracles.
               THE same day at the towne of S. Albans in Hartsordshire, the Translation of S. Alban Lord of V
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     me, knight of the Bath, high Steward of the Britans, and the first Martyr that suffered for Christ in our Hand.

Whose body was on this day by Offa King of the Mercians, in the yeare of Christ 794. Matth. West. an. 794. & 796. Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Ioan. Lidgate Monac. Buriēsis in eius vita. vid. Respons. ad D. Cooke an. 1606. edi▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 6. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 70. taken vp and translated to a Church, that he had newly built in his honour, without the towne of S. Albans. In which place also he founded a goodly Monastery, & endowed it with great lands and possessions. This King Offa went after in person to Rome, and procured S. Albans Canonization, and priuiledges for the said Monastery, of Pope Adrian the first: As also gaue to the Sea of Rome a certaine tribute of his Kingdome, gathering yearly, of euery family of his dominions, certayne money for the same, commonly called Peter-pence, which tribute continued in our Iland vntill King Henry the 8. when first the breach began with the sea Apostolicke.
               THE same day in like manner in Scotland 
                  Rom. Mart. Molan. & alij omnes hac die. the deposition of S. Brandan Abbot and Confessour, whose life and miracles haue byn famous in tymes past in our Iland of Great-Britany. He flourished in the yeare of Christ 570. about which tyme also he died.
            
            
               
                  D The seauenteenth Day.
               AT Elnona in the higher Germany the Translation of the venerable bodyes of

                  Three of t
                        •
                     e eleuen thousand Virgins, martyred with S. Vrsula, who be
                     〈…〉
                  g of the British Nation, suffered death for defence of their v
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ginity and Christian Religion, at Cullen in Io. Molā. in ad
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     d vsuar. Regist. Ecclesi
                        •
                      Elnonēs. 
                  Germany, with the forsaid S. V
                        •
                     sula, and her companions, about the yeare of Christ, three hundred fourscore and three. From whence on this day, three of their said glorious bodies were translated to Elnona, and there very honourably and with great veneration reconded; wherat it hath pleased God to worke miracles, as well for the increase of deuotion in the people, as also for confirmation of Catholicke Religion in those partes.
            
            
               
                  E The eighteenth Day.
               AT Yorke the deposition of S. Sewall Confessour and Archbishop of the Matth. Pa
                        •
                     is. in 
                        •
                     ist. Ang. an. 1255. 1256. 1257 & 1258. Catal. Episco. Eboracēs. same Sea, sometyme scholler in Oxford to S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, whose integrity and innoc
                     •
                  cy of life, togeather with his admirable patience in aduersity, was so acceptable to God, that it pleased his diuine Maiesty in signe therof, to worke miracles by him both aliue and dead: and among other, it is recorded, that lying on his death-bed, he turned water into wyne, by only blessing it. He ended his venerable old

dayes; after much sorrow and tribulation, in great sanctity and holinesse of life, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and eight, vpon the day of our Blessed Sauiours Ascension, deseruing to receyue the Crowne of his labours, on the same day, that Christ our Sauiour, after his bitter passion heere on earth for the Redemption of mankind, entred into the glory of his eternall Father. His body was buryed in hisowne Cathedrall Church of Yorke, and there kept and visited with great veneration of the Northerne people, euen vntill the tyme of King Henry the 8. for the Miracles that had byn wrought therat.
            
            
               
                  F The ninteenth Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Dunstan 
                  S
                        〈…〉
                     r. to. 2. hac die. Gul. Ma
                        〈…〉
                     s. in hist. Angl. Petr. in Catal. l. 8 Pol. Vir. l. 7. Mar
                        •
                     . Rom. Molā. & alii. Bishop and Confessour, who being first Abbot of the ancient and goodly Monastery of Glastenbury in Somersetshire, was thence promoted to the Bishopricke of VVorcester, and after to London, and 
                     •
                  ast of all to Canterbury: whose godly workes of piety, togeather with the multitude of his miracles, are manifest to the Christiā world. He d
                     •
                  ed in the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourscore and eight, and was buried at Canterbury, where his body was wont, in Catholicke

tymes, to be kept with great veneration of all England, vntill these later dayes of schismes and heresyes in our Kingdome.
               THE same day at Towers in France the deposition of S. Al
                        •
                     uine, Abbot and Confessour, who borne in Yorkeshire, and somtyme School-maister of Yorke, went ouer into France, and became Mai
                     ••
                  er to the Emperour Trit. de Script. E
                        ••
                     l. l. 2. Vincent. in specul. lib. 23. Gazelin. M
                        •
                     lā. & Wion hac die. in s
                        •
                     is Martyrologijs. 
                  Charles the Great, by whose help he founded the Vniuersity of Paris, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and foure, hauing himselfe byn scholler to our famous S. Bede in his youth. His notable labours and workes in Gods Church are yet memorable throughout the Christian world. He died at Towers in France about the yeare of Christ 813. & was the first that composed the Masse & Office of the blessed Trinity, and of S. Stephen the Protomartyr, which being afterward approued by our Mother the holy Catholicke Church, is the same that now is vsually said in the Romā Missal & Breuiary.
            
            
               
                  G The twentith Day.
               AT Here
                        •
                     ord the festiuity of S. Ethelbert King of the Eastangles and Martyr, who comming into Mercia to visit King Ossa, and to treate of a Marriage with his daughter, was through the malice of wicked Quendred
                  
wife to Ossa, miserably slayne at a town now called Sutton-wallis, foure miles distant from West. an. 793. Pol. Vir. lib. 4. Cōtin. Vē. Bed. l. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •
                     1, Molā. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Capgr. in Catal. SS. Britan. Girald. Cambr. & alij. 
                  Here
                        •
                     ord, partly for ambition, therby to inioy his Kingdome, and partly also for that he was a Christian. His body being presently brought to Heresord, and there interred, it pleased God forth with to shew the innocēcy of his cause, by the wonderfull miracles wrought therat; Ouer which, King Kenulphus afterward erected a goodly Church in his honour, placing there a Bishops Sea, and which is now the Cathedrall Church of that Citty. He suffered in the yeare of Christ 793.
            
            
               
                  A The one and twentith Day.
               AT Fin
                        •
                     hall among the Northumbers the Matth. West & Paris. an. 1170. Guliel. Ne
                        •
                     brig. l. 2. cap. 20. Item in vita S. Roberti Abbat. Mart. Rom. & alij. deposition of S. Godricke Eremite, who after he had lead a solitary life, for threescore yeares togeather, and twice on pilgrimage for deuotiō visited our Sauiours Sepulcher at Hierusalem, and the blessed Apostles bodyes at Rome, full of great sanctity of life & veneble old age, togeather with innumerable miracles, he finally reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred & seauenty. His body was buryed at Fin
                        •
                     hall in an Oratory which himselfe had built, wherat, euen vntill the dayes of Queene

                  Elizabeth, many miracles were wrought.
               THE same day at Constantinople the deposition of Blessed Constantine the Great, who borne in our 
                     ••
                  and og Great Britany, according to ancient Traditions; was the first Christian Emperour, that restored peace M
                        〈…〉
                     nal. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                      die. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . in ad li
                        •
                     . ad Vsuard. to the Church of God. He is by the Greekes canonized for a Saint, and his festiuity appointed on this day: among whome also many goodly Churches and altars, haue in former ages, byn dedicated in his honour. And in North wales of our Iland, there is yet remayning to be seene a fayre Church, 
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  
                  ted and dedicated in his name.
            
            
               
                  B The two and twentith Day.
               AT VVindesore the deposition of holy K. Henry, the sixt of that name, of England, 
                  Pol. Viz. l. 24. hist. A
                        •
                     gl. Io. Sto in A
                        〈…〉
                     l. A
                        •
                     gl. in Ed
                        〈…〉
                     . 4. Reg
                        〈…〉
                     . E
                        〈…〉
                     . W
                        ••
                     des. who being a most vertuous and innocent Prince, was wrongfully deposed by King Edward the 4. & cast into the tower of London, where a little after he was most barbarously slayne by Richard Duke of Glocester, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand foure hundred threescore and eleuen. His body was first buryed in the Monastery of Cher
                        •
                     sey, where presently it began to doe miracles, which being s
                     •
                  ene, it was with great solemnity and veneration translated to VVindesore,
                  
and there honourably interred in the Chappell of S. Gregory, wherat also it pleased God, in wittnesse of his innocent life, to worke many miracles. Moreouer it is recorded, that his Veluet 
                        •
                     at which he vsed to weare, being put on mens heads, that were troubled with the head-ake, were presently cured. He builded the famous schoole of Eaton, and was the founder of the Kings Colledg in Cambridge. King Henry the seauenth dealt which Pope Iulius the second about his Canonization, but by reason of both their deaths, the same was broken of.
            
            
               
                  C The three and twentith Day.
               AT Rochester in Kent the deposition of S. VVilliam Martyr, who borne in the Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Ang. Thom. Mo
                        〈…〉
                     m. in 
                        〈◊〉
                      vita. Molan. in ad
                        •
                     it. ad vsuar. towne of Perth in Scotland, and taking his pilgrimage towards Hierusale on foote through England, was by his owne seruant slaine in the high way, a little frō the aforsaid Citty of Rochester; whose body being brought to the towne, it pleased God forthwith to worke many miracles therat in signe of his innocency, where the same was after interred, and kept with great veneration in the Cathedrall Church of S. Andrew, in the same Citty, vntill these our dayes. The story of his martyrdōe & miracles, is writtē at large by

                  Thomas Monmouth, who liued about the yeare of Christ, one thousand, one hundred and threescore.
            
            
               
                  D The foure & twentith Day.
               AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the Commemoration of holy King Edgar Confessour, * and first Monarch of England, whose glorious actes in Gods Church are famous to all posterity. He builded and reedified seauen and fourty Monasteryes, that had byn destroyed by the incursions of other barbarous Nations, and endowed them with great maintenance; as also caused, by Pol. Vir. l. 6 histo. Angl. Matth. West. an. 975. et 1052. Vincent. in specul. l. 25. c. 81. Petr. in Catal. l. 11. c. 65. et alij. wion l. 4. ligni vitae. his intercession to the Sea Apostolicke, all the Clergy of his Realme to be reformed. In the houre of his Natiuity, it is recorded, that S. Dunstan heard a voyce of Angells singing, Pax Anglorum Eccles
                        •
                     ae, &c. Peace to the Church of England. He died in all sanctity and holinesse of life, in the yeare of Christ, nyne hūdred threescore and fifteene: whose body was with all solemnity and veneration, honourably interred at Glastenbury; which being takē vp in the yeare, one thousand fifty and two (almost fourscore yeares after his death by Aldar Abbot of that place, was found whole and vncorrupt, & being cut, fresh bloud issued therout, as if he had

byn newly dead; wherupon he was put into a costly shrine of siluer, which himselfe had somtime giuen to that Church, and placed vpon the high altar, togeather with the head of S. Apollinaris, and the reliques of S. Vincent Martyrs, wherat miracles are recorded to haue byn wrought: And so continued there vntill the tyme of King Henry the eight, and decay of that Monastery.
            
            
               
                  E The fiue & twentith Day.
               AT Sherborne in Dorcetshire the deposition Bed. l. 4. hist. c. 19. west. an. 794. Sur. in eius vita to. 3. Guliel. Mabnes. de Pont. Angl. in Adelmo. Mart. Rom. & alij. of S. Adelme Bishop and Confessour, nephew to Inas King of the Westsaxons, who trauayling into France in his youth, after his returne, became first a monke of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict at Malmesbury, and afterward being made Abbot of that Monastery, went to Rome in company of King Ceadwall, and was there created Bishop of Sherborne in Dorcetshire by Pope Sergius, and sent backe to his bishopricke, where after great labours and many notable bookes wrytten for the instruction of men in Christian Religion, but especially one of Virginity, which he dedicated to the Nunnes of Barkensteed, and wherby many were moued to that holy kind of Religious life, he finally reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of

Christ, seauen hundred and nyne. His body was buryed at Sherborne first, but afterward remooued to Maimesbury, where the same was wont to be kept in Catholicke tymes with great veneration.
            
            
               
                  F The six and twentith Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Augustine Confessour and first Bishop of that Sea, who being sent from Rome by S. Gregory 
                  Greg. l. 5. Registr. Epist. 53. Red. l. 1. 
                        ••
                     p. 23. & deinceps Breuiar. six. vsum Sarum. the Great to preach the Christian saith to the English nation, first conuerted King Ethelbert of Kent, and afterward by himselfe and others, the whole Nation, and so became our Apostle. He died in the yeare of Christ, six hundred, and was buryed at Canterbury, where his feast was wont to be kept ho
                     •
                  yday with great solemnity, and so likewise throughout the whole Diocesse.
               THE same day at Gl
                        •
                     stenbury in Somersetshire the festiuity of the Saints Fugatius 
                  Pont. Vi
                        •
                     un. Gauf Monum. in hist. Britan. Pol. Vir. Matth. West. Cestrens. & alij. and Damianus Confessours, who being sent into Britany by S. Eleutherius Pope (whose 
                     •
                  east is also this day celebrated) did baptize K. Lucius with the greatest part of his Kingdome, as also did institute three Archbishoprickes (to wit London, Yorke, and Carleon in VVales) and twenty eight Bishoprickes in place of so many Flaminies, teaching and

instructing the people in all Christian vertues and cerimonyes necessary for that new planted Catholicke Church. And when they had thus laboured for many yeares, sull of most venerable old age, and sanctity of life, they both ended their blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, one hundred fourscore and eleuen, and are said to haue byn buryed at Gl
                        •
                     stenbury.
               
            
            
               
                  G The seauen & twentith Day.
               AT Geruaux in Yorkshire the deposition of S. Bede Priest, who being a monke of Matth. West. an. 714. Con
                        •
                     in. eius bist. l. 1. cap. 7. & 8. Bar. in annot. ad Mart. Rom. bac die. Trit. devir. Illustr. l. 3. c. 155. et l. 4. c. 21. the Order of S. Benedict in the Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul, vpon the riuer banke of VVyre, in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, so illustrated Gods Church by his wrytings, that not only in his life tyme, but euer synce he hath for the same byn called by the name of Venerable. He departed this world in great sanctity and holinesse of life about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred threescore & six, and was buryed at Geruaux in the Monastery there, with this Epitaph.
               
                  Presbyter hic Beda requieseit carne sepultus;
                  Dona Christe animam in caelis gaudere per aeuum.
                  Daue i i sophia debriari fonte, cui iam
                  Suspirauit orans intento semper amore.
               
               
                  
But his body being afterward translated to Durham, and placed in the tombe togeather with S. Cuthbert, was there kept with great reuerence, euen vntill the dayes of the late Queene Elizabeth. There is a very ancient Table hanging in the new Church of S. Peter at Rome, which my sel
                     •
                  e haue seene and read, wherin are registred these words: In medio Ecclesiae ante portā, quae dicitur Argentea, sub lapide circulari, sepultum est corpus Venerabilis Bedae Presbyteri &c. But it is not (I suppose) to be vnderstood of this our S. Bede of England, (as many do) but rather of another of the same name, though not so anciēt as he, who was a Mōke also of S. Benedictes Order, & very famous for learning, in the tyme of Charles 
                  Tabul
                        •
                     e Canobij S. Benig. prope Genuam. the Great, with whome he liued; and after his death (which was in the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and ninteene) his body shining with miracles, was for a tyme translated to the Monassery of S. Benignus, neere Genua in Italy, and perhaps afterwards to Rome. But whosoeuer this was, it is not any way manifest, that our S. Bede was euer at Rome, eyther aliue or dead.
            
            
               
                  A The eight & twentith Day.
               AT Luxouiū
                   in France the Commemoration * of S. Ionas Abbot and Confessour,

who borne in Scotland of a noble parentage, and contemning the world in the flower of his youth, went ouer into France and thence into Lombardy to S. Columbane the Great, where he became a monke of the venerable Order of S. Benedict, and S. Columbanes 
                  Arnol. Wion l. 2. ligni vitae de Script. ord. Diui Benedict. Molan. passim in addit. ad vsuar. disciple, and was afterward made Abbot of Luxouium, where in all kind of good learning, sanctity of life, and other vertues, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and thirty. He wrote the liues of S. Columbane aforsaid, S. Eustachius and S. Bertulph Abbots, which are to be seene at large in Surius, though being annexed to the third Tome of S. Bedes workes, are, by errour, attributed vnto him.
            
            
               
                  B The nine & twentith Day.
               ATS. Buriens in Corn-wall, the Commemoration * of S. Burien Virgin, who being an Irish-woman of great nobility by Ex antiq. Monum. Cornu. et Registr. eiusdem Eccl. ibid. birth, came ouer into England and liued a most vertuous and godly life for many yeares in Corn wall, where in very great sanctimony and working of Miracles, she finally gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse. Her memory is very famous, euen vntill this day in our Ilād of Great Britany, especially among the Cornish-men, where

there is a towne and port of her name in the Cape or Promont of Cornwall, commonly called S. Buriens: where also in tymes past hath byn a famous Church erected in her honour.
            
            
               
                  C The thirtith Day.
               AT Colchester in Essex the Commemoration of S. Hieu Virgin, who borne of o
                     •
                   a noble bloud in the Kingdome of the * 
                  Northumbers, & building there a goodly Monastery called Heorth
                        •
                     u (of which the holy Virgin Hilda was first Abbesse) is said to De ea vid. ven. Be
                        •
                     . l. 4. c. 23. degest. Angl. Hulus meminit Arnol
                        •
                     . Wion in Append. ad l. 3. lig. vita. haue byn the first woman in that Kingdome, that tooke vpon her the vow and habit of a Nunne, being veyled and consecrated therunto by S. Aidan Bishop of Lindisferne. And a
                     •
                  terward cōming into the Prouince of the Fastangles, to the Citty called Calcaria (and now Colchester) in all sanctimony and holines of life, she finally there ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and seauen.
            
            
               
                  D The one & thirtith Day.
               AT Eucsham in VVorcester-shire the festiuity of S. VVolstan, Nephew to two

Kinges of Mercia, who being slaine in hatred of Christian Religion by one of his owne Kinsmen, a great light from heauen was seene for thirty dayes togeather Matth. West. an. 849. I
                        •
                     . Capg. in Catal. SS. Britā. Author Contin. hist. Ven. Bed. l. 2. cap. 31. to descend and remayne ouer the place, where he lay killed. By this miraculous token, his body being found out, was first buryed in the Monastery of Rependowne (now called Ripon) in Yorkeshire: and after when many miracles were wrought therat, it was translated to the Abbey of Euesham (which holy S. Egwyn Bishop of Worcester had founded not many yeares before) and there with great solemnity and veneratiō placed in the Church of that Monastery wherat it pleased God, in testimony of his innocency, to shew wonderous things. He was martyred vpon the vigill of Pentecost, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred fourty and nyne.
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF IVNE.
            
               
                  E The first Day.
               
                  AT Stone in Staffordshire the Commemoration of the * Saintes Rufin and Vlfade brothers & martyrs, sōns to VVulserus a Pagā King of the Mercians; who for Ex monumentis Monast. Petri de burgo, & Registr. Lichfield. that they were made Christians, and had receyued baptisme at the hands of S. Chad Bishop of Lichfield, were both by their owne Father slayne in hatred therof, as they were at prayer in S. Chads Oratory, about the yeare or Christ, six hundred threescore & eight. Their bodyes were by their mother Queene Ermenild (afterward also a Saint) conueyed to Stone, and there kept with great veneration, where also in tyme, was erected a

goodly Church, togeather with a Priory, and dedicated in their honour. But the K. their Father soone after repēting him of the fact, with great sorrow and cont
                     •
                  ition came to S. Chad, and asking him forgiuenes, receyued the Christian faith: wherupon destroying all the Tēples of the Idolatrous Gods in his Dominions, did in their places build Churches and Monasteryes; and amōg the rest, he founded the goodly Abbey of Medeshamsteed (now called Peterburrow) dedicating the same vnto God and S. Peter the Apostle, and enriching it with many and large poss
                     •
                  ssions.
            
            
               
                  F The second Day.
               AT Dunfermelling in Scotland, the Commemoration * of B
                     •
                  essed Malcoline, the third King of that name, and husband to the famous S. Margaret Queene of Scotland, whose godly workes of piety & deuotiō are famous all to posterity, especially to his successors, as well in that Kingdome, as to other Princes of bloud in Europe. He was so zealous in the loue of God, that he became more holy then any of his predecessors had byn before him, being wholy addicted to the repayring and erecting of Churches, Monasteryes, and Bishoprickes. Moreouer

he was accustomed, with his Religious Qu. S. Margaret, euery day to serue with his Turgot. Episc. S. Andreae in eius vita. Hector Deidonatus l. 12. hist. Scot. Molan. in append. ad vsuar Rob. Buc. in vita S. Margar. Reg. Sco. owne handes 300. poore people, with meate & drinke, he on the one side, and she on the other: & was the first King of that Natiō that created Earles in Scotland. Which Kingdome after he had gouerned in all vertuous and pious manner, for six and thirty yeares, cōming into England, was violently oppressed and slayne at Anwicke in the borders of Scotland, by Robert Mowbray Earle of Northumber land, togeather with his eldest sonne Edward, to the great lamentation of his Countrey, and was buryed at Dunfermelling, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand fourscore and twelue.
            
            
               
                  G The third Day.
               AT Arke in Apulia in the Kingdome of Naples, the Commemoration of S. 
                  * 
                  Eleutherius Confessour, who borne of a very Ex Archiuio Eccl. Arcens. & inscriptione ipsius Sepulchri. good parentage in England, and taking his iorney to Hierusalem for deuotion, returned thence backe by Italy, where for the loue of God he became an Eremite or pilgrime, leading a strict and seuere kind of life, so far from his natiue Countrey; at what tyme the plague infecting sorely those partes, full of great sanctity, and holynes of life, he finally

rested in our Lord. His body is kept at the forsaid towne of Arke vntill this day, with due honour and veneration of the inhabitants, for the Miracles, that by his merits, it hath pleased God to worke therat, and there is visited as chiefe Patrone of the Village.
            
            
               
                  A The fourth Day.
               AT Bodmin in Corn-wall the deposition of S. Patrocke Bishop & Cōfessour, whose Matth. West. in hist. maiori ad 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 905. Calend▪ sec. rs
                        〈…〉
                      Sarum hae die, Sto. in vita S. Edou. Conf. most godly life and vertues, haue byn very famous in former ages, throughout our whole Iland, but especially in Corn-wall, where his memory is fresh vntill this day, and where many altars and Oratories in Catholicke tymes, haue byn erected and dedicated in his honour. He liued about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and fifty; & is said to haue byn the first bishop of Corn-well, placing his Episcopall Sea at the fornamed towne of Bodmin, which Bishopricke was afterwards translated to S. Germans at Cridington (now called Kirton) in the same Prouince, & lastly to Excester in Deuonshire by King Edward the Cōfessour, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand and fifty.
            
            
               
               
                  B The fifth Day.
               AT Dockum in VVest-frizland the passiō of S. Bonisace Archbishop of Mentz and Apoltic of Germany, who being an Englishman Vē. Bed. in Epit. Sigebert in Chron. Marian. Scot. l. 2. hist. an. 717. T
                        •
                     i. d
                        •
                     vi
                        •
                     . Illustr. Mart. Rom. A
                        ••
                     , Vsuard. & alij. by birth, went ouer into Germany, & th
                     •
                  ce to Rome, where he was created the first Bishop of the forsaid Citty of Mentz, and sent thither to preach the Christian faith, which he did incessantly for sixteene yeares togeather, reducing many thousands from their Idolatry, to the true worship of Christ, building Churches & Monasteryes for the cōtinuation and propagation therof. And at last going into Frizland to preach to that people was there 
                     ••
                  ayne by the enemyes of Christ, at the forenamed towne of Dockum, in the yeare of our Lord, seauen hundred fifty and foure. His body was afterward translated to Mentz, and there honourably placed in the Monastery of Fulda, which himselfe had founded.
               THE same day also, and same place, the passion of S. Eboam, & S. Adlar Bishops; Io. Moiā. i
                        •
                      addi
                        •
                     . advsuar. & in I
                        •
                     di
                        •
                     . SS. Belgij S. Vintruge, S. VValter, and S. Adelhere Priests; S. Hamunt, and S. Boso Deacons; S. VVaccare, S. Gunderbere, S. VVilbere, S. Hildebrand, and S. Adolph Monkes, and others to the number of fifty, most of them Englishmen, who

were with the forsaid S. Bonisace martyred Sur. to. 3. in Vita S. Bonifacij in Frizland for preaching the Christiā faith. And as they were his fellowes in trauaile & labours of propagating the name of Christ: so were they worthy to be made partakers of his Martyrdome. Their bodyes are most of them kept at Maestricht vpon the Riuer of Mosa, with great veneration of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  C The sixt Day.
               IN the Monastery of Blandine neere Gaunt in 
                     
                        •
                     landers the depositiō of S. Gudwall Bishop Io. Molā. in ad
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     . ad vs
                        •
                     ar. 
                        〈◊〉
                      die. Sigebert. in Chrō. an. Do. 958. Sur. 10. 3. Vit. SS. & alij. and Confessour, who borne of a noble and ancient Brittish bloud, and despising all worldly honours and preferments, built many Monasteryes in our Iland, and became Father to an hundred and fourscore mōkes, which he instructed in all kind of vertue & good learning: & at last being made Bishop, he went ouer into France and Flanders to preach the Christian faith in those parts, where famous for sanctity of life and miracles, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, foure hūdred and three. His body was first buryed in the forsaid Monastery of Blandine, but being afterward brought into England, was thence againe in the second persecution of the Danes, translated

to Gaunt, by Arnulph Earle of Flanders, and S. Gerrard Abbot, about the yeare of our Lord, nyne hundred and fifty.
            
            
               
                  D The seauenth Day.
               AT Knaresburge in Yorkeshire the deposition of S. Robert Abbot & Confessour, who borne in the same Prouince, became Sur. to. 3. Rom. Mart. & Molā. hac die. Matth. Paris. an. 1238. 1243. & 1271. de eius miraculis. first a mōke at VVhitby, and then at Fountaines, and last of all was ordayned Abbot of Knaresburge of the Order of Cisterce; whose most holy life & cōuersatiō, hath byn wittnessed by the manifold miracles wrought at his body after his death; out of which (in the time of King Henry the third) there distilled a pretious sweet oyle, very soueraigne for many diseases. He was wont in his life time to recite euery day an hundred and fifty psalmes, in honour of Christ and the blessed Virgin Mary. He died in the yeare of our Lord, one thousand one hundred and fifty, & was buryed in his owne Monastery.
               THE same day at VVorcester the Translation of S. VVolstan Confessour and Bishop of the same Sea, whose wonderfull life and miracles haue byn famous throughout Englād. His body being takē vp on this day Matth. Paris. an. 1201. & 1218. was found sound & vncorrupted, togeather with his Pontificall vestments, wherin he

was buried, which was more thē an hūdred Wion hac die. in suo Martyr. Malmes. & Flor. in hist. Angl. yeares after his death; and was very solemnely, and with great veneration set in a more eminent place of his owne Cathedrall Church of VVorcester, in the yeare of Christ 1218. It is recorded, that the said Church being afterward burned by casuall fire, the tombe wherin his body lay, was not so much as touched with the flame.
            
            
               
                  E The eight Day.
               AT Yorke the deposition of S. VVilliam Confessour and Bishop of that Sea, Pol. Vir. lib. 12. Guliel. Neubrig. l. 1. cap. 17. & 27. Molā. in addit. ad Vsuard. Catal. Epis. Eboracēs. kinsman to Stephen King of England, who by false slaunders being accused to Pope Eugenius the third, was deposed frō his Bishopricke, and one Murdacke set vp in his place, but after againe restored by Pope Anastasius the fourth: wherin with great signes of sanctity and innocency of life, togeather with many miracles, he finally ended his blessed dayes, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred fifty and foure, and was buryed at Yorke. It is recorded by Polidor Virgil, that when he was restored againe to his Bishopricke, and comming towards Yorke, the people flocked in so great number to congratulate and welcome his returne, that

passing ouer the Riuer beyond Pont-fract, the throng and presse was so great, that the bridge (being but of wood) brake, euen 
                     •
                  ust, as the B
                     •
                  shop was ouer, and threw all the rest into the water: which when the holy man saw, he fell downe vpon his knees, and besought our Lord to saue them. Whose prayers were soone heard. For though the streame was very strong and violent, yet were they euery one preserued from drowning.
               THE same day in the Diocesse of Metz in the hig
                     •
                  er Germany, the deposition of S. 
                  Io. T
                        •
                     it. l. 3. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 283. le. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Ill
                        •
                     st. ord. D. Be
                        •
                     e li
                        〈…〉
                     . Wion in Mart. hac di
                        •
                     . & l. 3. lig. vitae. 
                  Distoode Bishop & Cōfessour, who borne in Ireland, and a monke of the Order of S. Benedict, was ordayned Bishop of Dullyn in the same Kingdome; but going ouer into Germany to preach the Christian faith, he resigned that dignity, and became Abbot of a Monastery there, which vntill this day is called of his name S. Disibodes, in the forsaid Diocesse of Mentz, where in great sanctity of life and Miracles, he ended his blessed da
                     •
                  es, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred.
            
            
               
                  F The ninth Day.
               IN Scotland the deposition of S. Colme. 
                  Columbe Abbot and Confessour, who borne in Ireland,
                  
and descended of a noble parentage, Bed. l. 3. c. 4. & 25. et in Epic. an. 565. He
                        •
                     m. Contr. in Chron. an. 596. Mart. Rom. Baron. t
                        •
                     m. 3. Annal. et ōnes alij. hac die. forsooke the world, and all other eart
                     ••
                  y preferments, and became a monke in one of the ilands of Orcades, called 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     oy, in a Monastery there of the Order of S. Benedict, wherof at last he being made abbot, was so famous for sanctity and holines of life, that euen vntill this day his memory is fresh to the Christian world, especially in the Kingdomes of England, Scotland & Ireland, where there be many Churchs yet remayning, dedicated in his honour. He desceased about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred fourscore and sixteene: whose body was afterward transl
                     •
                  ted into Ireland to the towne of Dune in the Prouince of Vlster, and there with great solemnity and veneration interred, togeather with the sacred reliques of S. Patricke & S. Brigit. He by his preaching conuerted to the faith of Christ, the Pictes that inhabited Scotland, and is called their Apostle, working very many miracles among them to his dying day.
            
            
               
                  G The tenth Day.
               AT S. Edmūdsbury in Suss
                        •
                     lke the Translatiō of S. Edmūd King of the Eastāgles & martyr, who in the Danish incursions, vnder the Captains Hinguar & Hubba, being first whipped,

and then, bound to tree, and shot full of shaftes, was finally beheaded. All which torments he most constantly indured, euer calling vpon the name of Iesus, vntill he had finished his Martyrdome, which was in the yeare of Christ, eight hūdred threescore and ten. His principall festiuity is celebrated in our Catholicke Church of England, vpon the twentith of Nouember: but his body being taken vp afterward on this day, was with great solemnity translated from Hexam in Northumberland (where Sur. to. 6. in eius vita 20. Nou. Registr. Monast. S. Edmūd. Buriens. he was martyred) and placed in a goodly shrine, richly adorned with iewells and pretious stones in a Church erected in his honour in Suffolke, which of his name was euer since called S. Edmūdsbury, wherat it is recorded many miracles haue byn wrought. And after this againe, in the yeare, one thousand & ten, the Danes inuading the Prouince of the Eastāgles, Alwyn the Bishop of that Diocesse brought the body of S. Edmūd from Bury aforsaid to London: at the comming wherof in at Criplegate many miracles were wrought, where for the space of three yeares it remayned in the Parish Church of S. Gregory neere vnto S. Paules, and then was translated the second tyme to Bury, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand and thirteene.
               
                  
THE same day in Scotland, the festiuity Abbo Floriacēs. in eius vita. Pet. in Catal. Osbert. de stoke in eius vita. Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum. Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij hac die. of S. Margaret Queene, wife to holy Malcome, King of that nation, & daughter to Prince Edward, surnamed the Out-law, Sonne of Edmund Ironside King of England, whose godly life and vertues, especially in deuotion and liberall almes to the poore, are yet famous both at home and abroad. She died in great sanctimony of life and miracles about the yeare of Christ, one thousand fourscore and twelue, vpon the sixteenth of Nouember: though her principall festiuity be celebrated vpon this day both in England and Scotland.
               
               THE same day also at Rochester in Kent, the deposition of S. Ithimar Bishop and Bed. l. 3. c. 14. & 20. Herebert. Rosweyd. in fast. SS. hac. die. wion l. 3. ligni vita. Confessour, who being a man of excellent learning and wisdome, succeeded S. Paulinus in that Sea, being consecrated therto, by Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury: which when he had gouerned most worthily for 17. yeares togeather, in great sanctity, and holines of life, he reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threscore and eleuen, and was buried in S. Andrewes Church at Rochester.
               
            
            
               
               
                  A The eleuenth Day.
               AT Lindisserne in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, the Commemoration of * S. Edilwald Priest & Confessour, who borne in our Iland of a noble parentage, succeeded S. Cuthlert for twelue yeares togeather, in leading an Eremiticall life in the Iland of Farne, commonly called Holy Iland. He was indued with so rare & singular vertues, that Vē. Bed. in vita S. Cuthber. & l. 5. c. 1 Hist. Angl. his very name was famous in those dayes, throughout England & Scotland. S. Bede recounteth that a certaine skynne wherwith S. Edil
                        〈…〉
                     ald had stopped a hole in his Oratory did miracles after his death: as also how by his prayers, he ceased a storme or tēpes, that arose on the sea, when certayne of his friēds, that came to visit him in the Iland, returned homeward, which happened about the yeare of Christ, six hundred, fourscore and nynteene; about which tyme also he died, & was buryed in S. Peters Church at Lindisserne in the raygne of King Elfride of Northumberland
            
            
               
               
                  B The tweluth Day.
               AT B
                        •
                     schopssen in the higher Germany the * Commemoration of S. Agatha Virgin, who being an English woman by birth, and Arnol. Wion in addit. ad Mart. Bened. l 3. & in vita S. Liobae. leading a religious life in the Monastery of VVimborne in Dorcetshire, went ouer into Germany with S. Lioba, S. Te
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and others, whome S. Bonisace (an Englishman in like manner, and 
                     〈…〉
                  bishop of Mentz) had sent for into those partes, to be Directrices in Monasticall discipline, of certaine Nunryes, which he there had newly founded; where vnder the forsaid Lioba, that was constituted Abbesse of the fornamed Monastery of Bischopssen, she liued & died in great sanctimony and holinesse of life, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred fifty and seauen, and was buryed in the same place.
            
            
               
                  C The thirteenth Day.
               IN North VVales the Commemoration of S. Elerius Abbot and Confessour, who * borne of a noble British parentage, and setting aside the vayne pleasures of the world, built with the goods of his owne inheritance a Monastery in the North-west

part of our Iland, now called North-wales, where he gathering togeather many deuout persons, lead a Monasticall life, directing Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Brita. Item in Act. S. Wenef. 3. Nouēbr. wion. in addit. ad l. 3. ligni vit. them in all kind of vertue and discipline, vntill his dying day. He liued in the tyme of S. VVenefrid, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threscore and foure; of whome she receyued the holy veyle of Chastity, and was ordayned Abbesse of a Monastery which S. Beno her maister and tutour had erected in her Fathers territory: as also wrote the whole story of her life, which is yet extant in wryttē-hand to be read in diuers libraryes of England. The bone of one of his armes, is yet in the custody of a Catholicke Gentleman of our Countrey, who preserueth the same with great deuotion and veneration, as beseemeth so pretious a Relique.
            
            
               
                  D The fourteenth Day.
               IN Scotland the Translation of S. Brandan Abbot & Confessour, borne in the same Kingdome, whose godly life and doctrine, Maurol. in Mart. hac die Pet. in Catal. l. 5. c. 117. togeather with his manifold miracles, are yet famous throughout the Christiā world, especially in our Iland of Great-Britany. His principall festiuity, in our Catholicke Church of England, is celebrated vpon the

sixteenth day of May, where also we haue wiō in suo Mart. hac etiam die. made mention of him. There was a goodly Church, as also a towne builded in his honour, in one of the Ilands of Orcades, which vntill this day, is commonly called by the name of S. Brandans. He died about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred and seauenty.
            
            
               
                  E The fifteenth Day.
               AT VVilton in VViltshire the deposition of S. Eadburge Virgin, daughter to King Edward the elder, who refusing all worldly Petr. in Catal. Vincent. in specul. Pol. Vir. West. an. 901. Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. honours and preferments, tooke a Religious habit in the Monastery of VVilton, and became a mirrour and rare example to the Nobility of England, where she so excelled in all manner of vertue, but especially humility, that she euer thought herselfe the most contemptiblest of all the Monastery: Which thing how acceptable it was to God, it pleased him to manifest to the world, by the manifold miracles he wrought by her, both aliue & dead. She desceased about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred and fourteene, and was buryed at Wilton.
               
               THE same day at Huis in the Diocesse of L
                        〈…〉
                     ge, the Translation of S. Menigold Martyr, who borne in England of a great parentage, became first a Captaine in the

French and German warres, and after an Erem
                     •
                  te; vnto whome 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   the Emperour gaue a 
                     ••
                  ttle Territory 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the riuer-
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Molan. in addit. ad Vsua. & in I
                        •
                      d
                        〈…〉
                     . SS. 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     gij hac die. o
                     •
                   
                  Mosa, where 
                     •
                  e 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   an Oratory for 
                     ••
                  s priuate deuotio
                     〈…〉
                   as he was one day going to Church, was 
                     ••
                  a
                     ••
                  e by ce
                     •
                  tain
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  diers in hatred of his sanc
                     ••
                  ty, about 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ eare of Christ, 
                     ••
                  ne 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                   body was afterward on this day, with great solemnity, tran
                     ••
                  ated to Huis, where the same is yet kept with due honour & veneration o
                     •
                   the Inhabitants.
               THE same day also in little Britany the deposition of S. Maine Abbot and Confeuour, who borne in our Iland of Great Britany, and kinsma to S. Samp
                        •
                     on, went ouer Pe
                        •
                     r. de V
                        •••
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •
                     oc. in ei
                        •
                     s vi
                        •
                     a. Renat. 
                        •
                     ened. in vit. SS. Ga
                        〈…〉
                     . Belforest. in descri. Armori
                        •
                     . with him into little Britany, to preach the Christian saith, where he fist lead a Monasticall life at Dole, vnder the forsaid S. Sāpson, and afterward being made Abbot of a Monastery dedicated to S. Iohn Baptist in the same Countrey, after many yeare of labour and toyle taken in the seruice of Christ, and conuersion of many soules to him, famous for miracles, he finally rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred and nynty. His body was buryed in the same Monastery, which at this day of his name is commonly called S. Maines, and there is kept with great honour and veneration.
            
            
               
               
                  F The sixteenth Day.
               AT Chichester in Sussex, the Translation of S. Richard Confessour and Bishop of that Sea, who hauing studied seaue yeares in the Vniuersity of Bologna in Italy, and returning home, was first made Chancelour of Oxford and thē Bishop of Chichester: which Sea when he had gouerned for nyne yeares, Matth. West. & Paris. an. 1253. & 1276. Sur. to. 2. die 3. Apr. Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum. hac die. in great sanctity & holinesse of life, he died at Douer in Kent, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and three. His body being brought to Chichester, was afterward on this day taken vp, and put into a goodly siluer shrine, and translated to a more eminent place of that Cathedrall Church, wherat so many miracles were dayly wrought, that infinite people made concourse thither from all partes of Englād. This Translation was made in the yeare, one thousand two hundred threescore and sixteene.
               THE same day at Hereford the passion of S. Leofgar Bishop and Martyr, who being Chaplyn to Duke Harold, su
                     •
                  ceeded Ethelstane in that Sea; where in all kind of Matth. West. ad an. Do. 1056. vertue, and good workes, exercising his Pastorall functiō, he was by K. Griffin of VVales, that violently and vniustly assaulted that

Citty, slayne, togeather with seauen of his Chanons that denied him entrance into the Catal. Episco. Herefor. Church, which when the said Griffin had spoyled & robbed of all the reliques, iewels, and other ornaments that were portable, he lastly fired both it, and the whole Citty, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand fifty and six.
            
            
               
                  G The seauenteenth Day.
               AT Hecknam in Normandy the deposition of S. Botulph Abbot and Confessour, who borne in Scotland of a noble parentage, Petr. in Catal. l. 11. c. vlt. West. in hist. Tho. walfingh. in 
                        •
                     pod. Neustr. Molan. in addit. ad Vsuard. Io. Sto. in Annal. sub Edou. primo. and going ouer into France, became there a monke, and afterward was made the first Abbot of a new Monastery called Hecknam in Normandy, which himselfe had caused to be built at his owne charges, where in great sanctity of life, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and foure. There is yet remayning a faire parish Church dedicated in his honour without Aldgate, in the Citty of London; besides many other ancient monumēts of him in the Realme of England. And among the rest, there was a goodly ancient Church & Monastery of Blackefriers erected in his honour in Lincolnshire, neere to the sea side, which in processe of tyme growing to a

fayre Market-towne, was called therof Botulphs-towne, and now by the corruption of our language, is vulgarly knowne by the name of Boston; which said Church and Monastery were both in the raigne of King Edward the first consumed by fire, in the yeare, one thousand two hundred fourscore and seauen.
            
            
               
                  A The eighteenth Day.
               IN Scotland the Cōmemoratiō of S. Dunstan 
                  * Abbot & Confessour, borne in that Kingdome and descended there of a great parentage, who contemning the vanities of the world in the flower of his youth, tooke a Io. Less. l. 4. de reb. gest. Scot. Wion in append. ad. l. 3. ligni vit. & alij. Religious habit, and became first a monke of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict in Scotland, and afterward was ordained Abbot of the whole Monastery; where in great sanctity of life, famous for his learning and workes of piety, in a good old age, finally rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and seauenty, and was buryed in Scotland. This man is different from the other S. Dunstan of England, whose festiuall dayes are celebrated vpon the nineteenth of May, and seauenth of September.
               
            
            
               
               
                  B The ninteenth Day.
               AT Ely in Cambridgshire, the Commemoration * of S. Iohn Confessour and Bishop of the same Sea, who being first a monke, Matth. West. an. 1220. & 1125. Arnol. Wion l. 2. lig. vit. in Catal. Episco. Eliens. and then Abbot of Fountaines in Yorkeshire, was for his great vertue and holinesse of life ordayned Bishop of Ely; In which dignity he so gouerned himselfe, especially in humility and charity to the poore, that his memory was very famous, aswell throughout England and Scotland at home, as in other Countreys abroad. And when he had sate in that Sea for fiue yeares or therabout, famous for holinesse of life, full of venerable old age, he departed to our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred, twenty and fiue, in the raigne of King Henry the third, and was buryed in his Cathedrall Church of Ely, before the Altar of S. Andrew.
               
            
            
               
                  C The twentith Day.
               AT Glastenbury in Somersetshire the Translation Sur. to. 2. 18. Mart. Pol. Vi
                        •
                     . lib. 6. of S. Edward King and Martyr, who through the deceipt of his step-mother Queene Alfred, was slayne at Corse-Castle in

Dorsetshire, as he was on hunting. His body was first buryed at VVarham, and then at Breuiar. sec. vsi
                        •
                     m Sarum et Epist. Innocēt. PP. 4. 
                  Shaftesbury, and lastly on this day with great solenity translated to Glastenbury the tweluth yeare after his Martyrdome, and yeare of Christ, one thousand and one. He was canonized for a Saint by Pope Innocentius the fourth.
               THE same day at VVinockes-berge in Flanders the Translatiō of S. Oswald King of Northumberland and Martyr, who after many glorious battayles and combatts sought in defence principally of the Christian faith, Matth. West. ad an. 789. Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die. was at length slayne in hatred therof by Pēda a Pagā
                   King of the Mercians or middle Englishmen) at a place in Shropshire, called afterward of his name, Oswaldes-tree; where now is built a fayre Market-towne, still retayning that anciēt name, though somwhat corrupted in pronunciation, and commonly called Oswistry. His body was first buryed at Peterburrow in Northamptonshire, and after in the Danish persecution on this day translated to Berghen in Flanders, where it is kept with great veneration of the inhabitants. His principall fel iuity was wont to be celebrated in our Catholicke Church of England vpon the fifth day of August, and in diuers places kept holy day.
            
            
               
               
                  D The one and twentith Day.
               AT Beuerwicke in the Diocesse of Harlē
                   in Albin. Flaccus in vita S. willebr. Molā. in Indic. SS. Belgij hac die. 
                  South-Holland, the passion of S. Englemund Martyr, borne of a noble parentage in England, who going ouer into Holland and Frizeland, for the propagation of Christian faith, was by Radbodus King of Frisia, a Pagan and enemy to Christ, most cruelly put to death, about the yeare of our Lord, seauē hundred twenty and seauen. His body was kept in an Oratory at the forsaid towne of Beuerwicke with great veneration, euen vntill the Hollanders in this last age, falling from the Obedience of the Catholicke Church and Sea of Rome, imbraced heresy.
            
            
               
                  E The two and twentith Day.
               IN Derswolds wood, neere to the towne of Gild. Epist. de excid. Britan. Bed. l. r. c. 7. Gaufr. Monum. lib. 5. Sur. tom. 3. Mart. Rom. 
                  S. Albās in Hartfordshire, the passiō of S. Albā, high Steward of the Britans, and the first Martyr in our Iland of the British nation, who in the persecution of Dioclesian the Emperour, was beheaded for being made a Christian, and receiuing and succouring a Christian Priest, named Amphibale, by whome he had byn baptized. He suffered

about the yeare of Christ, three hundred and three; and was afterward canonized for a Saint by Pope Adrian the first.
               THE same day, & same place, the passion of one of the souldiers, that led S. Alban 
                  Bed. Gild. Gaufr. Paris. & alij citati supra. to execution, who seing his constaney and patience in suffering for Christ, being therwith greatly moued, confessed forthwith his errour, and asked the blessed Martyr forgiuenesse: which when the persecutors beheld, they grieuously tormented him for the same. He notwithstanding, following S. Alban to his death, when his head was cut of, tooke & imbraced it in his armes, & therby was immediatly cured of all his woūds inflicted by the persecutors. And therupon confessing Christ, was by the enemyes of trut
                     •
                   finally beheaded, and so baptized in his owne bloud.
               THE same day in like manner at S. Omers in Artoys in the Monastery of S. Bertin, 
                  Io. Molā. addit. ad Vsuar. et in Indic. SS. Belgij hac die. the Translation of S. Ortrude Virgin, borne in England of a noble bloud: whose body in the Danish persecution was translated from an ancient Monastery in our Iland, called Andria, to the forsaid Abbey of S. Bertin, and is there yet preserued in a siluer shrine, with great veneration among other Reliques in the Sacristia or Vestrey of that Church. She died about the yeare of Christ, six hundred seauenty and nyne.
            
            
               
               
                  F The three and twentith Day.
               AT Ely in Cambridgshire, the deposition of S. 
                  S. Audry. 
                  Edil
                        •
                     rude Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles, and wise to King Egfrid of Northumberland, who liuing with her husband twelue yeares in perpetuall viginity, as S. Bede recordeth, at last, with his consent, renounced the pleasure of this world and dignity of a Queene, & became a nunne, first in the Ven. Bed. l. 4. c. 19. & 20. Item in Chron. de sex aetat. Trit. de vir. Illust. Vincent. in specul. Sigebert. in Chron Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij. omnes hac die. Monastery of Coldingham in the same Kingdome, vnder S. Ebba her aunt, and thence being ordayned Abbesse of the Monastery of Ely, where before she had founded a goodly Church in honour of S. Peter the Apostle, full of great sanctimony and holines of life, she finally wēt to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourscore. Her body was buryed in the same Monastery, ouer which there was erected a goodly Church, & dedicated to her name. And being taken vp sixteene yeares after her death, by her sister S. Sexburge then Abbesse of that place, was found wholy vncorrupt, and as fresh, as if the had byn buryed but the day before. S. Bede himselfe made a sonnet in moeter, in praise of this Virgin, which yow may read in the fourth booke of his

History of England and twentith Chapter. She is called by sundry writers Etheldride; but in our owne language, most commonly knowne by the name of S. Audry.
               
            
            
               
                  G The foure & twentith Day.
               AT Mechlyn in Brabant, the passion of Io. Molā. in Indic. SS. Belgij & in addit. ad Vsua. hac die. 
                  S. Rumwald Bishop and Martyr, sonne to a King of Ireland, who, after he was consecrated Bishop of Dublyn in that Countrey, went to Rome, and thence returning into Flanders, began to preach the Christian faith in the Territory of Mechlyn, and there first planted the same, vnder Count Ado of that Prouince, of whome he was very honourably intertayned. And when he had thus laboured, in reducing the strayed sheep, to the fold of his Maister Christ, for many yeares, he was at length, there slayne in hatred of the Christian faith by two wicked souldiers, one wherof, the blessed Bishop had som tymes reprehended for adultery, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred, threescore & fifteene. His body remayneth still at Mechlyn, and there is kept with great veneration in the Cathedrall Church, in a very sumptuous siluer shrine, though his principall feast be celebrated throughout the Diocesse, vpon the first of Iuly, with a

double office as chiefe Patrone of that Citty. He was canonized by Pope Alexander the 4.
            
            
               
                  A The fiue & twentith Day.
               AT Verolamium, now called S. Albans, in Hartfordshire, the Passion of S. Amphibale Priest and Martyr, who being a noble yong man of Britany, & going to Rome with Bassianus Sonne to Seuerus Viceroy of the Britans, 
                  Gild. de excid. Brit. Matth. Paris. & West. passim. Io. lidgat. Monac. Buriēs. in eius vita. Gerard. Liegh. in rudim. Infigniū. was there by Pope Zepherinus instructed secretly in the Christan faith, baptized, made Priest, and sent backe into Britany, there to preach vnto others, where he conuerted and baptized S. Alban then high Steward of the Britans for the Roman Emperour. And being at last accused for teaching the doctrine of Christ, had, by the persecutours, a hole made in his side; and one of his guttes being taken out of his belly, & fastened to a stake, was driuen about the same, vntill all the rest were pulled out, and woone about the said stake. And when he was ready to giue vp the ghost, two angells were seene to descend, & carry his soule vp to heauen. There was a fayre Church dedicated in his honour in VVinchester, where many miracles haue byn wrought at his Reliques. And amōg others it is recorded, that one that had byn dead

foure dayes, was raised againe to life. He suffered about the yeare of Christ 304. being aboue an hundred yeares of age.
               THE same day at Egmond in Holland the deposition Io. Molā. in Indic. SS. Belgij Sur. to. 3. Mart. Rom. & alij. omnes hac die. of S. Adalbert Priest and Confessour, nephew to Oswald King of Northumberland, and sonne to K. Edilbald of the South saxons, who going ouer into the lower Germany with S. VVillebrord and his fellowes to preach the Christian faith, conuerted infinite soules in Holland, and is therfore worthily called their Apostle. Count Theodore of that Prouince, built a goodly Monastery neere vnto Harlem in honour of him, whose sonne was afterward cured of a dangerous feuer by the meritts of S. Adalbert. He died about the yeare of Christ 705.
               THE same day in like manner at Dauentry in Gelderland the Translatiō of S. Lebuine Priest and Confessour, borne of a noble family Marcel. in vita S. Simibert. Io. Molā. in Indic. SS. Belgij in England: who going ouer also into the Low-Countreyes, to preach and instruct the new-made Christiās of those Prouinces, after many labours & much fruite wrought in that kind, he ended there his venerable old dayes, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred, and threescore. His body was afterward on this day translated to Dauentry, and there kept with great veneration, as chiefe Patrone of that Citty and Diocesse.
            
            
               
               
                  B The six and twentith Day.
               AT Benchor in Ireland the Commemoration * of Nine hundred holy Monkes Martyrs, who being oppressed by certaine Pagā 
                  Io. Trit. l. 3. de vir. Illustr. cap. 339. Arnol. Wion in append. ad. l. 3. lig. vitae. Pirates, that landed in that Iland, were in hatred of Christian Religion slayne, and their Monastery robbed and defaced, to the great lamentation of all Ireland; for that it was, in those dayes, a common store-house (as it were) of all good learning and vertue, out of which came the Apostles of diuers Prouinces of France, Flanders and Germany, who reduced them to the Christian faith, and true worship of one God. Many Authors (of forrayne Nations especially) do often tymes confound this Monastery of Benchor in Ireland, with that of Bangor in Caerneruanshire of North-wales, thinking them to haue byn all one, wheras they were different, and situated in two seuerall Kingdomes.
            
            
               
                  C The seauen & twentith Day.
               AT Cayon in the Diocesse of Towers in France, the deposition of S. Iohn Priest & Confessour, who being a noble Brytan by

birth, and refusing all worldly and temporall honors in his Countrey, went ouer into France, and there built himselfe a little Oratory for his owne priuate deuotion in a solitary place neere vnto Towers, where he was very famous for sanctity of life, working many miracles both aliue and dead. Rom. Mart. hac die. Greg. Turon. l. de gloria Conf. c. 23 & in hist. 562. His body was buryed in the same Oratory after his descease, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred thirty and seauen. There is a story recorded of a certaine Bay tres, that this S. Iohn had there somtymes planted; which when after many yeares, it withered with age; and was cut downe, being laid two yeares vnder a wall, and serued for a seate 
                     •
                  o sit on, was againe put into the ground, and through his merits, sprong and budded forth a fresh, to the admiration of all France.
               
               THE same day at Gaunt in Flanders the Translation of S. Leuine Bishop and Martyr, an Scottishman. 
                  Irishman by byrth, and disciple to S. Augustine our English Apostle; who leauing his Bishopricke (which was in Scotland) went ouer into Flanders with S. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Breuia. Gādauēss & Ioan. Molan. in addit. ad Vsuard. hac die. & in Iudic. SS. Belgij and his fellowés, where preaching the Christiā faith to the infidels of those partes, was by them apprehended, and had his tongue cut out of his mouth, which being by a miracle immediatly restored him againe, he was finally beheaded, about the

yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and twelue. His body being first interred in a Village of the same Prouince, was afterward on this day with great solēnity translated to Gaunt, where being placed in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty, is there yet preserued with great Veneration of the inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  D The eight & twentith Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Columbane Monke and Confessour, who * borne in the same Kingdome of an honourable family, contemned the world, a
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Io. Lest. l. 4. degest. Scot. Arnold. wion. in append. ad l. 3. lig. vita. became a monke of the Venerable Order o
                     •
                   S. Benedict in Scotland, where in great sanctit
                     •
                   of life, and other vertues therto agreable he ended his blessed dayes, in the yeare o
                     •
                   Christ, six hundred and fourty; where also his memory hath byn famous in tymes past hauing had many Chappells & altars dedicated in his honour. This man is differen
                     •
                   from the other S. Columbane of Ireland, surnamed the Great, somtymes Abbot and founde
                     •
                   of the Monastery of Bobia in Lombardy, whos
                     •
                   feast is celebrated vpon the one & twenti
                     •
                   day of Nouember.
               
            
            
               
               
                  E The nine & twentith Day. Maen
                        •
                     l. Graec. ex Sym. Metaph. 29. Iunij. Innocēt. PP. Epis. ad Decēt. Eysengr. Cē. 1. p. 7. Theodor. Epist. ad Tin. & in Psal. 116. & l. 9. de curand. Grac. affect. Sophron. serm. de natal. Apost. 
                        〈…〉
                     lred. Rieual. in vita Edo. Conf. Mart. Rom.
               
               AT Rome the Passion of the glorious Apostles S. Peter & S. Paul, who in the persecution of Nero the Emperour, were on one, and the selfesame day put to death; S. Peter being fastened to a Crosse with his head down ward, and S. Paul beheaded. Of these two Apostles it is recorded by diuers very ancient wryters, that about the yeare of Christ, threscore and seauen, they came both personally into our iland of great Britany, and there preached the Christian faith, founded Churches, ordayned Priests and Deacons, and therfore may worthily be called our Apostles, of whome we haue receyued so great benefitts. There are very many Churches in our Countrey dedicated in their honour, as speciall Patrons of our Iland. And in the tyme of King Edward the Confessor, S. Peter appearing to a very holy man, shewed him, that himselfe had sometymes preached in Britany, and consequently the speciall care he had of that Church and Countrey.
               THE same day at Lindisferne in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, the Commemoration * of S. Ethelwyne Bishop and Confessour, who of a Monke of S. Benedicts Order

in S. Columbes Monastery in the Iland of Hoy in Scotland, was ordayned Bishop of Lindisferne, 
                  Io. Trit. l. 4. c. 156. Wiō l. 2. lig. vitae. in Catal. Epis. Lindis. where for many yeares hauing instructed his flocke, in all vertue, and good learning, finally in great sanctity of life, he reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and nynty, and in the raigne of Osred King of Northumberland.
               
            
            
               
                  F The thirtith Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Deusdedit Bishop and Confessor, surnamed Bed. l. 3. hist. c. 28. & l. 4. c. 1 west. an. 645. & 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Ioan. Molan. in addit. ad Vsuar. 14. Iulij. 
                  Frithona, who being an English Saxon by birth, succeeded S. Honorius in the Sea of Canterbury, being consecrated therto by Ithimar Bishop of Rochester: wherin when he had spent nyne yeares, in continuall preaching and instructing his flocke, famous for learning and sanctity of life, he gaue vp his blessed soule to rest, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and foure, and was buryed in the Church of S. Augustines in Canterbury, with his predecessors; at whose body in confirmation of the innocency of his life, it pleased God to worke many miracles.
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF IVLY.
            
               
                  G The first Day.
               
                  AT Cairlegion. 
                  Carleon vpon Vske in South-wales, the passion of the Saintes Iulius and Aaron Martyrs, who Gild. de excid. Britan. Ven. Bed. l. 1. hist. cap. 7. Mart. Rom. hac die. cū Molā. Hu
                        〈…〉
                     f. 
                        •
                     huide in fragm descript. Britan. being two noble anciēt Britans of the same Citty, were in the persecution of the Roman Emperour Dioclesian with many others in our British primitiue Church, most cruelly put to death for the Confession of Christ, about the yeare of our Lord, three hundred and foure. There was an ancient goodly Church erected & dedicated in their honour in the forsaid Citty of Carleon, where also their bodyes haue in tymes past byn kept with

great veneration of the old Britans of South-VVales.
               
               THE same day in little Britany the deposition of S. Goluin Bishop and Con
                     •
                  essour, Rob. Caenalis de reb. Gall. l. 2. Perio
                        •
                     h. G. Renat. Benedict. in vit. SS. Gall. hac. die. wion. in addit. ad l. 3. lig. vit. borne in our Iland of great Britany of very honourable parents, who going ouer into little Britany, and there leading an Eremiticall life, for many yeares, was at last, against his will, elected, and vpon obedience consecrated Bishop, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred. In which function & dignity he excelled in all kind of sanctity and holines of life, working many miracles among the Frenchmen, both aliue and dead.
            
            
               
                  A The second Day.
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire the deposition of S. Su
                        •
                     ithin Confessour and Bishop Matth. West. an. 862. Sur. to. 4 de vit. SS. Molā in addit. ad vsua. 2. et 
                        •
                     5. Iulij. of that Sea, whose rare life, togeather with his working of miracles, is very famous to all posterity through the Christian world. Whensoeuer he was to consecrate any new Church, though it were neuer so far of; yet would he go thither on foote. It chanced on a Market day at VVinchester that a womā passing ouer the bridg, with a basket of egges, where the holy man was sitting to see the workmen labour, about mending of the bridge; and one of the said labourers

offering to iest with the woman, and she resisting, brake all her egges: which thing the good Bishop seeing, and lamenting the womans losse, made the signe of the Crosse ouer the said broken egges, and immediatly they all became whose againe. He died about the yeare of Christ, eight hūdred threescore and two, and was buryed at VVinchester.
               
               THE same day at Landaffa in Clamorganshire of VVales the deposition of S. Oudocke Confessour and Bishop of that Sea, who Catal. Episco. Landafens. hac die. being descended of a noble bloud in Britany, was famous for holines of life and working of miracles, both aliue and dead. He was the third Bishop of Landaffa, and succeeded S. Telean in the same Sea, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and thirty.
            
            
               
                  B The third Day.
               AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Lanfranke Confessour, and Bishop of the same Sea, who being Abbot of Cane in Normandy, was thence, at the suite of K. VVilliam the Conquerour, promoted to the Maurol. in Mart. hac die vnà cum wion & alijs. Sea of Canterbury, where in great holines of life, he gouerned the same most laudably for nineteene yeares togeather, and at last desceased the third yeare of the raigne of K.

                  VVilliam Rusus, and yeare of Christ, one thousand fourscore and nyne. Vpon this day his West. an. Do. 1089. Vincent. in specul. & alij. body being taken vp afterward, was with great solemnity tran
                     •
                  lated to a more eminēt place of the Church of Cāterbury, wherat, it is recorded, many miracles haue byn wrought.
               THE same day at Oostkerke in Flanders the deposition of S. Guthagon Confessour, Sonne to a king of aliàs Ireland 
                  Scotland, who taking vpon him a voluntary pouerty for the loue of Christ, went ouer into Flanders, and there became a pilgrim
                     •
                   or Eremite in the territory of Tornay, where in great sanctity Io. Molā. in Indie. SS. Belgij & in addit. ad Vsua. hac die. & holinesse of life, he reposed in our Lord. His body was afterward taken vp by Gerrard Bishop of Tornay, and set in a more eminent place of the Church of Oostk
                        •
                     rke, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand 
                     ••
                  ty and nyne, where the same is kept with great honour and veneration of the inhabitants, and is yet to be seene there through iron grates, placed in a wall of the same Church.
            
            
               
                  C The fourth Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Odo Con
                     •
                  essour & Archbishop of the same Sea: Who being a man of excellent learning & wisdome, was first made Bishop of VVelles, & after of Canterbury. In which dignity, in

great sanctity of life & spirit of prophesy, he ended his venerable old dayes, in the yeare o
                     •
                   Christ, nyne hundred f
                     •
                  fty and eight, and was buried at Canterbury. Matthew a Monke of VVestminster recounteth a dreadfull exāple of reuenge, taken vpon his successour in that Bishopricke, Ealysine, who so soone as S. Odo was dead, and procuring himsel
                     •
                  e to be elected Matth. West. an. 934. & 958. Hereb. Rosweyd. in ast. SS. hac die. Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. in his roome by Symony, the very first day o
                     •
                   his induction to that Sea, he most cō
                  temptuously trode him vnder his feete in his graue. With which fact God being highly offended, soone after reuenged the same in the behalfe of S. Odo. For Ealssine going to Rome for his Pall, perished most miserabl
                     •
                  , through hungar and cold, in the Alpes (which thing was 
                     •
                  ortould also by S. Odo) being forced before his death, to put those his feete in the warme dung of horses, with which he had so insolently troden vpon the others body in his graue.
            
            
               
                  D The fifth Day.
               AT Burton vpon Trent in Staffordshire the festiuity of S. Modu
                        •
                     ene Virgin and Abbesle, daughter to Nang
                        ••
                     ee King of Ireland, who after infinite miracles wrought in that Kingdome, came into England, & there by the help of K. Ethelnulse, whose sonne she by her

prayers, had cured of a dangerous sicknesse, builded two famous Monasteryes, neere to the forrest of Arden in VVaruickshire, the one at Polesbury, the other by the forrest side; of which later she her selfe was Abbesse first, and then of another Monastery at the forsaid H
                        ••
                     ebert. Ros. in f
                        〈…〉
                     s SS. hac die. Pol. Vir. l. 5. hist. M
                        •
                     tth. West. an. 857. Sur. to. 5. in vita S. Osithae Virg. 
                  Burton in Staffordshire. And after this she went into Scotland to King Conwall her kinsman, and thence backe againe into Ireland, where in all kind of rare sanctimony of life and miracles, she finally ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and seauenty, bequeathing her body to the forsaid Monastery of Burton, whither it was brought, and kept with great reuerence and veneration, euen vntill our dayes. Among her many miracles, one is recorded, that by her prayers, she raised to life S. Osith, being thē but a girle, that had byn drowned in a riuer three dayes, as may be read in the Acts of S. Osithes life.
               THE same day at Canterbury the Translation of S. Anselme Confessour & Bishop Petr. Gaselin. Maurol. & wion in suis Mart. hac die. Petr. in Catald. 6. c. 56. of the same Sea, whose rare learning, vertues, and labours in Gods Church, togeather with his miracles and sanctity of life, are yet famous to the Christian world. He died in the yeare of Christ, 1109. and in the nynth yeare of K. Henry the first his raigne. His body was afterward on this day taken vp and translated to a more eminent place

of his Church at Canterbury, with great solemnity and veneration, wherat, through his meritts, it hath pleased God to worke many miracles.
            
            
               
                  E The sixt Day.
               AT Ely in Cambridgshire the deposition of S. Sexburge Queene and Abbesse, wife Ven. Bed. l. 4. c. 19. west. an. 640. Vincent. in specul. l. 15. c. 32. Rob. Buckl. in eius vita fol. 128. to Ercombert K. of Kent, and daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles, who after the death of her husband, gouerned his Kingdome for a while, and built a goodly Monastery of Nunnes in the ile of Sheppey in Kent, & then became herselfe a Religious woman in the Monastery of Ely, wherof also (after the death of her sister S. Audry, who had that dignity whilst she liued) she was made Abbesse: and there in most godly wise, finally gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse Christ, about the yeare of our Lord, six hundred fourscore and nynteene; and was buryed in the same place, neere to her said sister S. Audry. Whose body being taken vp seauen yeares after her death, was found whole and vncorrupt, which well declared the sanctimony, and holines of her life, whilst she liued.
            
            
               
               
                  F The seauenth Day.
               AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Thomas Archbishop of the same Sea and Martyr, who being violently oppressed by Sur. to. 6. Staplet. de trib. Thomis. Sander. de schis. Angl. Breuiar. sec. vsum Sar
                        〈…〉
                     . hac die. King Henry the second his seruantes, was, after many slaunders, calumniations and banishment suffered in defence of Ecclesiasticall libertyes, slayne in the tyme of Euensonge, in his Pontificall vestments, before the high altar in his owne Church of Canbury, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred threescore and seauenteene. His body being afterward on this day taken vp, and put into a costly siluer shrine, guilt, and set with pretious stones, was translated to a more eminent place of the same Church, wherat it pleased God to worke infinite miracles. King Henry the eight at his breach with the Sea Apostolicke destroyed this goodly monument, and taking all the treasure therof to his owne vse, caused his body to be burned to ashes & dispersed in the ayre, in the yeare of Christ 1538.
               THE same day at VVinchester in Hampshire the deposition of S. Hedda Confessour Bed. l. 4. c. 12. & 5. cap. 19. and Bishop of that Sea, whose godly and innocent life was afterward confirmed by

the miracles wrought at his body in VVinchester, 
                  Tritem. de vir. Illustr. where he died, and was buryed in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and fiue.
               THE same day also at Eyst in Germany, the deposition of S. VVillebald Confessour Democh. l. 2. de Sacrif. Missae. & in Catal. Episco. Eystens. Mart. Rom. & alij. and first Bishop of that Sea, Sonne to S. Richard King of the English: who going ouer to his vncle S. Boniface into Germany, was by him ordayned Bishop of Eyst, where full of great holines of life, he reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred fourscore and one. His body is buryed in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty, and there preserued with great veneration. Bed. l. 3. c. 8. Trit. de Vir. Illustr. Contin. Ven. Bed. Vincent. in specul. & alij.
               
               THE same day in like manner at Brige neere Paris in France, the depositiō of the Saintes, Edilburge daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles, and Ercongote daughter to King Ercombert of Kent, who being both Abbesses of the said Monastery of Brige, the one succeding the other, and dying both on one day, in diuers yeares, deserued to haue their memoryes celebrated togeather, on one and the selfe same day, by our Mother the holy Cath. Church. The former, S. Edilburge, died about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and threescore: and the other some foure yeares after, and were both buryed at Brige aforsaid.
            
            
               
               
                  G The eight Day.
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire the depositiō 
                  Matth. West. an. 872. Molan. in Indic. SS. Belgij Gotzel. Monach. in eius vita. of S. Grimbald Abbot and Confessour, whome King Alfred calling out of Trā
                     
                        •
                     e into England, vsed in all his consultations for the gouernment of his Kingdome. He refused the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, and chose rather to be Abbot of a new Monastery, erected by the said K. Alfred in the Citty of VVinchester, where in most godly wise he ended his blessed dayes, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and foure.
               THE same day at VVirtzburge in Franconia the passiō of S. Kilian Bishop, togeather with the Saints Colmā, Totnā
                   & Erwald mōkes and Martyrs, who being borne in Ireland Io. Trit. de vir. Illustr. Rom. Mart. Molan. Gaselin. & wion hac die. all of very honourable families, and S. Kilian sonne to the King of that Iland, went ouer into Germany, where S. Kilian was ordayned Bishop of VVirtzburge, and preaching the Christian faith in those partes, were all at last by the enemyes of truth, slayne for the defence therof, vnder Gosbert King of Franconia, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred nynty and seauen. Their Reliques are kept vntill this day at VVirtzburge, with great veneration of the inhabitants.
            
            
               
               
                  A The ninth Day.
               AT Barking in Essex the deposition of S. Edilburge Queene, who being wife to Inas King of the VVestsaxons, both she and her husband consented to enter into two Monasteryes, and become religious: wherupon Io. Trit. de Vir. Illustr. Pol. Vir. hist. l. 4. Stephan. Lusingā. Co
                        〈…〉
                     na 4. c. 21. & Chron. Britan. fol. 155. Wion hac die. in Mart. Benedict. the King himselfe going to Rome, and there taking vpon him the habit of a monke of S. Benedicts Order, the Queene likewise entred into the Monastery of Barking aforsaid, and receyued the holy veyle of Chastity, where in all kind of sanctimony of life, she finally ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and fourty. Of this name of Edilburge, there are three Saintes of our Nation, to wit, S. Edilburge daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles, and Abbesse of Brige in France: S. Edilburge, sister to S. Erconwald Bishop of London, and the first Abbesse of this aforsaid Monastery of Barking: and this S. Edilburge wherof we now speake, Queene of the VVestsaxons. All which three being English women by byrth, liued togeather within the space of lesse then an hundred yeares.
            
            
               
               
                  B The tenth Day.
               AT Fisciacum in Hannonia. 
                  Hennalt the deposition of S. Etto Bishop and Confessour, who being an Irishman by byrth, and comming out of that Kingdome with S. Furseus and his fellowes, went ouer into France and Germany, to preach the Christiā faith, which Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die, et in Indic. SS. Belgij he did with as great fruite and profit, as holinesse of life, vntill his dying day: which happened about the yeare of Christ, six hūdred fifty & six. His body was afterward translated to Letias in the same Prouince, and there is kept vntill this day with great honour and veneration of the inhabitants, for the manifold miracles, that it hath pleased God in signe of his sanctity to worke therat.
            
            
               
                  C The eleuenth Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. * 
                  Dronston Confessour, who borne in the same Kingdome of the bloud Royall, and vncle to Aidan King of Scotland, contemned Io. Lesl. Ros. E
                        •
                     is. l. 4. hist. Scot. the vanities of the world in his youth, and entring into a Monastery there, tooke the Religious habit of S. Benedict. In which kind

of life he so excelled in all humility and perfection, Wion l. 4. ligni vit. Ioan. Maior in hist. l. 2. cap. 7. that his name was very famous throughout Scotland and Ireland, euen vntill his dying day, which happened full or sanctity of life and miracles, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred: where also in ancient Catholicke tymes, many Chappells and altars haue byn dedicated in his honour.
            
            
               
                  D The tweluth Day.
               IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Luane Abbot and Confessour, who being * borne in the same Iland of a noble parētage, Arnold. Wion in append. ad. l. 3. lig. vitae. Item in Actis S. Malac. Malac. Epis. 5. Nouemb. became there first a monke of the Order of S. Benedict, and afterward Abbot of the Monastery of Benchor in the same Kingdome, where he was very famous for sanctity of life, in the tyme of S. Malachy Bishop of Connerthen & Primate of all Ireland, with whome he liued many yeares, ending his venerable dayes in a good old age, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred and fourty, and in the raigne of King Stephen of England.
               
            
            
               
               
                  E The thirteenth Day.
               AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Mildred Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to Merualdus King of the Mercians (or middle Englishmen) who contemning the vanities Matth. west. an. 676. & 1011. Pol. Vir. l. 4. Io. Molan. in addit. ad Vsua. & in Indi
                        •
                     . SS. Belgij of this life, became a religious woman in the Ile of Thanet in Kent, and afterward Abbesse of that Monastery: in which kind of life she so excelled, especially in humility, that it pleased God to worke many miracles at her body after her death: which being on this day translated to Cāterbury by S. Lāfranke Archbishop of that Sea, was, togeather with the venerable body of S. Edburge, most honourably placed there in the Church of S. Gregory, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand fou
                     •
                  score and fiue. There was also a famous Monastery built in her honour in the Prouince of Kent, besides many goodly Churches e
                     •
                  ected and dedicated in her name in diuers places of England. Part of her Reliques were translated to Dauentry in Gelderland, and there kept vntill these our dayes, with great veneration of the people of Geldria. She died about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and foure.
            
            
               
               
                  F The fourteenth Day.
               AT Dauentry in Gelderland the festiuity of S. Marchebne Priest and Confessour, Hu
                        •
                     ba
                        •
                     . Monac. in vita. S. Leb. Mart. Rom. Molan. in Indi
                        •
                     . SS. Belgij ba
                        •
                     die. who being an Englishman by birth, and going ouer into the low-Countreyes as companion to S. Willebrord, preached there the faith of Christ incessantly, for more then threescore yeares togeather, wherby he conuerted the greatest part of Frizeland, and is called their Apostle. And a ter infinite labours and toyles taken in that holy enterprize, full of great sanctity and holmes of life, and in a good old age, he finally reposed in our Lord, at a place in Transysleania (to wit beyond the Riuer of Ysle) called Oldseele, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred threescore and two. His body was a
                     •
                  ter translated to Dauentry, where the same was honoured, and preserued euen vntill our dayes, with great veneration of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  G The fifteenth Day.
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire the Translation of S. Swithin Bishop of the same Sea and Confessour, whose life was so innocent,

and vertues so rare, that it pleased God by him to worke many miracles both aliue and dead. When he was ready to depart out of this world, he commanded (for humilityes sake) his body to be buryed in the Church-yard, wheron euery one might Matth. West. an. Do. 862. Sur. to. 4 Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. Matth. Paris. an. 970. & 854. tread with their feet. But afterward when many and dayly miracles, were, by his merits, wrought at his graue, and the concourse of people therto began to be great, he was on this day taken vp, and translated to a Church of his owne name, erected in Winchester, commonly called S. Swithins, which now of late in hatred of his memory is by the Protestants named the Trinity. This his translation happened about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred; which day was afterward by commaundement kept holy, throughout the Diocesse of VVinchester.
               
               THE same day at Oldseele beyond the Riuer of Ysle in Gelderland, the deposition of S. Plechelme Bishop and Confessour, who borne in our Iland of Great Britany, and Ven. Bed. l. 5. c. 24. in fine. Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. & in Indie. SS. Belgij going to Rome with S. VVero, was ordayned Bishop of an old towne in Scotlād named Candida-Casa, now called VVhitherne, & in his returne homward preached the Christian faith to the Frisians, where full of sanctity of life and miracles, he reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred thirty and two. His body is yet preserued

at the forsaid towne of Oldseele with great veneration of the people therabout.
               THE same day also at Pollesbury in VVarwickeshire the deposition of S. Eadgith 
                  Matth. West. 901. & 926. Wion in Mart. Benedict. ha
                        •
                      di
                        •
                     . Queene of Northumberland, and sister to King Ethelstane, who was giuen in Matrimony to Sithricke Prince or the Northumbers, a Pagan, vpon condition he would become a Curistian. Which he accepted of: but soone after renouncing both his Queene & faith, ended his life in a most miserable sort. And she setting aside the cares and troubles of this world, became a Religious woman, & receyued the holy veyle of chastity in the Monastery of Polesbury aforsaid: where in great sanctimony of life, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ 926.
               THE same day in like māner at VVerdt in Cleeucland, the passion of S. Harrucke Bishop Albert. Cranz in Metrop. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 29. 
                        •
                     o. Lest. l. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . degest. Sect. and Martyr, who being a Scottishman by birth, and a monke of the Monastery of Amarbaricke in Scotland, went ouer into the low Countreyes and Germany to propagate the Christian faith, where being ordayned Bishop of VVerdt, was at last put to death by the enemyes of Christ, and so ended a glorious Martyrdome, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred thirty and one.
               MOreouer in Suetia the deposition of S. Dauid Confessour, who being an Englishmā by birth & an Abbot of the Venerable

Order of Cluniacke, went into Suetia to preach the faith of Christ to the infide
                     •
                  s of Bre
                        •
                     iar. S
                        〈…〉
                     i 
                        〈◊〉
                      h
                        •
                     c die. Item. in Chron. Suet. & Nor
                        •
                     eg. de Gent. Apostoiis that Coūtry, which he did for many yeares; and after aboundant fruite reaped in that haruest by his holy labours and indeauours, famous for sanctity of life, he finally re
                     •
                  ed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and two.
            
            
               
                  A The sixteenth Day.
               AT Salisbury in VVil
                        •
                     shire the Translation of S. Osmund Confessour and Bishop of the same Sea, whose li
                     •
                  e and doctrine hath Ranul
                        •
                     h. Cest
                        〈…〉
                     n 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     . M. S. l. 7. cap. 3. Matth. W
                        •
                     st. pas
                        •
                     im in 
                        •
                     istor. & alij, Calendar. sec. vsum Sarum. hac die. much illustrated, as well the vniuersall, as our Catholicke Church of England. He was the first that compiled the Sarū Breutary, and other Cerimonies of that Church, which were afterward receyued and vsed throughout the whole Realme. For which cause in ancient tymes, the Catholicke Bishops of Salisbury obtayned the Title of the Popes Maister o
                     •
                   Cerimonyes, and had their places alwayes assigned them in the Popes Chappell & other solēnit
                     •
                  es at Rome, according to that dignity. His body was on this day solemnely translated to new Salisbury from a village a mile distant from the s
                     •
                  me, now called old Salisbury, where he died in the yeare of Christ, one thousand fourscore

and ninteene, and there placed in the great Minster or Cathedrall Church of that Citt
                     •
                  , in the middle of the Chappell of our Blessed Lady, vnder a faire marble Monument, wherat it pleased God to worke miracles through his merits. He wrote many learned bookes, and among others, the life of S. Adelmus the first Bishop of Sherborne, yet extant in diuers libraryes to be read. He was canonized for a Saint by Pope Calixtus the secōd, and his feast in many places of England hath on this day byn kept holy.
            
            
               
                  B The seauenteenth Day.
               AT VVinchcombe in Glocestershire the Passion Matth. West. an. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Con
                        〈…〉
                     . Ven. Bed. l. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 31. 
                        •
                     incent. in spec
                        ••
                     l. l. 25. c. 3. Matth. Paris. an. 1257. Mart. Rom. Molā. & Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum. of S. Kenelme King of Mercia and Martyr, who being but seauen yeares of age, and committed vnto his sister Quendrede 
                  
                     •
                  or his education, was, through her ambition of desire to raigne, caused secretly to be slayne by one of his guard, who cast his body into an obscure place among bushes and thornes: which thing being first miraculously reueyled at Rome by an Angell, that let fall a paper vpon S. Peters aultar, wherin was wryttē in goldē letters the whole processe and manner of his death, the Pope sent presently into Englād to other Christiā Kings to inquire and search out his body: and the

same being at last found, and with a sollemne procession brought vnto the Church of VVinchcombe aforsaid, it pleased God forthwith to worke many miracles in witnesse of his innocency. His sister the Authour of the soule fact was stroken blind, both her eyes falling out vpon a Primer, wheron she was reading: which being stayned with the bloud of her said eyes, is yet kept in memory of the miracle of Gods 
                     •
                  ustice. His Martyrdome hapned about the yeare of Christ 821.
               THE same day at S. Albans in Hartfordshire, the deposition of S. Iohn Confessour, who being Abbot of the Monastery of the Matth. West. an. 1214. in hist. Flor. Britan. 
                  Benediclines in that towne; was very famous for sanctity of life and miracles throughout England, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred and fourteene.
               ALso the same day in the territory of Namures the festiuity of S. Fridegand Priest and Confessour, who being an Irishmā by birth, went ouer into the Low-Coū
                  treyes with S. Foillan and his fellowes to Io. Molā. in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij preach the Christian faith, which he did most feruently with great fruite of his holy labour, till his dying day, which happened about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourty. His body was lost in the troubles of the late warres made by the French in the Low-Countreyes, to the great lamentation of the Inhabitants of that place, who

for their synnes were depriued of so glorious a Patrone.
            
            
               
                  C The eighteenth Day.
               AT Alisbury in Buckinghamshire the deposition of S. Edburge Virgin, daughter to Red
                        •
                     ald King of the Eastangles, who togeather with her sister S. Edith became a Religious Maurol. in suo Mart. h
                        •
                     c aie. vnà cum 
                        •
                     ion & Chron. Britan. fol. 302. woman in a Monastery at the forsaid towne o
                     •
                   
                  Alisbury: where in great sanctimony o
                     •
                   
                  
                     •••
                  e, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare o
                     •
                   Christ, six hundred and twenty. Her body was a terward translated to a towne of her owne name, called Edburgetowne, which now more corruptly we cō
                  monly call Edburton, where the same hath byn preserued euen vntill our dayes, with great honour and veneration, for the Mirac
                     ••
                  s that haue byn wrought therat.
               THE same day at Huis in the Confines of the higher Germany, the Translation of S. Odilia one of the eleuen thousand Brittish Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Virgins, martyred with S. Vrsula, whose name & body being reueyled by her selfe to a holy religious man in Paris, called Ioannes de Eppa, was found out, and vpon this day by Siffred Archbishop of Cullen with great solemnity translated to the forsaid towne of Huis, where the same was very honourably

placed in the Church of the Religious men there of the Order of the Holy-Cr
                        •
                     sse, and is preserued yet in the same place with great veneration of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  D The ninteenth Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Diman Confessour, who descended of an * honourable linnage in the same Kingdome, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . L
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     . R
                        •
                     s. E
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     gest. 
                        〈…〉
                     . l. 4. 
                        〈◊〉
                      i
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . vitae. contemned the world, and entring into a Monastery, became a Religious man of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict in Scotland, vnder the care and gouernment of S. Sigenius Abbot, whose scholler and disciple he was: where in all kind of singular humility, and other sanctity of life, in a venerable old age, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and seauenty.
            
            
               
                  E The twentith Day.
               AT VVilton in Wiltshire, the Commemoatiō of S. Eth
                        〈…〉
                     ide Queene, wife to K. * 
                  Al red of the VVest saxons, who after the death of her husband, built a goodly Monastery in the forsaid towne of Wilton for religious 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . W
                        •
                     st. an. 904. women, endowing it with great

rentes and reuenewes: among whome also herselfe entring, tooke their habit and holy Chron. Britan. f
                        •
                     l. 196. Wiō l. 4 lig. vita. veyle of Chastity, and became one of the number; where in all kind of singular humility, vertue, and other sanctimony of life, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred and foure, and was buryed in the same place.
            
            
               
                  F The one & twentith Day.
               AT Strasburgh in the higher Germany, the deposition of S. Arbogastus Con
                     ••
                  ssour and Bishop of that Sea, who being an Cratepol. de Epis. German. Ant. Democh. de Sacrif. Missa. to. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 35. wi
                        •
                     n l. 2. lig. vit. in Catal. Epis
                        •
                     o. Argent. Irishman by birth, and a monke of the Order of S. Benedict, went ouer into France and Germany, where he became an Ermite for diuers yeares in the forrest of Alsatia, and afterward was ordained Bishop of Strasburgh: which Sea, when he had gouerned for twelue yeares, in great sanctity of life, and other vertues, he departed this world, and reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and eight. Among many of his miracles, one is recorded, that by his prayers he reca
                     •
                  led to life Sigebert Sonne to King Dagobert of France, that by misfortune had byn slayne by a wild boare.
            
            
               
               
                  G The two and twentith Day.
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire the Commemoration of Bl. VVilfr
                        •
                     de Queene and * Abbesse, wife to holy King Edgar, and Mother to S. Edith Virgin, who being from a Pol. Vir. lib. 6. Ranulph. Cest
                        •
                     . in hist. Angl. Ite
                        •
                      in Actas S. Edi 
                        〈◊〉
                      Virg. child brought vp among the Religious woman in the Monastery o
                     •
                   
                  VVinchester, and afterward married to King 
                     
                        •
                     dgar, reiecting the vanities of the world after her husbands death, entred againe into the said Monastery, and became Abbesse of the same; where in all kind o
                     •
                   sanctimony and exemplar good life, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourscore and seauen: In which place also her body was interred, and there kept with great veneration, euen vntill our dayes.
            
            
               
                  A The three and twentith Day.
               AT London the Commemoration of S. Vodine Martyr and Archbishop of the * same Sea in our British Primitiue Church, who being a man of singular sanctity of life, reproued King Vortiger of Britany, for putting away his lawfull wise, and taking another

woman, whose Father was a great enemy to the Christiā faith: wherfore King Gul. Mal nes. histor. ex antiq. Monum. Britan. & Sto. Ibidem. 
                  Hingist of Kent, the said womās Father, incē
                  sed with rage against the holy Bishop, caused him forthwith to be slayne (like another S. Iohn Baptist,) togeather with many other British Priests and religious men, and so he receyued a crowne of Martyrdome, about the yeare of Christ, foure hundred and fifty.
            
            
               
                  B The foure & twentith Day.
               AT VVinocks-berghen in Flanders, the translation of S. Lew
                        •
                     ne Virgin & Martyr Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die, et in Indic. SS. Belgij Antiq. Britan. Monum. who descending of a very honourable parentage in our Iland of Great-Britany, was in the tyme of S. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, slayne for the confessiō of Christ, in the yeare of our Lord, six hundred fourscore and seauen. Her body was kept with great veneration in an old Monastery of S. Andrew, neere Seaford-hauen in Sussex, vntill the tyme of the second Danish and Norman incursions, & then on this day was trāslated to Berghen aforsaid, and there placed in the Cloister of S. Winocke, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand fifty and eight, wherat many miracles haue byn wrought. In the last vastation of Flanders by the French, the said

glorious body was lost, to the great lamentation of all Flanders, but especially of the Inhabitants of Berghen, who by that meanes where depriued o
                     •
                   so great a treasure.
            
            
               
                  C The fiue & twentith Day
               IN Gothland the Commemoration of the * Sainte
                     •
                   
                  VViaman, Vnaman, and Sunaman, brethren and martyrs, nephewes to S. Sigfride o
                     •
                   
                  Yorke and Apostle of Gothia, who going out of England into that Countrey with their said vncle S. Sigfrid for the Conuersion therof, were, by the enemies of Io. Mag. 
                        〈◊〉
                      hist. Gothorū l. 17. c. 20. Olâus Magnus etiam in addit. ad Ioan. Christ, slayne in hatred of Christian Religion. Their bodyes were throwne into a riuer, and their heads being put into a vessell, & a great stone hāged therat, were cast into a poole neere vnto the place of their Martyrdome, where on a tyme S. Sigfride walking and deploring their deathes, on a suddaine there appeared three miraculous lightes vpon the water, that compassed the vessell wherin their said heads were, which he seeing, presently leaped into the poole, & imbracing thē wept & said: Vindicet Deus. Wherto one answered, Vindicatum erit, Another replyed, In quem? The third added, In filios filiorum &c. This happened about the yeare of Christ, one thousand.
            
            
               
               
                  D The six and twentith Day.
               AT Derremond in Flanders the festiuity of S. Christian Virgin, who descended of the bloud Royall of our Kings of England, 
                  Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die, et in Indic. SS. Belgij had an angell sent from heauen (as writeth Molanus) to instruct her in the Christian faith: by whose admonition, to eschue the dangerous allurements of the world, she first stole secretly into Scotland, and thence into Flanders, and there after a priuate & most saintly life, full of miracles, she gaue vp her blessed soule to rest with her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand fourscore and twelue, and in the raigne of K. VVilliam Rusus of England. Her principall celebrity is kept at the forsaid towne of Derremond, vpon the seauenth day of September, when her body was taken vp and translated to a more eminent place of the same Church, where it is yet preserued with great veneration of the Inhabitants, as Patronesse of that Village.
            
            
               
                  E The seauen & twentith Day.
               AT Glastenbury in Sommersetshire the festiuity of S. Ioseph of Arimath
                        •
                     a, who

going out of Iury (after he had buryed Christ) with S. Mary Magdalen and her company, to Marselles in France, came thence into Great-Britany, with his owne sonne Io. Capg. i
                        •
                      Catal. SS. Brit. Pol. Vir. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Ca
                        ••
                     d. in d
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     rip. Britan. pag. 162 
                        •
                     icol. Harpesf. in hist. Eccl
                        •
                     s. fol. 3. 
                  Ioseph, and ten other disciples, where he obtained of King Aruiragus, a little Iland in Somersetshire, called in the British tongue Ins wi
                        ••
                     in (now Glastenbury;) & there leading a solitary life with his said fellowes, at last he cōuerted to the Christian faith Marius & Coillus, sonne and nephew to King Aruiragus, and then full of most venerable old yeares, he died, about the yeare of Christ, fourscore and two. There was afterward a goodly Monastery erected in that place of the Order of S. Benedict, which was the greatest in all England, and so remayned vntill the tyme of King Henry the 8. when by his commandement the same was destroyed by Syr VVilliam Goald Iustice of Peace, to the lamentation of all Christendome. His feast was wont to be celebrated on this day in many places of our Realme, euen vntill the raigne of the late Queene Elizabeth.
               
               THE same day at Lincolne th
                     •
                   passion of S. Hugh Martyr, who being a Child of t
                     •
                  n yeares old, was by the Iewes of that Citty in contēpt of Christ & Christian Religion, nayled on a crosse, & so deserued to be crowned with the same death, that our blessed Sauiour suffered for the Redēptiō of

mankind. The perfidious Iewes, when he was dead, buryed his body in an obscure place, which the earth miraculously cast Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Aug. Matth. West. & Paris
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 1255. vp: and then they threw him into a well, who being there also by a miracle found out by his owne Mother, the Chanons of the same Citty, with great veneration carried the same in processiō to the Cathedrall Church or Minster, and there interred his holy Reliques, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and fiue, and in the raigne of King Henry the third of England.
            
            
               
                  F The eight & twentith Day.
               AT Dole in little Britany the deposition of Sigeb. in Chron. an. 565. Petr. in Catal. l. 6. Vincent. in specul. lib. 20. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij hac die▪
                   
                  S. Sampson Bishop and Confessour, who borne in our Ilād of a Royall British bloud, was first created Archbishop of Carleon vpon the riuer of Vske, and Metropolitan among the old Britans of VVales, now commonly called Carline; and being inflamed with desyre of helping his neighbour-Countreyes for their Conuersion, went ouer into France, and there was constituted Bishop of Dole in little Britany by King Childebert of France: where after he had conuerted many thousands to the faith of Christ, famous for miracles, he finally ended his venerable dayes,

and reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and 
                     •
                  oure. His body was buryed at Dole, and there in ancient times wont to be kept with great veneration and reuerence of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  G The nine & twentith Day.
               AT Troys in France the deposition of S. Lupus Bishop and Confessour, who about the yeare of Christ, foure hundred and fourty, togeather with S. German Bishop Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij omn
                        •
                     s hac die. Bed. l. 1. Eist. Eccl c. 17. 18. 19. 20. & 21. Gild. Sapien. in eius vita. Greg. T
                        〈…〉
                      de glo
                        •
                     . Conf. of Auxier, came ouer into our Iland of Great-Britany, to expell the Pelagian heresy, and to reestablish the Catholicke and Roman faith, which was among them before, and then began to be extinguished by the doctrine of Pelagius the Britan. At what time also is recorded a famous & miraculous victory achieued by the prayers of these two Saintes, against those heretickes, by only crying and sounding out the word Alleluia, wherwith the said Pelagians were driuen away and discomfited. And for this singular benefit, that our Countrey hath receyued by this seruant of Christ, it seemeth not amisse, that his memory should be recorded among the ancient Saintes of our Nation (though he were a Frenchman by birth) and his festiuity celebrated by vs, for the increase of

deuotion in our Iland, that was once made worthy of so glorious a Patrone and Protectour.
               THE same day at Lichfield in Stassordshire, the Commemoration of Blessed Owen 
                  * Confessour, who being a man of great esteeme and birth, and high Steward to Queene Edildride of the East 
                     ••
                  gles, renounced the world, and became a monke, first in the Monastery of Lesting in the Kingdome Ven. Bed. l. 4. hist. Angl. cap. 3. of the Northumbers, vnder S. Chad, that then was Abbot therof, and after at Lichfield: where being made worthy by God, to heare the voyce of Angells one day descending vpon S. Chads Oratory to call him to heauē, in great sanctity and holines of life, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourscore.
            
            
               
                  A The thirtith Day.
               IN Northumberland the deposition of S. Le
                     
                        •
                     rone Virgin and Martyr, who being Abbesse Matth. West. an. 1011. Arnol. Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac die of a Monastery in the same Kingdome, was in the second Danish persecution togeather with many holy men and women, slaine in contēpt of the Christiā faith. For the furious Danes surprizing all the Monasteries that stood in their wayes, put most of the Religious persons, eyther to sword

or fire. And among others, cōming to this Monastery, whero
                     •
                   S. Lefrone was Abb
                     •
                  sse, a
                     •
                  ter that they had most barbarously and by violence abused the sacred Virgins, they tithed the whole Monastery, putting nyne to death, and leauing the tenth to sh
                     〈…〉
                   for herselfe, which vnheard-of-cruelty, the perfidious Danes shewed towards many religious persons in our Coūtrey, at their arri
                  
                     •
                  all, and incursions, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and eleuen.
               THE same day at Canterbury the deposition of S. Ta
                        〈…〉
                     yne Confessour, and Archbishop of the same Sea, who being a Bed. l. 5. c. 24. Ioan. Tritem. l. 4. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 69. Pol. Vir. lib. 6. wion l. 2. lig. vitae. man of excellent learning and wisdome, was, of a monke of the Monastery of Brewton, promoted to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, and succeeded S. Brituald in that office: where in all kind of holy conuersation, and sanctity of life, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and fourty, and in the raigne of King Edbert of Kent. His body was buryed in the Cathedrall Church of Canterbury, where it yet remayneth in the old Cloister.
               
            
            
               
                  F The one and thirtith Day.
               AT Hunstocke in Corn-wall the deposition of S. Neoth Priest and Confessour, who

leading a solitary life in the VVest-part of England, was famous for sanctity of life & Matth. West. an. 87
                        •
                     . et 878. Molam. in addit. ad Vsua. & alij omnes hac die. miracles, both aliue and dead. He was very familiar with king Alfred of the VVestsaxons, by whose counsell and exhortation, the said King founded the famous Vniuersity of Oxford. With this man also there liued at the same tyme, another venerable holy man (and as it were his companion) called S. Guier, vnto both which there haue byn many Chappells and altars, in Catholicke tymes past, dedicated with in the Realme of England. And in Humingtonshire in particular, there is yet remayning a faire towne and Church, sometyme erected in memory of S. Neoth, which vntill this day retayneth that ancient name, and is commonly called S. Neots. He died about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred threescore and eleuen.
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF AVGVST.
            
               
                  C The first Day.
               
                  AT VVinchester in Hampshire the deposition of S. Ethelwold 
                  Sur. to. 4 in eius vita. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Pol. Vir. lib. 6. histor. Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij omnes hac die. Bishop and Confessour, who being first a Monke of Glastenbury Monastery, vnder S. Dunstan, was afterward made Abbot of Abington, & thence promoted to the Bishopricke of VVinchester: which when he had gouerned for one and twenty yeares togeather, in great sanctity of life & working of Miracles, he rested in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ 984. & was buryed in his owne Cathedral Church of VVinchester: at whose body it hath pleased God to worke many miracles. It is recorded of this

holy Bishop, that in tyme of a great dearth, he brake all the plate belonging to his Church, and gaue it to the poore, saying: That the Church in good tyme might be againe prouided of Ornaments necessary, but the poore that perished for want of food, could not be recouered.
               
               THE same day at Gaunt in Flanders the Translation of S. VVenlocke Abbot and Confessour, who descended of the ancient Royall bloud of Britany, became Father to Sur. in vita. S. Ethbini 19. Octo. Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die. many Monkes in an old Monastery in the lesser Britany, called Tauracum, where in all kind of most holy life, he ended his blessed dayes. His body was afterward on this day with great solemnity translated to Gaunt, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and fifty, and is there vntill this day preserued with great honour and veneration.
            
            
               
                  D The second Day.
               AT Durham in the Bishopricke, the Commemoration of S. Alrike Eremite * and Confessour who leading a solitary life in the forrest of Carliele for many yeares togeather, Matth. Paris. in Chron. ad an. 1107. & 1170. was of such admirable sanctity and holinesse of life, that his memory, euen vntill our dayes, hath byn famous throughout the whole Iland of Britany. S. Godricke an Eremite also liuing in those partes at the

same tyme, and being present at his death, saw his soule ascend into heauen, as it were in a Sphericall forme of a burning wynd. His body was with great veneration interred at Durham by the Clergy of that Church, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred and seauen, in which yeare he died.
            
            
               
                  E The third Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Domitiús Confessour, who descended of a * worthy lynage in the Kingdome of Ireland, became there a Monke of the holy Order of Io. Lest. Episco. Rossens. l. 4. de gest. Scot. Wion in append. 
                        〈…〉
                     d l. 3. 
                        〈…〉
                     g. vitae. S. Benedict, vnder the famous Abbot S. Columbe, whose scholler and disciple he was, where in all kind of good learning, vertue, & other sanctity of life, he ended his venerable old dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and eleuen. His memory hath, in tymes past, byn very famous throughout the Iland of Great-Britany, especially in Scotland, where he liued and died.
            
            
               
               
                  F The fourth Day.
               AT Furne in Flanders in the Diocesse of Ipres, the Translation of part of the glorious body of S. VValburge Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to S. Richard King of the English, who being sent for into Germany by S. Bonijace her vncle, Archbishop of Mentz, was by him ordained Abbesse of a monastery Marcel. in vit. S. Simib. c. 14. Mol. in addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Wion. hac die in Mart. Benedict. there, which he had newly founded, called Heyden
                        •
                     rae, where in all kind of sanctimony of life, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred threescore and sixteene. The rest of her body remayneth at Eyst, whither it was before translated; wherout, vntill this day, distilleth a precious oyle, very soueraigne formany diseases. Her principall festiuity was wont to be celebrated in our Catholicke Church of England, vpon the one and twentith day of Iune, according to the vse of Sarum; and in Germany vpon the first of May.
            
            
               
                  G The fifth Day.
               AT Oswistree in Shropshire the Passion of S. Oswald King of the Northumbers and

Martyr, who after he had brought the Angles, Scots, and Pictes vnto his subiection, was so zealous in the new planted faith of Christ, that for defence therof principally he was slayne by Penda the Pagan King of Mercia, at the forsaid towne of Osistree, in the Bed. in Epit. & l. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . c. 6. 9. 10. & 11. Io. Maior Histor. Scot. l. 2. cap. 11 Mart. Rom. & alij omnes. hac die. yeare of Christ, six hundred thirty and fiue. S. Bede recounteth, that on a day as he sate at dinner with S. Aidan Bishop of Lindisferne, there was a siluer dish brought before him full of daynties, which when he saw, he caused presently to be brokē in little peeces, and giuen to the poore attending at his gate for almes, togeather with the meate that was therin, saying, They had more need therof then himselfe. The Bishop sitting by, and delighted with such rare piety in a King, tooke him by the right hand, and said: This hand, I pray God, may neuer consume. And so saith S. Bede, it fell out: for that his arme and hand being cut of at his death, remayned till his dayes whole and incorrupt, being kept in a siluer case, in S. Peters Church at Bambrough. He finished the Cathedrall Church of S. Peter at Torke, which was before begun by his predecessour King Edwyn. His body was first buryed at Peterburrow, and part therof trāslated afterward to VVinockes-Berghen in Flanders, where the same was preserued with great Veneration.
            
            
               
               
                  A The sixt Day.
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire the depositiō 
                  Pol. Vir. lib. 11. & 12. Matth. West. & Paris. ad ann. citat. Wiō l. 2. in Catal. Episco. winton. of Blessed Henry Confessour and Bishop of the same Sea, who being a Frenchman by birth, and brother to King Stephen of England, became first a monke of the Order of S. Benedict, and after Abbot of Glastenbury, and last of all Bishop of VVinchester, and Legat Apostolicall of England. In which dignity he behaued himself with so great humility and loue of the common people, for more then fourty yeares togeather, that his name was famous throughout all England & France. He died in great sanctity of life, and spirit of Prophesy, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred seauenty and one, about foure monethes before the Martyrdome of S. Thomas of Canterbury.
               
               THE same day at 
                     
                        •
                     one in France the Commemoration of S. Alexander Confessour, * who descended of the bloud-Royall of Scotland, 
                  Rob-Buckl. in vita S. Mechtil. Virg. L. M. de vit. SS. Mulie ū. Angl. stole secretly thence for the loue of Christ in base attyre, and went into France, where he became a Lay-brother in a Monastery of Cistercian monkes at Fone, labouring in the basest offices of the house, vnknowne till his dying day: Which being then reueyled to the Prior of the Monastery vpon obedience,

it pleased God to testify his worthines by a Miracle after his death, which was thus. A Monke of the same Monastery, that had a sore vlcer in his brest, and now growne to a fistula, came to the said Alexanders tombe, and there prayed. Vnto whome Alexāder appearing brighter then the sunne with two Crownes, one on his head, and another in his hand; the Monke demaunded what that double Crowne meant? He answered and said: The Crowne in his hand is for the temporall Crowne, which I forsooke for Christes loue (for he should haue byn King of Scotland, being next heyre thervnto by succession, as the Story relateth:) The other on my head, is that which I haue receyued common with other Saintes. And that yow may be assured of the verity of this vision, you shal now be cured of your infirmity. And hauing thus spoken, and the other immediatly healed, he vanished away. He died about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and two hundred.
            
            
               
                  B The seauenth Day.
               AT VVestminster by London the Commemoration of S. Maude Queene, daughter * to S. Margaret and holy King Malcolme of Scotland, & wife to K. Henry the first of England,
                  
whose admirable and rare vertues, togeather with her singular & exemplar life, hath byn a patterne euer synce to all Princesses in Europe; especially her exceeding Charity Matth. West. et Paris. an. 1118. & 1105. Item in Actis S. Marg. Matris apud Sur. to. 3. 10. Iunij. towards the poore, whome she disdayned not, though neuer so foule leapers, but rather imbraced them with all delight, yea washed their soares and vlcers, neuer so loathsome and filthy: For whome she built also a goodly hospitall in the suburbes of London called S. G
                        •
                     les; as also founded the Priory of Christes-Church within Ald-gate of the same Citty. Her body was with all veneration buryed at VVestminster in the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred and eighteene, which yeare she desceased. In whose praise these distiches following were composed.
               
                  Prosper a non laetam secere, non aspera tristem,
                  Aspera risus ei, prospera terror erant.
                  Non decor essecit frag
                        •
                     lem, non Sceptra superbam,
                  Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.
               
               She was in her tender yeares brought vp in the Monasteries of Religious womē at VVinchester and Rumsey, in all exercise of vertue and learning. She built a faire stone-bridge ouer the riuer of Lue at Stratford-vpon-Bow, as also gaue diuers goodly mannours and lands to the Abbey of Barking in Essex, for mayntayning of the same.
            
            
               
               
                  C The eight Day.
               AT Glastenbury-Abbey in Somersetshire the Commemoration of S. Fagane Confessour, * and Scholler to S. Ioseph of Arimathia, with whome when he had led a solitary Eysengr. C
                        •
                     nt 2. part. 3 dist. 4. Io. de Kirkstat in Monast. Tabulae. Glas
                        •
                     on. life for many yeares in the Iland of Auallonia, now called Glastenbury, and being by S. Ioseph throughly instructed in the Christian 
                     •
                  aith and other vertues, became himselfe a preacher therof and S. Iosephs successour in his Oratory, where the 
                     •
                  amous Monastery of Glastenbury was afterward built: Where also in great sanctity & holines of life he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, one hundred and twelue; and was one of the first Confessours of our British Nation.
            
            
               
                  D The ninth Day.
               AT Ely in Cambridgshire the deposition of Matth. West. an. 1254. & Paris. eodem an. Pol. Vir. l. 16. in fine. S. Hugh Bishop and Confessour, who being first a Monke and then Abbot of the Monastery of S. Edmundsbury in Suffolke, was thence promoted to the Bishopricke of Ely, where in all kind of most commendable vertues, especially in humility and abstinence,

hauing gouerned that Sea fiue and Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac die. twēty years, he happily ended his venerable dayes, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and foure. His body was very honourably interred in the Cathedrall Church of Fly, within the Chancell, which himselfe had newly built from the ground, consecrating the same in presence of King Henry the third, and his sonne Prince Edward, in the yeare 1235. and was there kept vntill our dayes with great honour and veneration of the people. He also built the Bishops Pallace at Ely, besydes many other publicke works of Charity, which he perfourmed whilst he liued.
            
            
               
                  E The tenth Day.
               AT Lesmor in Ireland the Commemoration of S. Malcus Bishop and Confessour, * who borne in England, and a Monke of the Monastery of VVinchester in Hampshire, and of a most vertuous conuersatiō, was elected Io. Molā. in appēd. ad Mart. Vsua. & Ber. in vita S. Malach. Epis. & consecrated Bishop of Lesmor in Ireland. In which Pastorall office, in great sanctity of life & working of Miracles, he finally ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred twenty & fiue. He is also much praised by S. Bernard, that liued at the same tyme; who wryting the

life of S. Malachy, Bishop and Primate of Ireland, among other thinges, he saith of S. Malcus: That the wisdome of God was in him. &c.
               
            
            
               
                  F The eleuenth Day.
               AT Chichester in Sussex the Commemoration of Bl. Gilbert Confessour & Bishop * of the same Sea, whose integrity of life and vertuous conuersation, hath made him famous to posterity. He was a Father of the fatherlesse (saith the Story of his life) a comforter of mourners, a defender of widdowes, a relieuer of the poore, a helper of the distressed, and a diligent visitour of the sicke. And thus heaping vp heauenly treasure by the excercise of these and other like vertues, and by his continuall teaching and instructing Matth. West. in hist. An
                        •
                      l. ad an. Citat. Registr. Cicestren. Catal. Epis. Cicestrēs. the people, like a true Pastour of Christs flocke, full of venerable old age, he finally reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand three hundred and 
                     •
                  iue, & was buryed in his owne Cathedrall Church. At whose body Matthew of VVestminster recordeth diuers Miracles to haue byn wrought. He raised the foundations of our Blessed Ladyes Chappell at Chichester, but death preuenting his pious endeauour, the same was finished by another.
            
            
               
               
                  G The tweluth Day.
               AT Stafford in the 
                     •
                  ame Shire, the Commemoration * of S. Bertelme Confessour, who descended of a noble British lynage in our Iland, contemned the puddle and vanityes Regist. Eccle. Stafford. & monument. antiq. eiusdem Prouin. of the world in the flower of his youth, and became an E
                     •
                  mite for the loue of God, leading a most strict & seuere kind of life, in the woods neere Stafford aforsaid: where in very great sanctity and holines of life, he ended his blessed dayes, & finally reposed in our Lord. His body was afterward brought to Stafford, and being there interred, was wont, in ancient tymes, to be kept with great veneration of the people of that Prouince.
            
            
               
                  A The thirteenth Day.
               IN Frizeland the Commemoration of S. * 
                  VVigbert Priest and Martyr, who being an English-man by birth, descended of an honourable stocke, lead first a solitary life in Ireland, and thence returning into England; went ouer into Frizeland to preach the Christian saith to the Pagans of that Countrey, which when he had done for two yeares,

without any great profit, returned againe, and gaue himselfe to his former Eremiticall kind of life. But being sent thither the second Ven. Bed. l. 5. c. 10. & 11. Marcel. in vita S. Simibert. Molan. in In
                        •
                     ic. SS. Belgij tyme with S. VVillebrord & his fellowes, was by Radbodus King of the Frizians put to a mos
                     •
                   cruell death, for persuading the people to breake downe a certaine Image of Iupiter, which the said King had set vp to worship and offer sacrifice vnto, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore and fourteene. This man is different from the other S. VVigbert, whose feast is also celebrated vpon this day by the Roman Martyrologe, vnder the name and title of a Confessour.
               
            
            
               
                  B The fourteenth Day.
               AT Elst in Gelderland the Translation of S. VVerenfrid Priest & Confessour, who Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Io. Trit. de vir. Illustr. l. 3. c. 147. wion in Mart. Benedict. being a Monke of the monastery of Rippon in Yorkeshire, went out of England into Flāders and Germany to preach the Christian faith, where he conuerted the whole Countrey of Geldria, and became their Apostle, labouring incessantly, by teaching and instructing them in the true way of life, vntill his dying day. His body was afterward with great solemnity and veneration, on this day translated to the forsaid towne of Elst, wherat

infinite miracles haue byn wrought, especially in curing the disease of the Goute. He died about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and siue; and is honoured of the Inhabitantes of Elst, as principall Apostle and Patrone of that Prouince.
            
            
               
                  C The fifteenth Day.
               IN the Monastery of Cateby, the Commemoration * of S. Margaret Prioresse, who borne at Abington in Barkeshire, and sister to S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, was by him ordayned Prioresse of the forsaid Monastery of Cateby: whose most vertuous life Matth. West. in hist. ad an. 1257. and conuersation, full of sanctimony and miracles, deserued to be famous euen vntill our dayes throughout Englād. She died about the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and seauen, and was buryed in the same place. At whose body it hath pleased God, in testimony of her holines, & increase of deuotion in our Iland of Great-Britany, to worke miracles,
            
            
               
                  D The sixteenth Day.
               AT Douer in Kent the Commemoration of S. Thomas Monke & Martyr, who by *
                  
certain French Pirates, that lāded there in the night, was most barbarously slayne in defence of the goods of the Church & Monastery Matth. West. an. 1295. Pol. Vir. lib. 17. Histor. Sto. in vita. Edou. 1. committed to his charge, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fourscore and fifteene, and raigne of King Edward the first of England. His body was with great solemnity and veneration interred in the Church of Douer, wherat it is recorded that miracles haue byn wrought, in signe of his innocency.
            
            
               
                  E The seauenteenth Day.
               AT Hartford in the same Shire, the festiuity of S. Thomas Archdeacon of Northumberland and Confessour, who hauing Matth. West. & Paris, an. 1253. byn a disciple of S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, was of so great sanctity and holinesse o
                     •
                   life, that it pleased God to manifest the same after his death, by the manifold miracles wrought at his body. He died in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and three, and was buryed in a little Chappell of the Carmelites at Hartford. And for that there are three other Saintes of this name, of the English nation, this man is cōmonly called, for distinctions sake, by the name of S. Thomas of Northumberland.
               
               
                  
THE same day at Egmond in North-Holland 
                  
                     •
                  n the D
                     •
                  ocesteo Harlem the deposition o
                     •
                   S. Ieron Priest and Martyr, who borne in Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. e in Ind. SS. Belgij Petr. Cratep. de Episco. German. Wion & a
                        •
                     ij. 
                  Scotland of a Noble bloud, went ouer into Holland to preach the Christian faith to the peop
                     •
                  e o
                     •
                   that Coūtrey: which whē he had done most painfully for many years togeather with great sruite and profit of his holy labours, was at last slayne in hatred therof by the Danes and Normans, that made incursions into those partes, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and fifty. His body was with great veneration brought to the Monastery of Egmond, and there placed neere to the venerable Reliques of S. Adalbert their Apostle, both which are now destroyed and cast out o
                     •
                   the Church, in these our vnhappy dayes, togeather with all other sacred Reliques and images, in those partes, to the lamentation of the Christian world.
            
            
               
                  F The eighteenth Day.
               AT Rome the deposition of S. Helen Empresse mother to Constantine the Great, who borne at Colchester in Essex (as ancient Niceph. l. 8. Euseb. in vit. Constant. Socrat. l. 2. cap. 12. Records testifie) and daughter to Prince Coelus of Britany, was for her great zeale in Christian Religion, made worthy both of an earthly & heauēly crowne. She desceased

at Rome, about the yeare of Christ, three hundred twenty and six, being of the age Zozom. l. 1. c. 1. Manal. Graec. 21. Maij. Mart. Rom. hac die. Symon Dunel. in histor. Angl. of fourscore yeares. Her body was afterward translated to Rhemes in France, and there is kept with great veneration. The Greeke Church doth celebrate her feast vpon the one and twentith day of May, togeather with her sonne Constantine. She going to Hierusalem found out the Crosse, wheron our Sauiour was nayled, and suffered his passion for the Redemption of man-kind, and repayred that Citty sore ruined through the warres of the Roman Emperours, adorning the same with many goodly Churches and monumētes. She also builded the walles of the Citty of London & Colchester in England, togeather with a goodly Church in the Towne of Bedsord, which being turned into a Monastery, was called of her name Helenslow, but afterward quite destroyed and ouerthrowne by the Incursions of the Danes, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred threescore and eight.
            
            
               
                  G The ninteenth Day.
               IN South-wales the Commemoration of S. Clintanke K. of Brecknocke and Martyr, who * being a very zealous and godly Prince, as he was one day on hunting, was slayne by a

Pagan souldiar, partly in hatred of Christian Religion, and partly also for that a noble Virgin should say, she would neuer 10. Capg. in Catal. SS. Brit. marry any man except the said King, who was so zealons a Christian. There was afterward a goodly Church erected in his honour, neere to a Riuer in South-wales, where he was slayne, and where with great veneration his holy body was interred, at which it pleased God in signe of his innocency to worke many miracles.
            
            
               
                  A The twentith Day.
               IN Northumberland the passion of S. Oswine King of the 
                     now Yorkshire 
                  Deires & Martyr, who for that he was a most zealous Christian, was impiously slayne by Osway the Pagan King of the Bernicians, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and one. His body being Bed. in Epit. & Histor. l. 3. c. 14. West. an. 645. & 941. Molan. in addit. ad Vsua. throwne into an obscure place, & after miraculously found out, was with great veneration brought vnto Tinmouth, and there placed in an ancient Church erected in honour of our blessed Lady. S. Aidan liuing at the same tyme, and Bishop of Lindisserne, had a reuelation of his death, euen at the instant of his passion, who when he preached to the people, was wont oftentymes to say of him: This Nation of ours is not worthy to haue so

good a Ruler or Gouernour. &c.
               
            
            
               
                  B The one & twentith Day.
               IN Calabria in Italy the Commemoration of S. Richard Bishop and Confessour, who * descended of a worthy parentage in England, and going to the Court of Rome, was there made Priest, and at length, for his Regist. Eccles. S. Andr. in Calab▪ & Officiū
                     cius impress. Romae. vertue and learning, ordayned Bishop of a place in Calabria called S. Andrews: where in great sanctity and holines, of life togeather with exceeding vigilancy ouer his flocke committed to his charge, he finally reposed in our Lord. His body was interred in his said Cathedrall Church of S. Andrew, and there is yet preserued with great deuotion and veneration of the Inhabitantes, for the frequent Miracles that haue byn wrought therat. He is Patrone of that Diocesse, and his feast is there celebrated with a double Office, wherin he hath three proper lessons, conteyning the whole Story of his life.
            
            
               
                  C The two and twentith Day.
               IN Bedfordshire the Commemoration of S. Arnulph Confessour, who descended of * a noble British lynage in our Iland, for the

loue of God, contemned the world, and became an Eremite, leading a most strict and Ex antiq. monum. Prouin
                        •
                     . Bedford. seuere kind of life in the County or Prouince of Bedford: where in great sanctity and holinesse he also ended his blessed dayes. His body was buryed in the same shire at a place called afterward of his name S. Arnulphs-bury, where for a long tyme it was honoured, for the miracles it pleased God to worke therat.
            
            
               
                  D The three and twentith Day.
               AT Meneuia, now cal'ed S. Dauids in Penbrookeshire 
                  * of VVales the Commemoration o
                     •
                   
                  S. Iustinian Monke and Martyr, who being a noble Britan, and building a Monastery 10. Capg. in Catal. SS. Brit. with his owne inheritance, in the Iland of Ramsey in Penbrookeshire aforsaid, and hauing there gathered many monkes togeather vnder Monasticall discipline, was in the said iland, by the diuells instigation, in hatred of his sanctity, slayne by three of the brethren of his said Monastery, who were all presently stroken with a filthy leprosy by diuine Iustice, in reuenge of so odious a fact, about the yeare of Christ, foure hundred fourscore and six. His body was withall veneratiō & honour brought to the Church of Meneuia, where the same was by

                  S. Dauid himselfe then Bishop therof, solemnely interred, and wherat it pleased God to worke many miracles.
            
            
               
                  E The foure & twentith Day.
               IN Cateby-Monastery the Commemoration of S. Alice Prioresse, and sister to S. Edmund 
                  * Archbishop of Canterbury, who borne at Matth. Paris. in hist. Maiori. ad an. D. 1257. & deinceps. 
                  Abington in Barkeshire & a woman of admirable spirit and vertue, was after the death of her sister S. Margaret, made Prioresse of the Monastery of Cateby, where in very great humility and holinesse of life, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred and seauenty. Her body was buryed in the same Monastery neere to the body of her forsaid sister S. Margaret, wherat in token of her sanctimony of life, whilst she liued, it pleased God to worke miracles after her death.
            
            
               
                  F The fiue & twentith Day
               AT Coldingham in Norhamshire, in the Marches of Scotland, the passion of S. Ebba Abbesse and Martyr, descended of the bloud royall of the Kings of Northūberlād, togeather with all her Sisters in the Monastery

who in the first Danish Incursions, vnder the Captayns Hinguar & Hubba, cut of their noses Chron. Britan. fol. 609. Westan. 870. Pol. Vir. lib. 4. Arnold. Wion. lib. 4. lig. vitae. Baron. tom. 10. Annal. in defens. earumdē. and vpper lippes, to deforme themselues, therby to anoyd the barbarous lust of the Pagan persecutours; who seeing them so mangled and defaced, commaunded their Monastery to be fiered, and so they all ended their course of Martyrdome. She was afterward canonized for a Saint, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and fourscore. This woman is different from the other of the same Name, who was the foundresse and first Abbesse of this Monastery of Coldingham, and no Martyr, for that the Danes were not in her tyme yet come into England, nor almost two hundred yeares after. Her Commemoration we haue put downe before, vpon the second day of Aprill.
               THE same day at Monte-Flascone in Tuscany 
                  Catal. Epis. Herefor. Regist. eiusdem Eccle. Pol. Vir. l. 17. Hist. Ang l. the deposition of S. Thomas Confessour and Bishop of Hereford, who going to Rome to Pope Martyn the second, about the affaires of his Church, died in his way homward at the forsaid Towne of Monte-Flascone, where his flesh being separated from his bones, was there honourably interred in the Church of S. Seuerine; but his sacred Reliques were brought to Hereford, and there placed in a faire marble Tombe in his owne Cathedrall Church, with great solemnity

and veneration, the second day of October, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fourscore and seauen. He was afterward Canonized for a Saint by Pope Iohn the two and twentith.
            
            
               
                  G The six and twentith Day.
               AT Isselbey in Lincolnshire the Commemotion * of S. Pandwyne Virgin, who descended of a noble parentage in our Iland of Great-Britany, was of such admirable vertue, Rich. Parochus Isselb. in eius vita apud Io. Capg. in Cat. SS. Angl. Molā. in append. ad Vsua. and austerity of life, that in signe therof it pleased God to worke many miracles at her body after her death, which was kept for a long tyme with great veneration of the Countrey-pleople, at the forsaid towne of Isselbey. She died about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred and foure. The story of her life is wrytten at large, by Richard Pastour of the Church of Isselbey, wherof there is mentiō made in the Catalogue of English Saints, gathered by Iohn Capgraue a learned man of our Nation, who liued in the tyme of King Richard the second, and lead an Eremiticall life in the Prouince of Kent.
               
            
            
               
               
                  A The seauen & twentith Day.
               IN Glocestershire the Commemoration of * 
                  S. Decuman Eremite and Martyr, who borne of a very noble British parentage in South-wales, and brought vp in the Christian faith from his youth, stole secretly away from his friends, and with a fagot of wood, insteed of a boat, miraculously passed ouer the riuer of Seuerne, and came into Glocestershire, 
                  Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Ang. where leading an Eremiticall austere life, was at length slaine by a Pagan souldier, in hatred of Christian Religion: whose head being cut of from his body, himselfe tooke vp from the ground, and carried to a fountayne, wherat he was wont to wash it. At which place there was afterward a Goodly Church erected in his honour, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and six, where his body was wont to be kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants: as also another dedicated vnto him in the Towne of VVells in Somersetshire, which at this day is there standing to be seene.
            
            
               
               
                  B The eight & twentith Day.
               AT Brackley in Northamptonshire, the Commemoration of S. Rumbald Confessour, * Sonne to a British King of our Iland, who as soone as he was borne into the world Ex Registr. Eccle. Brackl. et antiqua monum. Prouin
                        •
                     . North. and baptized, did miraculously speake and fortell diuers wonderfull thinges; and professing himselfe a Christian, presently yielded vp the ghost. His body was with great veneration buryed at the forsaid towne of Brackley, wherat, it is recorded, diuers miracles haue byn wrought.
               THE same day at Cullen in the higher Germany, the Commemoration of S. 
                  * 
                  Agnes Virgin and Martyr, who being a noble Britan by birth, and one of the number of the Eleuen thousand Virgins martyred with S. Vrsula, was for defence of her chastity there Tabulae. Coloniēs. put to death with the rest of her fellowes, about the yeare of Christ, three hundred fourscore and three, herselfe afterward miraculously reuealing her name: for which cause her body is peculiarly honoured of the Inhabitants of Cullen.
               
            
            
               
               
                  C The nine & twentith Day.
               AT London the deposition of S. Sebbe 
                  Ven. Bed. l. 4. c. 11. Mart. Rom. hac die. Sto. in. Ann
                        •
                     l. Angl. de Regib. Eastsax. King of the East saxons and Confessour, who after he had gouerned that Kingdome thirty yeares in great peace and tranquillity, became a Monke in the Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul at London, distributing the greatest part of his goods to the poore before his entrance, where within a few yeares after, in great sanctity of life, he peaceably rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and fifteene. His body was buried in the Church of S. Paul in London, in a costly marble Coffin, where it was kept vntill our dayes with great veneration of the Cittizens, for the miracles that are recorded to haue byn wrought therat.
               THE same day at Dorchester in Oxfordshire, 
                  Gul. Malmesb. lib. de Pontif. & Reg. Angl. an. 871. the Translation of S. Edwold Confessour and Eremite, brother to S. Edmund King & Martyr, who refusing the Kingdome of the Eastangles, gaue himselfe, for loue of Christ, to a solitary life; In which when he had liued many yeares in all sanctity and holines, at last ended his blessed dayes at Dorchester, where his body being interred about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred threescore

and eleuen, was afterward, on this day, taken vp and translated to a more eminent place of the same Church, where before it was land.
            
            
               
                  D The thirtith Day.
               IN 
                     
                        •
                     rance in the Diocesse of Meldune the deposition of S. Fiaker Confeslour, Sonne Io. Lest. Epis. Ross. de reb. Sco. lib. 4. Hect. Boet. l. 9. Bellefor. in Ann. Francorū l. 9. c. 36. Molā. & omnes hac die. to Eugenius the fourth of that name, King of Scotland, who forsaking all worldly dignities and delightes, went ouer into France with his sister S. Syra, and became a Religious man, by the help and directions of S. Pharao Bishop of Meldune: where in very great sanctity and holinesse of life he ended his blessed daye
                     •
                  , about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and thirty. In the Citty of S. Omers in Artors, there is a Chappell or Oratory dedicated vnto S. Fiaker within the Par
                     •
                  sh Church of S. Margaret in the same Towne, where his feast is kept on this day with great solemnity, and veneration, by the Sodality or Confraternity that is there instituted in his honour. Where also is graunted Plenary Indulgence to all that rightly v
                     •
                  sit his Chappell on this day, and fullf
                     •
                  ll the other circumstances conteyned in the Bull of Graunt, by Pope Clement the

eight, dated in the yeare of Christ one thousand 
                     •
                  iue hundred nynty and seauen.
            
            
               
                  E The one and thirtith Day.
               AT Lindisserne in the Kingdome of the Northumbers the deposition of S. Aidan 
                  Bed. l. 3. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3. 5. & 14 Et in vita S. Cuthber. Confessour, and Bishop of the same Sea, whose soule S. Cuthbert, being then but a Sheepheard, saw carried vp to heauen by two angells, and was therby conuerted to a Religious life, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and one.
               THE same day at VVimborne in Dorcetshire 
                  Matth. West. an. 719. 727. & 901. Breuiar, Sarum & Molan. hac die. the deposition of S. Cuthberge Abbesse sister to King Inas of the VVestsaxons, who building a Monastery of her owne charges at VVimborne, entred her selfe therin, tooke a Religious habit, and became Abbesse of the same. Where in all kind of vertuous exercise, and Monasticall discipline, togeather with working of many miracles, she finally gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spous
                     •
                  , about the veare of Christ, seauen hundred twenty and seauen,
               ALso the same day at Fulkstone in Kent the Translation of S. Eanswide Abbesse daughter to Eadbald King of Kent. who despising all worldly and temporall honours

studied how to attaine to Celestiall. And entring into a monastery at Fulkstōe aforsaid, Io. Molā. hac die Chron. Brit. fol. 264. Rob. Buckl. in eius vita pag. 119. was afterward made Abbesse therof; where in great sanctimony and holinesse of life she died, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourty. Her body was afterward on this day taken vp, and translated to a more eminent place of the same Church, wherat it pleased God to worke miracles
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF SEPTEMBER.
            
               
                  F The first Day.
               
                  AT VVinchester in Hampshire the Commemoration of S. Elphege the first of that * name, Confessour and Bishop of the same Sea, whose godly life and doctrine, Matth. West. an. Do. 934. & 947. in histor. Angl. maiors. togeather with the spirit of prophesy, hath byn very famous in ancient tymes throughout England. He was the first that persuaded S. Dunstan to lead a Monasticall life, as also ordayned him and S. Ethelwold Priestes. And when the said Dunstan was expelled the Court by King Ethelred, he came to this holy man Elphege, of whome he was very gratefully receyued and cōforted. And

finally full of venerable old age, replenished with sanctity of life & miracles, 
                     •
                  e peaceably rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourty and six, and was buried at VVinchester. This man is different from the other S. Elphege of the same name, who was B
                     •
                  shop of Canterbury, and martyred by the Danes in the yeare 1012.
            
            
               
                  G The second Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Adaman Abbot and Confessour, a man of * wonder
                     •
                  ull vertue and austerity of life, who be
                     •
                  ng made Abbot of S. Columbes Monastery in the Iland of Hoy by Scotland, gouerned the Tritem. d
                        〈…〉
                     . Ill
                        〈…〉
                     . Bed. l. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 16. & 22. Sixt. Se
                     
                        •
                     ens. in 
                        •
                     ibliot
                        •
                     . lib. 4. Molan. in App
                        ••
                     d. ad Vsua. same in great sanctity and holines, togeather with obse
                     •
                  uance of Monasticall discipline vntill his dying day. He was one of the first, that by his doctrine and exhortations brought the Scottishmen, as also a great part of the Britans, to the Catholicke obseruatiō of the feast of Easter, who before followed the errour of the Quartade
                        •
                     imans in keeping therof. He wrote in like manner a learned Treatise of the same subiect; as also another worke yet extant, intituled, De Lo
                        •
                     is Sanctis, and flourished about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and seauenty.
            
            
               
               
                  A The third Day.
               AT Fossis in the Territory of Namures, the Translation of S. Foillan Bishop and Martyr, Sonne to King Philtan of Ireland, who going to Rome, was there created Bishop Molan. in addit. ad vs
                        •
                     ar. et in Ind▪ SS. Belgij Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac 
                        •
                     ie. by Pope Martin the first, and sent thence to preach the Christian faith in France and Flanders; which when he had done for many yeares with very great labour & profit in that kind, he was at length slayne, togeather with three of his fellows at a place in Namures, called Silua Carbonaria, or Colliers-wood: which thing being reueyled to his brother S. Vltan, and S. Gertrude Abbesse of Niuell in Brabant, his body was 
                     •
                  ought for, and being found out, was on this day afterward solemnly translated to the Monastery of Fossis, and there is yet preserued with great veneration. He suffered about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and threescore.
            
            
               
                  B The fourth Day.
               AT Durham in the Bishopricke, the Translation of S. Cuthbert Bishop and Confessour, who first leading a solitary life in the Iland of Farne (now called Cochet) became

afterward a Monke, and then Abbot Bed. l. 4. c. 27. 28. 29. & 30. West. an. 696. 875. 878. 995. Alan▪ Copus in dialog. dial. 3. cap. 19. Abbo Flori
                        ••
                     . in Prolo. ad vit. S. Edmundi Ereuiar. sec. vsum Sarum. of the Monastery of Mailros in Northumberland, and last of all was promoted to the Bishopricke of Lindisferne; the which he resigned after some yeares againe, & became an Eremite. Whose great holines of life hath byn manifested by the wonderfull miracles wrought by him, both aliue and dead. He desecased in the yeare of Christ 687. His body being afterward on this day taken vp, & foūd altogeather whole and vncorrupt, was with great solēnity trāslated to the Cathedrall Church of Durh
                        •
                     m & there kept with great veneration: whither also many thousandes went on pilgrimage, euen vntill the dayes of King Henry the eight.
               THE same day at Treuers in the higher Germany, the Passion of S. Marcellus Bishop and Martyr, who being a noble Britan by byrth, and gathering togeather the dispersed Democh. l. 2. de Missa. contr. Caluinū c. 37. Eysengr▪ cent. 2. p. 4. d 7. Molan. Mart. Rom. Christians in our Countrey, that were conuerted to Christ by S. Ioseph of Arimathia and his fellowes, in our Primitiue British Church, did by his preaching and doctrine so mooue King Lucius, that he sent forth with to Rome to Pope Eleutherius to treate about his Conuersion to Christian faith. He afterward went ouer into Germany to preach, in like manner, the faith of Christ to that people, where, as he was executing the office of a good Pastour, he was

finally martyred at Treuers, about the yeare of our Lord, one hundred and fourscore; & was the first of our British Nation, that suffered death for Christ, out of the Iland of Great Britany.
            
            
               
                  C The fifth Day.
               AT Alt-Munster in Germany, the Commemoration of S. Altho Abbot and Confessour, * who borne in Scotland, and descended of a noble parentage in that Kingdome, Metrop. Salisbur. & wion in appēd. lib. 3. lig. vitae. went ouer into Germany, in that Primitiue Church, and there became Abbot of a new Monastery, erected by S. Boni
                        •
                     ace (an Englishman) Archbishop of Mentz, and Apostle of that Countrey. Which Monastery was afterward of this mans name, commonly called Altho-Monastery, and now by continuance of tyme, more abruptly is tearmed Alt-Munster. He died in great sanctity and holines of life, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and threescore, and was buryed in the same place.
            
            
               
                  D The sixt Day.
               IN Cumberland the Commemoration of S. * 
                  Bega Virgin, who descended of a very

noble parentage in Ireland, and being instructed in the Christian faith, came ouer into our Iland of Great-Britany, and there led a most vertuous life in the forsaid Prouince of Cumberland: where in very great sanctimony of life, and working of miracles, she finally Chron. Brit. fol. 650. Wion. in appēd. ad l. 3. lig. vitae. gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse. There hath byn in ancient Catholick tymes a goodly Church and Monastery erected in her honour in Cumberland, where her body was wont to be kept with great reuerence and veneration of the Inhabitantes of that Shire; which place, in those dayes, was a famous pilgrimage, especially for the people of the Northerne partes of England.
            
            
               
                  E The seauenth Day.
               AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Dunstan Bishop and Confessour, who Sur. 
                        •
                     o. 3. Malmes. in hist. Angl. Petr. in Catal. lib. 8. Pol. Vir. lib. 7. being first Abbot of Glastenbury, then Bishop of VVorcester, and after of London, was last of all created Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of England: whose most holy life and miracles, are yet famous throughout the Christian world. The Diuell appearing to him on a time in the liknesse of a yong & beautifull woman, tempting him to vncleanesse, he tooke vp a paire of pinchers,

that then lay by him, and caught the foule beast by the vpper lippe, and so holding him fast, and leading him vp and downe his chamber, after diuers interrogatories, draue him away. He died in great sanctity of life, in the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourscore and eight. His body was on this day taken vp, and with great solemnity, set in a more eminent place of the Cathedrall Church of Canterbury, wherat it hath pleased God to worke many miracles.
            
            
               
                  F The eight Day.
               AT Lyming in Kent the Commemoration * of Blessed Ethelburge Queene, wife to De ea habetur mentio in vit. Edwin. Reg. North. & in vit. Ethelb. & Eadb. Regum Cant. R. Buckl. in vit. S. Ethelb. Abbatis. Bark. fol. 122. holy Edwyn the first Christian King of Northumberland, and daughter to K. Ethel
                        •
                     ert of Kent, who after the martyrdome of her Lord and husband, fled out of Northumberland, and came backe to her Countrey of Kent, where forsaking the pompe and vanities of the world, she built herselfe a little Monastery at the forsaid towne of Lyming, and there receyuing the holy veyle of Chastity, was consecrated to God by the handes of S. Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury: where in very great holines of life seruing her heauenly spouse, she became mother to many holy

Virgins and widdowes, that did imitate her religious purpose and profession. And so continuing in that godly vocation, for many yeares, full of all vertue and sanctimony of life, she finally went to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourty and seauen.
            
            
               
                  G The ninth Day.
               IN Scotland the deposition of S. Queran Abbot and Confessour, who descended of a Mart. Rom. Vsuard. Gasel. Wion & alij. omnes hac die. noble family in that Kingdome, contemned the vanities of the world, and entring into a Monastery, became a Monke of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, & afterward Abbot of the same; whose singular life and miracles haue byn manifested aboundantly to the world, both at home and abroad.
               THE same day at Barking in Essex the depositiō of S. VVulshild Virgin & Abbesse, daughter to VVulshelme an Earle among the Hereb. Rosweyd. in Fast. SS. Rob. Buckl. in eius vital. M. S. de vit. SS. Mul. Angl. 
                  VVestsaxons, who being borne after eighteene yeares barrenesse of her mother, was in her very infancy consecrated to God, and cō
                  mitted for her education to the Religious Virgins in the Nunry of VVinchester; but comming to riper yeares, she built herselfe a Monastery at Horton, and was by holy K. Edgar confirmed Abbesse therof, as also of

the Monastery of Barking, which the said King had newly reedined and repayred, being sorely ruined through the incursions of the Danes; from whence being soone after expulled, with all her company, by the ambition of Queene Alstrude, was after 20. yeares banishment restored againe by the forsaid Queene, she being admonished therto by S. Ethelburge sometyme Abbesse therof, who had appeared vnto her in a vision, when she lay sicke, complayning of the iniustice of the fact; and there in very great fanctimony of life, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourscore and fiue, and was buryed at Barking: whose body being taken vp thirty yeares after her death, was found, togeather with all her cloathes, as whole and sound, as if she had byn buryed but a few dayes before.
            
            
               
                  A The tenth Day.
               IN the Territory of Ruremond in Gelderland the Deposition of S. Otger Deacon and Confessour, who being a Monke in the North of England where he was borne, and going to Rome in company of S. VViro and Plechelme, returned thence into the low Countreyes, and was most honourably receyued

of Duke Pepin of Brabant, who gaue him a certaine Territory and place of hab
                     •
                  
                  tation in his dominions, where he might Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. e
                        •
                      in Ind. SS. Belgij Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac die. preach and plant the Christian faith: which when he had done for many yeares, with great feruour of spirit, to the gayning of many thousand soules in those partes; in great sanctity and holines of life, he receyued the reward of his labours by reposing in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred thirty and one. A great part of his body remayneth yet in the Cathedrall Church of Ruremond, and is there kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants of that Diocesse.
            
            
               
                  B The eleuenth Day.
               IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Bather 
                  * Abbot and Confessour, scholler to S. Columbe the Great of that Kingdome, who comming into Scotland with him to preach Io. Lesl. Epis. Ross. l. 4. de gest. Scot. wion in append. ad lib. 3. lig. vit. the Christian 
                     •
                  aith to the Pictes, who then inhabited that Countrey: and being a most vertuous and innocent man of life, was by him made Abbot of a Monastery in the same Countrey, which he had newly erected. In which office and dignity he so behaued himselfe, especially in the reformation of monasticall discipline, that his name hath

synce byn famous throughout the Kingdomes of Ireland and Scotland. He desceased in great sanctity and ho
                     ••
                  nes of life, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred fourscore and eleuen.
            
            
               
                  C The tweluth Day.
               AT Fulkestone in Kent the deposition of S. Eansu ide Virgin & Abbesse daughter Rob. Buckl. in eius vit l. M. S. Angl. pag. 119. ex antiq. Monum. Cantiae. to Eadbald King of Kent, who forsaking all worldly conuersation and delights, obtayned of her Father a solitary place in his kingdome to serue her spouse Christ, which being graunted her at Fulkestone aforsaid, she there built her selfe a little Oratory for a tyme, and then gathering togeather many other noble Virgins, imbraced a monasticall life, and became Abbesse of the rest, her Oratory being cōuerted into a Nūry; where in all kind of sanctimony of life and pious conuersation, glorious for miracles, she finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourty.
               THE same day at VVimborne in Dorcetshire 
                  * the Commemoration of S. Quemburge 
                  Matth. West. in hist. Maio
                        •
                     i. ad an. 727. Virgin, sister to Inas King of the VVestsaxons, who vnder the Gouerment of S. Cuthberge her sister and Abbesse, receaued the holy veyle of chastity in the Monastery aforsaid:

where in very great vertue, humility, and other pious excercises, she ended her happy dayes, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred twenty and seauen.
            
            
               
                  D The thirteenth Day.
               AT VVester-woort in Gelderland, the Deposition of S. VVerensrid Priest & Confessour, who being an Englishmā by byrth, Falix in Martyr. hac die. Eius vita habetur tom. 7. Sto ij. ex M. S. Codic. and descended of an honourable family, became first a Monke in the Monastery of Rippon in Yorkeshire, and thence went ouer into the Low-Countreyes & Germany to preach the Christian faith, where he conuerted the whole Prouince of Geldria, and so became their Apostle. He died on this day at the forsaid Towne of VVester-woort, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and fiue: and was afterward solemnely translated to Elst, where his body hath byn kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants, for the manifold miracles that haue byn wrought therat, especially in curing the goute.
            
            
               
                  E The fourteenth Day.
               AT Arpine in the Kingdome of Naples 
                  * the Commemoration of S. Bernard
                  
Confessour, who being an Englishman by birth, and going to Ierusalem on pilgrimage (togeather with S. Gerard his companio) to visit our Sauiours sepulcher, in his returne backe fell sicke in Italy, where after a short space, in all signes of sanctity and helines Ex Reg. Eccles. Arpinēs. & Arch. Inscript. ipsius Sepulch. of life, he reposed in our Lord. His body being obscurely buryed, was many yeares after miraculously reuealed to the Archpriest of that place, who with a sollemne procession, brought the same vnto Arpine, and placed it very decently in the Church, where it is at this day kept with great veneration and honour of the Inhabitants, as their chiefe Patrone, for the manifold miracles, that euē in these our times are wrought therat, especially in curing of Ruptures: wherby the same place is now becōe a famous pilgrimage, for such as are grieued with that infirmity. His life and miracles are recounted more at large in the Records of the Church of Arpine; of whome also there is a proper prayer with a Hymne, or Sequentia, wherin briefly is declared the whole story of his life: both which are commonly read in the Masse and Office of his festiuall day.
            
            
               
               
                  F The fifteenth Day.
               IN the Monastery of Dormundcaster in Northamptonshire two miles from Peterburrow, the Commemoration of Blessed Chinneburge Queene, daughter to Penda King of the Mercians, 
                  * and wife to Alfred King of Northumberland, who with the consent of her husband (he also hauing left the world, and retyred Chron. Brit. fol. 398. wion l. 4. lig. vit. Rob. Buckl. in eius vita l. M. S. fol. 171. himselfe to a Monasticall life in the Abbey of Mailros) became a Religious woman in the forsaid Monastery of Dormūdcaster, where in all kind of sanctimony of life, and pious conuersation, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and ten. This forsaid Monastery being afterward called of her name Chinneburgcaster was in the yeare 1010. quite ouerthrowne by the Danes; so as there is little or no memory therof left at this day, in our Iland of Great-Britany.
               
            
            
               
                  G The sixteenth Day.
               IN Scotland the deposition of S. Ninian Bishop and Confessour, who descended of a noble British bloud, was ordained Bishop of a place called S. Martins, amōg the South-Pictes
                  
in the Marches of Scotland, whome he conuerted to the Christian faith, and became Ve. Bed. l. 3. c. 4. Io. Molā. in addi
                        •
                     . ad Vsua. & alij omnes hac die. their Apostle. He after died in Scotland, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred and twelue; whose body being buryed in the forsaid Church of S. Martin, was there kept with great honour and veneration euen vntill the dayes of K. Henry the eight. In whose honour also many goodly Churches and altars, haue in former Catholicke tymes byn erected and dedicated, in the Kingdome of Scotland.
               
               THE same day at VVilton, in the Church of S. Dionyse, the deposition of S. Edith 
                  Sur. to. 5. Cont. Vē. Bed. l. 2. Pol. Vir. l. 6. Vincent. in specul. Matth. West. an. 961. Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to holy Edgar King of England, who despising all worldly and temporall perfermentes became a Religious woman in the Monastery of VVilton, vnder the care and gouernment of her owne mother VVilsrede, after whose descease, she was made Abbesse of the same place: where in all sanctimony of life, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, in the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourscore and foure. There are many goodly Churches and monumentes of her name yet to be seene in diuers places of Englād: & one particularly at a Towne called Church-Eaton in Staffordshire, where there is a little well-spring of water, very soueraigne for many diseases, cōmonly called by the name of S. Ediths well.
            
            
               
               
                  A The seauenteenth Day.
               IN South-wales, the passion of the Sayntes Stephen and Socrates Martyrs, who being two noble ancient Britans by byrth, and conuerted to the faith of Christ in our Primitiue Mart. Rom. Bed. Ado. Vsuar. & alij omnes hac die. Church, by the preaching of S. Amphibale Priest and Martyr, were in hatred therof, put to death in our Iland, in the persecution of Dioclesian the Emperour, by most exquisite tormentes, togeather with many others for the same cause, about the yeare of Christ, three hūdred & foure. There are diuers Churches yet remayning in Wales that in ancient tymes haue byn dedicated in their honour: among whome also, their memory is yet famous vntill this day, especially in Monmouthshire, and the Southerne partes adioyning.
            
            
               
                  B The eighteenth Day.
               AT Berghen in Flanders, the Translation of S. VVinocke Abbot and Confessour, who descended of a noble British bloud, and going ouer into the Low Countreyes to S. Bertin Abbot of the Monastery of Sitheù (now called S. Bertins) in the Citty of S. Omers,
                  
was by him ordayned Abbot of an ancient Monastery named VVoromholt, called afterward Molā. in addit. ad Vsuard. et in Ind. SS. Bel
                        〈…〉
                     ij Meyerus in Anna. Flandr. & alij. of his name S. VVinockes; where in all kind of sanctity of life & Regular discipline, famous for miracles, he reposed in our Lord. His body was afterward on this day translated to the forsaid towne of Berghen, by Baldwyn Earle of Flanders, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred; and there is yet conserued with great veneration of the Inhabitants, for the manifold miracles which it hath pleased God to worke therat.
            
            
               
                  C The ninteenth Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Theodore Archbishop of that Sea and Confessour, Bed. l. 5. cap. 8. & in Epit. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Mart. Rom. & alij omnes hac die. who borne at Tharsis in Cilicia of a noble parentage, became first a Monke of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, and afterward was ordayned Archbishop of Canterbury, and sent thither from Rome by Pope Vitalianus. He celebrated two Prouinciall Synods in our Iland, the one at Hartford, the other at Hedtfeld, concerning the Reformation of the Clergy of England. And when he had in all vertuous and Saintlike behauiour gouerned the forsaid Sea of Canterbury for two and twenty yeares, in most godly wise, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the

yeare of Christ, six hundred and nynty, and was buryed at Canterbury, with a famous Epitaph in heroicall verse: some part wherof yow may read in S. Bede, setdowne in the fi
                     •
                  th Booke and eight Chapter of his History of England.
            
            
               
                  D The twentith Day.
               IN Scotlād the Cōmemoratiō of S. Cybthacke Priest & Cōfessour, who being an Irishman 
                  * by birth, and Nephew to S. Columbe the Great of that Nation, despised all worldly preferments, and came ouer into Scotland with his said Vncle, to preach the Christian faith to the Pictes who then inhabited part Io. Lest. Episco. Ross. l. 4. hist. Scot. of that Kingdome. And at last entring into a Monastery, became a Monke of S. Benedictes Venerable Order in the Iland of Hoy vnder the care of the forsaid S. Columbe, who had newly founded the same, and was then Abbot therof: where famous for sanctity of life and miracles throughout the whole Kingdome, there ended his blessed dayes in rest, about yeare of Christ, six hundred and foure.
            
            
               
               
                  E The one & twentith Day.
               IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Edilhun 
                  * Confessour, who being an English-man by byrth, of great learning and vertue, and brother to another Edilhun of the same Vē. Bed. l. 3. l. 27. Hist
                        •
                     r. Eccles. 
                        •
                     ent. Angl. name, then Bishop of Lindisferne, in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, went ouer into Ireland, to lead a more quiet kind of life, remote from the world; where after he had passed a few yeares, in very great holines and sanctity, he gaue vp his soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and fiue. He had for companion in this his peregrination into Ireland, a noble yong man named Egbert, with whome liuing in a Monastery there, called in the Irish tongue Rathmelsig, whilst the plague infected sorely that Countrey, he had a vision of his owne departure out of this life, and of the escape of his fellow Egbert; to whome, when he had related the whole, in an quietnes of spirit he gaue vp the ghost.
            
            
               
                  F The two and twentith Day.
               AT 
                     
                        •
                     indissa in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, the Commemoration of S. 
                  *
                  
                  Higbald Abbot and Confessour, whose integrity of life and conuersation hath byn 
                     •
                  amous, in tymes past, throughout the whole Vē. Bed. l. 4. c. 3. Io. Molā. in appēd. ad Vsua▪ lit. H. Iland of Great-Britany. He was Abbot of an ancient Monastery in the forsaid Kingdome of Northumberland, in the tyme of VVulhere King of the Mercians; and ended his happy dayes about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore & fiue. He went into 
                     
                        ••
                     eland a little before his death to visit the holy Abbot Egbert, who at that tyme was there very famous for the great opinion of his sanctity and holines of life: with whome he had very many spirituall conferences, and amōg other thinges, discoursing of the death of S. Chad Bishop of Lichfield (being a little before desceased) holy Egbert related to haue seene his foule carried vp to heauen, by the hands of Angells, that descended thence to accompany the same.
            
            
               
                  G The three and twentith Day.
               AT Kale in France the Commemoration of Blessed Hereswide Queene, ne
                     •
                  ce to * 
                  S. Edwyn King of Northumberland and Martyr, Bed. l. 4. Histor. cap. 23. Wion lib. 4. lig. vit
                        •
                     . sister to S. Hlida, and wife to King Ethelwold of the Eastangles, who after the death of her Lord and husband, forsaking all worldly pleasures, friends, and other prefermentes

whatsoeuer, went ouer into France, & there taking a Religious habit, receyued therwith the holy veyle of Chastity in the forsaid Monastery of Kale, where in very great humility and sanctimony of life, she spent the rest of her dayes in prayer and contemplation of heauenly things, and finally gaue vp her blessed soule to her heauēly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore and ten.
            
            
               
                  A The foure & twentith Day.
               AT Eyst in the higher Germany, the Translation of S. VVinibald Abbot and Confessour, Sonne to S. Richard King of Author 
                        •
                     ius vit
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     d Sur. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 7. Wion hac die in Mart. Benedict. the English; who going ouer into Flanders & Germany with S. VVillebrord and his fellowes to preach the Christiā faith to those people, founded a Monastery in the Prouince of Franconia, called Heydelmaine, and became himselfe Abbot therof; which when he had gouerned for ten yeares, in great sanctity & holines of life, 
                     •
                  he happily reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and threescore. His body was afterward on this day, solemnely translated to the forsaid Citty of Eyst, and there placed in the Cathedrall Church, togeather with the Venerable body of his brother S. Willebald,
                  
where the same is preserued with great veneration of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  B The fiue & twentith Day
               AT Langres in France the Deposition of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . C
                        •
                     ol
                        ••
                     id Con
                     •
                  es
                     •
                  our, and Abbot of the ancient Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul, 
                  Vē. Bed 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2
                        •
                     . & l. 
                        •
                     e se
                        •
                      A
                        •
                     tat. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . M
                        〈…〉
                     . in ad li
                        •
                     . ad V
                        〈…〉
                     d. Revi
                        •••
                     . F
                        〈…〉
                     es. Lig
                        ••
                     . vpon the Riuer banke of VVyre, in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, now cailed VVyre
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , and Ma
                     •••
                  er to our famous S. Bede, who going to Rome to obtayne Priuiledges for his sa
                     •
                  d Monastery, died in his iorney homward at Langres, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred & seauenteene: and there being most honourably interred in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty, his body is kept vntill this day with great veneration. There is a Letter of this holy mans yet extant in S. Bedes History, which he wrote to N
                        •
                     ionus King of the Pi
                        ••
                     es or Redshankes, about the 
                     ••
                  ue obseruation of the feast of Easter; as also for the Reformation of his Clergy. To whome in like manner saith the Story) he sent cunning Carpenters & workemen, to bu
                     •
                  d him a C
                     •
                  urch, after the fashion of those in Nor
                        •
                     humberland.
               
            
            
               
               
                  C The six and twentith Day.
               AT VVestminster by Londō
                   the depositiō of S. VVu
                        ••
                     y Abbot and Con
                     〈…〉
                  our, who 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . W
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 8. W
                        〈…〉
                      in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ad 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3. lig. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . being a man of great vertue and innocency of life, was by S. Dunstan created the first Abbot of VVestminster, where in all kind of exemplar good life, full of sanctity and miracles, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred and threescore. His body was buryed in the same Monastery, and there was wont to be kept with great veneration of the Citizens of Lond
                        •
                     n.
               
               T
                     •
                  E same day in Sco
                        •
                     land the Commemoration of S. 
                        〈…〉
                     us Mon
                     •
                  e and * Conf
                     •
                  ssour, who borne in Ireland, and descended of a worthy parentage in that Kingdome, came thence into Scotland in company H
                        •
                     ct. Boet. de rebus gest. Scot. & Io. 
                        ••
                     st. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                      l. 4. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . of S. Co
                        〈…〉
                     e the great of that Nation, whose d
                     〈…〉
                  ple he was, a
                     •
                  d afterward his coadiutour impreaching the Christian 
                     •
                  aith to the Pictes. After whose Co
                     ••
                  ersion, full of sanctity and miracle
                     •
                  , he gaue vp his soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, 
                     ••
                  ue hundred and fourscore.
            
            
               
               
                  D The seauen & twentith Day.
               AT Knobhersburge in the Prouince of the * 
                  Eastangles, the Commemoration of S. Sige
                        •
                     ert King of the same Prouince and Martyr, Bed, l. 3. cap. 18. Pol. Vir. lib. 4. histor. Matth. W
                        •
                     st. an. 5
                        •
                     6. et 6
                        •
                     2. & W
                        〈…〉
                     . li
                        •
                     . 4. lig. vit. Registr. Cantab. who inflamed with the loue of God, left the administration of his Kingdome to his Cosyn Egricke, and tooke a Religious habit in a monastery which himselfe had newly erected called Knobhersburge; but a little after Penda the Pagan King of Mercia, inuading his dominions, he was by his Subiectes drawne, by force, out of his Monastery, into the field, where vnarmed, hauing only a little rod in his hand, was slayne, togeather with his Cosyn Egri
                        •
                     ke, by the forsaid Penda, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and two, and the seauenteenth of his raigne; and was afterward declared a Martyr. It is recorded by diuers Historiograp
                     •
                  ers that he first founded the Vniuersity of Cambridge in his owne Prouince, for the education and instruction of youth in all kind of good learning and liberall sciences.
            
            
               
               
                  E The eight & twentith Day.
               AT Fulda in tho higher Germany the deposition of S. Lioba Virgin and Abbesse, Rudolph. B. Rena. discip. in eius vita. Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij. who being first a Religious woman in the Monastery of Wimborne in Dorcetshire, was called thence, togeather with S. Te
                        •
                     la, S. Agatha and diuers others, into Germany, by S. Boniface an Englishman, and Archbishop of Mentz, and there made Abbesse of a new Monastery, which he had erected at a place called Biscopssen; where after she had led a most Saintly life, full of miracles, she went at last to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred fifty and seauen, and was buryed at Fulda, where her body is yet kept, togeather with the venerable body of S. Boniface, with great veneration of that Countrey round about.
            
            
               
                  F The nine & twentith Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Cogan 
                  * Abbot and Confessour, who borne in the same Kingdome of a very honourable parentage, became there a Monke of the Venerable

Order of S. Benedict, and after Abbot of the whole Monastery; whose name being famous throughout our whole Iland of Great-Bri
                        •
                     any 
                  
                     •
                  or sanctity of life and lear
                  
                     •
                  ning, Io. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . l. 4▪ hist. Scot. 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     . W
                        〈…〉
                      i
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . li
                        •
                     . 3. lig. vit
                        •
                     . he gaue vp his soule to rest in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ 700. & thr
                     ••
                  score. At whose body it pleased God, in cōfirmatiō of his holines to worke many miracles. In which Kingdome also, there haue byn in tymes past many Chappells and altars dedicated in his honour, but now all vtterly ruined by the v
                     •
                  fortunate change of Relig
                     •
                  on in that Countrey, to the lamentation of the Christian world.
            
            
               
                  G The thirtith Day.
               AT Canterbury the Deposition S. Honorius Archbishop of the same Sea and Confessour, who comming from Be
                        •
                     . l. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . & l. 3. cap. 20. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . to. 5. Mart. R
                        ••
                     . Mol 
                        •
                     n. & alij omnes hac die. 
                  Rome into England with S. Augustine our Apostle, succeeded him afterward in his Office, and was the fi
                     •
                  th Archbishop o
                     •
                   
                  Canterbury. W
                     •
                  ich Sea, when he had gouerned in all kind of sanctity and holy example of vertuous life, full of Venerable old age, he reposed happily in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred

fi
                     •
                  ty and three, and was buryed in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty with his predecessours: where his body was kept, euen vntill our dayes with great honor and veneration, due to so glorious a Confessour.
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF OCTOBER.
            
               
                  A The first Day.
               
                  AT London the deposition of S. Roger Confessour and Bishop of the same S
                     •
                  a, whose admirable Matth. Paris. an. 1247. & an. 1248. & 1271. Descrip. Ciuitat. Parmēs. in Italia. Registr. Eccles. D. Pauli Londinē. vertues, and sanctity of life, wittnesse the Miracles that haue byn wrought at his body. He died at Stepney a mile from London, in a house belonging to that Bishops Sea, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred and fourty: whose body being brought to London, was with all honour and veneration, interred in the Cathedrall Church of S. Paul the Apostle, in a faire tombe by the North-wall, a little aboue the Quire, with

this Epithaph, which is there yet remayning to be read.
               
                  Ecclesiae quondam Praesul praesentis, in anno
                  M. bis C. quater X. iacet his Rogerus humatus.
                  Huius erat manibus Domino locus iste dicatus.
                  Christe suis precibu
                        •
                      veniam des, tolle reatus.
               
               The people of Parma in Italy haue chosen him for one of the chiefe Patrons of their Citty, by reason of a meruaylous victory they obtayned against Fredericke the Empeperour, by the prayers of S. Roger, whose body at that tyme shined with miracles in England.
               
               THE same day at Oostkerke in Flanders the Translation of S. Guthagon Confessour, Sonne to the King of Scotland, who taking vpon him a voluntary pouerty, for Molā. in addit. ad Vsuard. et in Ind. SS. Belgij the loue of God, went ouer into Flanders, and there became a pilgrime or Eremite; where in great sanctity of life he finally reposed in our Lord. Nicolas Bishop of Tornay, on this day, caused his body to be reuerently eleuated, and placed more decently in the forsaid Church of Oostkerke, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand foure hundred fourty and foure, where the same is yet preserued with great veneration: whose feast in like manner in there on this day celebrated with great solemnity by the Inhabitantes round about.
               
                  
MOreouer the same day at Condy in He
                        〈…〉
                     lt, the deposition of S. VVas
                        〈…〉
                     lph Confessour, who des
                     •
                  ended o
                     •
                   a nob
                     •
                  e bloud in the Kingdome of Ireland, and brother Mola
                        •
                     . in addit. ad Vsua. e
                        •
                      in Ind. SS. Belgij to S. Etto of that Na
                     ••
                  on, did, for the loue of Christ, fo
                     •
                  sa
                     •
                  e his Countrey and friend
                     •
                  , and went ouer into France, to lead a solitary and strict kind of life, where in great sanctity and holines, famous for miracles, 
                     •
                  e ended his bl
                     •
                  ssed da
                     •
                  es, in the Prouince o
                     •
                   
                  Hen
                        〈…〉
                     , whose body being yet preserued at the 
                     〈◊〉
                   towne of Cordy, is there honoured with great veneration of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  B The second Day.
               AT Hereford t
                     •
                  e Translation of S. T
                        •
                     omas Bishop and Con
                     •
                  essour, who being Pol. V
                        •
                     r. lib. 17. Mart. Rom. Molan. Bret
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     . sec vsum Sarum. Sur. to. 5. hac di
                        •
                     . & alij. first Chancelour of the Vniuer
                     ••
                  ty of Ox
                        •
                     ord, & thē of the whole Realme of 
                     •
                  nglād, was finally ord
                     ••
                  ned Bishop o
                     •
                   
                  Hereford; which Sea, whē he had gouerned mo
                     ••
                  l
                     ••
                  dably for many yeares, he tooke his 
                     •
                  orney to Rome, to Pope Mar▪ in the second, and died in his way homward at M
                        •
                     te-
                        ••
                     s
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     e in the Dukedome of Florence, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fourscore and seauē: whose sacred Reliques being brought into England, were with great veneration, on this

day placed in the Cathedrall Church of Hereford. His miracles are Registred in the same Church to the number of foure hundred twenty & fiue: Amōg which, it is recorded, that by his prayers were raised from death to life threscore seuerall persons, one and twenty leapers healed, and three and twenty blynd and dumme men to haue receyued their sight & speach.
            
            
               
                  C The third Day.
               IN VVestphalia the Passion of the Saintes Bed. l. 5. cap. 11. Sigeb. in Chron. an. 693. Mart. Rom-Molan. & a
                        •
                     j omnes hac die. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     waldi, brethren and Martyrs, commonly called Al
                        •
                     us and Niger, who being Priests and Monkes of the Monastery of Rippon in Yorkeshire, went ouer into Ireland, where liuing for diuers yeares in great austerity of life, at last returned, and went into Friz
                        •
                     land to preach the Christian faith to that Nation, which they did for a long tyme, with great labour and profit, till comming into VVestphalia, they were slayne by the old Pagan Saxone, for the Confession of Christ, about the yeare of our Lord, six hundred fourscore and si
                     •
                  teene. Their bod
                     •
                  es were afterward miraculously found in the riuer of Rhene, & most honourably layd in the Church of S. Cunibert at Cullen, by Duke Pepin of France, about the yeare of Christ 1074. and there

are kept with great veneration of the Cittizens of that place.
            
            
               
                  D The fourth Day.
               IN Northumberland the Passion of S. Eduyn King and Martyr, who being the first Christian Prince of that Prouince, and conuerted to the faith of Christ by the Vē. Bed. in Epit. & hist. l. 2. c. 16. 17. & 20. & l. 3. c. 9 West. an. 617. 625. 626. 634. & alij. preaching of S. Paulinus Bishop of Yorke, was afterward slayne in hatred therof, by the impious Cadwalline King of the Britans, & Penda King of the Mercians, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred thirty and foure, and in the seauenteenth of his raigne. There was an ancient fayre Church somtyme crected and dedicated in his honour in the Citty of London, by New-gate Market, which there remayned vntill it was dissolued in this last age by King Henry the eight, togeather with many other like goodly Monuments of Catholicke piety in our Kingdome.
            
            
               
                  E The fifth Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Conwalline Abbot and Confessour, whose rare * vertues and learning haue in tymes past byn famous, not only throughout his owne

countrey, but in others also. He was first Io. Lest. Episco. Ross. l. 4. hist. Scot. Wion in append. ad lib. 3. lig. vitae. a Monke of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, and then made Abbot of an ancient Monastery in the Iland of Iona belonging to Scotland, where in great sanctity of life and other vertues, especially in the Reformation of Monasticall discipline, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred and threefcore.
            
            
               
                  F The sixt Day.
               IN Northūberland the festiuity of S. Ywy Deacon and Confessour, scholler and disciple Hereb. Rosw. in Tab. de fast. SS. hac die. to S. Cuthbert of Durham, whose great holines of life, hath in ancient Catholicke tymes byn famous in our Iland, especially among the Northumbers. He died, as may be gathered out of antiquity, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and foure.
               THE same day in Scotland the Commemoration * of S. Comine Abbot and Confessour, who descended of a noble bloud Io. Lest. Episco. Ross. l. 4. hist. Scot. wion in Append. ad lib. 3. lig. vtta. in the same Kingdome, and disciple to S. Columbe the Great, in a Monastery in the Iland of Hoy, was for his great learning and vertue, made Abbot, by him, of another Monastery in the same Prouince; whose godly life and miracles, haue in former tymes byn famous, both at home & abroad.

He died about the yeare of Christ 600.
            
            
               
                  G The seauenth Day.
               AT Chich in Essex the Passion of S. aliâs O
                        〈…〉
                     sy. 
                  Osith Queene and Martyr, daughter to the King of the Eastangles, and wife to Suthred the last King of the Eastsaxons, who with the consent to her husband, fo
                     ••
                  ooke the world, and receyued the holy veyle of Chastity in the Monastery of Alisbury; but afterward building another of her owne, in a Village Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Angl. Pol. Vir. l. 5. hist. Sur. to. 5. hac die. Hereb. in fast SS. Wion. lib. 4. lig. vitae. called Chich, in the Prouince or the Eastsaxons, and gathering togeather many noble Virgins, became herselfe Abbesse therof, vntill the Danes inuading that Kingdome; and comming vnto her said Monastery, cut of her head in hatred of Christian Religion. The which she taking vp from the ground, carried three surlōges, 
                     •
                  o a Church of S. Peter & S. Paul, where coming to the Church dore imbrewed in her owne innocent bloud, she fell downe, and so ended the course of her martyrdome, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and seauenty. In the place also where she was beheaded there presently sprong vp a miraculous fountayne of water, very soueraigne for many diseases, which euen vntill this day is greatly esteemed by the Inhabitantes neere about. Her body was

first buryed at Alisbury in Buckinghamshire; but afterward, by a voyce from heauen it was commaunded to be translated to the forsaid Monastery of Chich, now commonly called S. Osiths of her name, situated not far from the sea side, wherat it pleased God to worke many miracles,
               THe same day at Lincolne the Translation of S. Hugh Confessour and Bishop of the Sur. to. 6. West. an. 1297. Petr. Sutor in vit. Cart. Registr. Eccles. Lincoln. same Sea; whose body after fourscore yeares that it had byn buryed, was on this day taken vp, and being found altogeather vncorrupt, with a great quantity of cleere and sweet oyle in the Tombe where it lay, was put into a costly shrine of siluer, guilt and richly adorned with precious stones, and set in a more eminent place of the same Church or Minster at Lincolne, in the raigne of King Edward the first, and yeare of Christ 1282. where it hath euer synce byn kept vntill these our later dayes, with great reuerence and veneration, for the miracles that haue byn wrought therat.
            
            
               
                  A The eight Day.
               AT VValciodore in the Territory of Liege the Translation of S. Eloquius Priest and Confessour, who borne in Ireland of a noble parētage, & cōming into England, went thēce

into the low-Countreys with S. Etto, & his fellowes to preach the Christian faith; where after much fruite reapt in gayning Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua et in Ind. SS. Belgij of soules to God, in great sanctity of life and working of miracles, finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and one. His body was afterward on this day translated to the Monastery of VValciodore aforsaid, where the same is kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants.
               THE same day in Brecknockshire of VVales the deposition or S. Keyna Virgin, daughter to Braghan King of Brecknocke, and great Aunt to S. Dauid Bish. of Meneuia, who Rob. Buckl. l. man. scrip. de vit. SS. Mulier. Angl. Pag. 91. being in her infancy consecrated to God, left her Countrey and came ouer the Riuer of Seuerne into England, and there liued a most austere life in a solitary wood full of serpents, into which no man durst enter for feare of death: But by her prayers they were all turned into stones, still retayning the shape of serpēts. And after that she had liued many yeares therin, without humane assisiance, she returned againe to her friends and Countrey, and built herselfe a little Cottage vpon a hill, where in continuall prayer and abstinence, clad in hayrcloth she serued her Lord & Sauiour vntill her dying day. And being ready to depart out of this world, an Angell came downe from heauen, and put vpon her a white garment

wrought with gould, bidding her to be in readinesse to enter into the Kingdome of her Celestiall spouse. She departed to our Lord vpon this day, about the yeare of Christ, foure hundred and nynty, and was buryed in the same Prouince, where her memory hath byn famous euen vntill our dayes. She is called in the British tongue Keyn-vayre, that is to say, Keyne the Virgin.
            
            
               
                  B The ninth Day.
               AT Lincolne the deposition of Bl. Robert surnamed Grossa-testa, Confessour and Bishop of the same Sea, whose great sanctity of life and vertues, ioyned with learning, Matth. West. & Paris. an. 1253. & 1251. Sixt. Senens. in Biblioth. lib. 4. Io. Trit. de vir. Illustr. Registr. Eccles. Lincoln. especially in the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latyn tongues, hath byn very famous in the Church of Christ. Among other workes, he translated the Testamentes of the twelue Patriarkes out of Greeke into Latin, as also wrote very learned Cōmentaryes vpon the Psalter, yet extant to be seene in wrytten hand in diuers Libraryes of Europe. He was borne in Suffolke, and in his youth trauayled into France, where applying his studyes, he attayned to great knowledge in Philosophy and Diuinity, and at his returne backe was promoted first to the Arch deaconry of Licester,
                  
and afterward to the Bishopricke of Lincolne, which when he had gouerned most laudably for eighteene yeares, he reposed happily in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred fifty and three. His body was most solemnly interred in a goodly marble Tombe in the south Ile of his owne Cathedrall Church of Lincolne, and there was wont to be kept with great reuerence and veneration, euen vntill the dayes of King Henry the eight.
               THE same day in the County of Hennalt in the Diocesse of Cambray, the festiuity Ioan. Maior l. 2. hist. Scot. c. 7. Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij of S. Gislen Confessour, who being an Irishman by birth, went to Athens in Greece, where he became first a Monke of the Order of S. S. Basil, and thence returning by Rome, came backe into the Lower-Germany, and there built himselfe an Oratory in a Village three myles distant from Montz in Hennalt, teaching and instructing the people of those partes in the Christian faith with great fruite and feruour of spirit vntill his dying day, which happened about the yeare of Christ, six hundred & fourty. His body is kept in a Monastery of his owne name in the forsaid Territory of Hennalt, cōmōly called S. Gislens, where it is honoured vntill this day with great veneration of the Inhabitants round about.
            
            
               
               
                  C The tenth Day.
               AT Rochester in Kent the Deposition of S. Pauline Bishop and Confessour, who Vē. Bed. in Epit. & lib. 1. Histor. cap. 29. et l. 2. c. 9. 10. 11. & 12. Sur. to. 5. & alij. comming into England with S. Augustine and his fellowes, conuerted the Kingdome of the Northumbers, togeather with Edwyn King of that Prouince, and so became their Apostle. He was ordayned the first Archbishop of Yorke; but being thence expulsed after King Edwyns death, he came backe againe into Kent, and there gouerned the Sea of Rochester, being then voyd: where in great sanctity of life, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare Christ, six hundred fourty and fiue. His body was with all solemnity buryed in the Cathedrall Church of S. Andrew in Rochester, and there kept with great veneration.
               THE same day at Birlington in Yorkeshire the deposition of S. Iohn Confessour, Prior of the Monastery of Chanons-Regular, Io. Molā. in addit. ad vsuar. whose godly life, full of sanctity, hath byn manifested sufficiently by the miracles he wrought both aliue and dead. He desceased in the yeare of Christ, one thousand three hundred threescore and nynteene, and was buryed at Birlington.
               
            
            
               
               
                  D The eleuenth Day.
               AT Barking in Fssex, the deposition of S. Edilburge Abbesse, sister to S. Erconwald 
                  Bed. l. 4. cap. 7. 8 9. & 10. Tritem de vir. Illustr. Molan. & alij. Bishop of Lodon, who by him was cōstituted Gouernesse of a new Monastery that himselfe had built, by the forsaid towne of Barking vpon the Riuer of Thames, where in all kind of sanctimony of life and Monasticall discipline, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred threefore and sixteene
               THE same day in Scotland the deposition of S. Canicke Abbot & Cōfessour, whose godly life and miracles, haue byn famous Mart. Ro
                        〈…〉
                     . Mol in. Petr. in Catal. l 11. cap. vlt. throughout the Christian world, but especially in Scotland, where he was borne, liued, and died about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred.
            
            
               
                  E The tweluth Day.
               AT Rippon in Yorkeshire the deposition of S. VVil
                        〈…〉
                     ride Confessour and Archbishop of Yorke, who being twice expulsed his Bishopricke by Egfrid King of the Northumbers, went and preached to the Southsaxons, where he conuerted the Ile of VVight,
                  
and first planted the Christian faith in that Vē. Bed. l. 3. c. 28 & l. 4. c. 12. & 13. & l. 5. cap. 20. Mart. Rom. Molan. Sur. to. 5. & omnes hac die. place. And when he had thus laboured for many yeares in his banishment to the gayning of infinite soules to God, being at last restored to his Bishopricke, in all sanctity or life and miracles, he finally rested in our Lord, vpon the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and eleuen; and was buryed in S Peters Church at Rippon aforsaid, which himselfe had built, on the south side of the high Altar, Ouer whose tombe was engrauen this ancient Epitaph following.
               
                  VVilfridus hic magnus requiescit corpore Praesul,
                  Hanc Domino qut Aulam, du
                        〈…〉
                     us pieta
                        •
                     i amore
                  Fecit, & exi
                        〈…〉
                     o sacrauit nomine PETRI,
                  
                  C
                        〈…〉
                      laues cali Christus dedit arbiter Orbis,
                  Atque auro ac Tyrio deuotus vestijt ostro.
                  Quin etiam sublime Crucis radiante metallo,
                  Hic posuit tropheüm, nec non & quattuor auro
                  Scribi Euangel
                        〈…〉
                      praerepit in ordine libros,
                  Ac thecam è ru
                        •
                     ilo his con
                        〈…〉
                     ignam condidit auro.
                  Paschalis qui etiam solem
                        〈…〉
                     a tempora cursus,
                  Catholci adiustum correxit dogma Canonis,
                  Quem statuere Paires, dubioque errore remoto,
                  Certa suae Ge
                        〈…〉
                     i ostendit moderam
                        〈…〉
                     na ritus.
                  In
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      loc
                        〈…〉
                     stis Monachorum examina crebra
                  Colligit, ac monitis cauit quae regula Patrum
                  Sedulus in
                        〈…〉
                     it, 
                        〈…〉
                     sue do
                        〈…〉
                     ue forisue
                  Iactatus 
                        〈…〉
                     mium per tempor a longa periclis.
                  Qu
                        〈…〉
                     decies ternos postquam egit Episcopus annos,
                  
                     
Transijt, & gaudens caelestia regna petiuit:
                  Dona IESV, vt grex Pastoris calle sequatur.
               
            
            
               
                  F The thirteenth Day.
               AT VVestminster by London the Translation of S. Edward King and Confessour, whose body in the nynth yeare of King Henry the second, was by S. Thomas of Canterbury 
                  Pol. Vir. lib. 8. Matth. Paris. an. 1066. & 1163. Sur. & Mart. Rom. 5. Ian. Regist. Vati
                        •
                     . Romae. taken vp, and put into a costly shryne of siluer, guilt with gold, made by K. VVilliam the Conquerour, and placed in the great Church of VVestminster. In which also, euen vntill our dayes, was wont to be kept a Ring of gold, with great veneration, which S. Edward himselfe had somtyme giuen to S. Iohn Euangelist, asking him an aimes in the habit of a poore man, and was afterward brought vnto the said King from Hierusalem, by a certaine Pilgrime, as sent vnto him for a token by S. Iohn. This day was afterward commaunded to be kept holyday throughout England, as is yet to be seene, aswell by a Councell celebrated at Oxford in the yeare of Christ 1222. as also by the letters of Pope Innocentius the 4. registred in the Roman Vaticane.
               THE same day at Vienna in Austria the deposition of S. Colman, Martyr and somtyme Bishop of Lindisserne in the Kingdome

of the Northumbers, who being borne in Ireland 
                  Mart. Rom. Breuiar. Saltz. Hect. Boet. Lest. de gest. Sco. in Ferquardo Rege. of a noble Scottish bloud, after he had preached incessantly to the English Saxons, and among others conuerted Penda the Pagan King of Mercia to the faith of Christ, went ouer unto the higher Germanr to instruct that Nation also, where comming at 
                     〈…〉
                  all into Austria, was for defence therof, slayne by the barbarous people of that Prouince, about the yeare of Christ 675. His body was brought to Vienna, and is there yet preserued with great veneration of that Citty.
            
            
               
                  G The fourteenth Day.
               AT VVirtzburgh in Franconia, the Translation of S. Burchard Confessour and Bishop Egilwar. in eius vita. Sur. tom. 5. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Molan. Mart. Rom. & alij. of the same Sea, who being an Englishman by birth, & brother to S. Swithin Bishop of VVinchester, went ouer into France and thence into Germany to S. Boniface, with whome he wēt to Rome, & was there ordayned Bishop of VVirtzburgh by Pope Zacharias, and sent backe to his Sea. And after that he had laboured incessantly for fourty yeares togeather in Christes vineyard, teaching & preaching the Christian faith, full of sanctity and miracles, he gaue vp his soule to rest, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred fourscore and eleuen. His body was afterward

on this day translated to the Monas
                     •
                  ery of S. Andrew in that Citty, by Hugh B
                     •
                  shop of VVirtzburgh, and there▪ is kept with great Veneration.
            
            
               
                  A The fifteenth Day.
               AT VVorcester the Translation of S. Oswald Bishop & Confessour, nephew to S. Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, who being first a Chanon of VVinchester, was thence promoted to the Bishopricke of VVorcester 
                  Sur. to. 5. Pol. Vir. lib. 7. West. an. 959. et 960. Molan. & alij. and lastly to Yorke: Whose godly l
                     ••
                  e and miracles are yet famous through the Christian world. He died in the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourscore and twelue; and was afterward on this day translated to VVorcester, whose feast was wont to be kept with great celebrity in Catholicke tyme, as well in that Church, as throughout the rest of England besides.
               THE same day also at Ochnofort in the higher Germany, the depositiō of S. Tecla Virgin and abbesse, who being an Englishwom
                     •
                  n Sur. in vita. S. Bonifac. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Mart. Rom. & alij. by byrth, & sent for out of VVimborne▪ Monastery in Dorcetshire into Germany by S. Bonijace B
                     •
                  shop of Mentz, togeather with S. 
                     
                        •
                     ioba and S. Agatha, was there made Abbesse of a Nunry called Ochnofort, which the said S. Boniface had newly erected, where

in great sanctimony & holines of life she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and fifty.
            
            
               
                  B The six
                     •
                  eenth Day.
               AT Mentz in the higher Germany the depo
                     〈…〉
                  tion of S. Lullus Con
                     •
                  essour, and Breuiar. Mogunt & Sur. tom. 5. Tri
                        •
                     em. de vir▪ Illustr. Vincent. inspec. Molan. Mart. Rom. Archbishop of that Sea, who descended of a noble parentage in England, & hearing of the fame of S. Boni
                        •
                     ace his Countreyman, went ouer vnto him into Germany, of whome he was first made Priest, and then Suffragan vnder him in the same Sea whilst he liued, and his successour after his death. Which when he had gouerned for two and thirty yeares, full of sanctity of life, he happily reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred fourscore and eight.
               THE same day at Arb
                        •
                     n also in Germany the Mart. Rom. Vsuard. hac die. Sur. to. 5. Lesl. de gest. Sco. l. 4. in Chenetto Rege. deposition of S. Gallus Abbotond Confessour, whose life and doctrine haue in tymes past byn very famous in many places throughout Europe. He was borne in Ireland of a noble parentage, and disciple to S. Columbane the Great of that Nation; and died in Germany about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourty, and was buryed at Arbon aforsaid.
            
            
               
               
                  C The seauenteenth Day.
               AT VVye in Kent the Passiō of the Saintes Ethelbrit and Ethelred Brothers and Martyrs, who being nephewes to Eadbald King of Kent, were slayne in hatred of Matth. West. an. 654. Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Cont. Bed. l. 2. cap. 3
                        •
                     . Herebert. in Tab. fast. SS. hac die. Christian Religion, about the yeare of Christ 664. Whose bodyes being cast into an obscure place, a miraculous light from heauen was seene to shine ouer them, and to detect the indecency of their buriall. Wherfore being therby found out, they were brought to the Monastery of VVye with great solemnity, wherat many miracles were forth with wrought. And in the raigne of King Edgar of England, S. Oswald▪
                   Bishop of VVorcester caused them to be remooued to Ramsey, where also in signe of their innocency, it pleased God in like manner to worke many miracles. There was a goodly Church erected in Kent, and dedicated in their honour, by S. Ermenburge Queene of the Mercians, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and nyneteene.
               THE same day at Ely in Cambridgshire the Translation of the Venerable body of S. Audry. 
                  Ediltrude Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to Annas King of the Eastangles, and wife to Egfrid King of the Northumbers, who liuing

with her husband twelue yeares in perpetuall Virginity, with his consent became a Religious woman, and receyued the Bed. l. 4. cap. 19. Item de sex aetat. Tritem. de vir. Illust
                        •
                     . Vincent. in spec. Sigeb. in Chron. holy veyle of Chastity in the Monastery of Coldingham, vnder S. Ebba her Aunt, and afterward was made Abbesse of the Nunry of Ely; where in all sanctimony of life she went to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred & fourscore, & was buryed in the same Monastery. But her fame increasing by the Miracles wrought at her body, the same was taken vp sixteene yeares after her death by her owne sister S. Sexburge then Abbesse of that place, and being found fresh and wholy vncorrupt, was translated to a goodly Church newly erected there in her honour, where it was wont to be kept, euen vntill our dayes, with great veneration.
            
            
               
                  D The eighteenth Day.
               AT Nassoin in the Territory of Liege in the lower Germany, the Passion of S. Mono Eremite and Martyr, who descended Mosand. apud Sur. to. 7 Molan. in addit. ad vsit. et in Indic. SS. Belgij of a noble parentage in Scotland, forsooke the world, and went ouer into Flanders and Germany, and there became an Eremite in the Forest of Arden, leading a most strict and seuere kind of life for many yeares togeather,

where being finally slayne by certaine P
                     •
                  gan theeues in hatred of his Religion, he happily attayned to the palme o
                     •
                   Martyrdome, His body is buryed in the forsaid Village of Nassoin belonging to the Abbey of S. Huvert, in a Church which himselfe had there somtyme bu
                     •
                  lt, and is kept with great veneration o
                     •
                   the Inhabitants of that place.
            
            
               
                  E The ninteenth Day.
               AT Oxford the Depositiō of S. Frideswide Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to Didan Duke of Oxford, who being so
                     •
                  licited by one Pol. Vir. l. 5. hist. Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum. Mart. Rom. hac die. Nicol. Sand. l. 2. desch s. Angl. Vitaeius M. S. Rob. Buckl. 
                  Algarus a noble yong man to yield vnto his 
                     •
                  ust, escaped miraculously his violence, he being on the suddaine stroken blynd by Gods Iustice for offering the same. She was afterward made Abbesse of a Monastery erected by her Father in the same Citty: which Monastery in the tyme of King Henry the first was conuerted to a Priory of Chanous Regular, and so continued vntill King Henry the 8. when as Cardinall VVolsey obtayned the same of the Pope, towards the founding of Christs-Colledge, which is now built in the same place. She died in all sanctimony and holines of life, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred thirty and nyne.

There is an ancient Chappell yet to be scene dedicated in her honour, in a Village of Artoys ca
                     •
                  led Bomy, some foure leagues di
                     •
                  tant from the Citty or S. Omers, where her festiuity is kept with due veneration of the Inhabitants.
               THE same day at Maestricht in Brabant the Translation of S. VVillebrord, the first Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac die. Molan. in Indic. SS. Belgij Bishop of that Sea and Con
                     •
                  essour, who being borne in Yorkeshire, went ouer into the low Countreyes with a dozen other Companions, all holy men, and conuerted the greatest part of those Prouinces to the Christian faith, and so became their chiefe Apostle. He died in all sanctity and holines of life, about the yeare of Christ 736. and was afterward on this day translated to Maestrcht, and there is kept with great honour and veneration, as principall Patron o
                     •
                   that Diocesse, where also his feast is celebrated with an Office of nyne lessons.
               ALso the same day in Ireland the Deposition Mart. Rom. Molan. Petr. in Catal. of S. Ethbyn Abbot and Confessour, whose godly life and miracles haue in tymes past byn famous through the Countreys round about. He died about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and ten.
            
            
               
               
                  F The twentith Day.
               AT Toleys in aliter Germany
                   
                  France the deposition of S. VVendelyn Abbot & Con
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  sour, Sonne to the King of Scotland, who forsaking all temporall preferments, and his owne inheritance to that Crowne and Kingdome, went ouer into France, and there became a Peter Cratep. de Epis. German. Exeges. l. 11. Trit. de vir. Illustr. l. 3. c. 79. Molan. wion, & alij omnes hac die. Religious man and afterward Abbot of the Monastery of Toleys, where famous for sanctity of life and Miracles, he reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred & twenty, and there lieth solemnly intombed. Ouer whose body is also built a goodly Chappell, which for the cōcourse of people, that come thither on deuotion to visit the same, and the miracles that are dayly wrought therat, the Towne is now cōmonly called by the name of S. VVendelyns.
               
            
            
               
                  G The one and twentith Day.
               AT Cullen in the higher Germany the Passion of S. Vrsula Virgin and Martyr, daughter to Dionocus King of Cornwall, who togeather with an eleuen thousand other British Virgins (as ancient Authors do recount) being shipped at London, to passe ouer

into France, to be maried there to two Legions of British souldiers, vnto whome Maximus, that was by them chosen Emperour, had giuen the Countrey of Armorica; were by a contrary wynd driuen downe Ga
                        •
                     f. Monum. l. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . c. 15. hist. vec. Britan▪ Baron. in Annal. an. 338. Ri
                        •
                     h▪ Vi
                        •
                     us I. V. Doct: iahist. Britan. Mart. Rom▪ & omnes hac 
                        〈◊〉
                     . to the mouth of the Riuer o
                     •
                   
                  Rhene, and there, neere vnto Cullen, were all slayne by the barbarous Hunnes and Pictes, in defence of their Virginity, about the yeare of Christ, three hundred fourscore and three. Most of their bodyes were brought to Cullen, and there interred with great honour and veneration, and their memoryes celebrated vpon this day, throughout the Christian world. There was afterward a goodly Church built in Cullen in their honour, called the Church Of the holy Virgins; which alwayes hath byn had in such reuerence among the Inhabitants, that they neuer buried any other body there. Neyther will the ground or earth of that Church receyue any other body, no, not the corpes of yong Infants newly baptized, but, as if were, vomiting them vp againe in the night, they will be cast aboue ground, as hath oftentymes byn tried.
            
            
               
               
                  A The two and twentith Day.
               AT Roane in France, the Deposition of S. Mellon Bishop and Con 
                     •••
                  ou
                     •
                  , who Pet. de. Natal. de vit. SS. Vinc. in spec. l. 11. cap. 74. Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij. being a noble Britan by byrth, and sent to Rome in the tyme of Valerian the Emperour to pay Tribute for the Kingdome of Britany, was by Pope Stephen, instructed in the Christian faith and baptized, and after created the first Bishop of Roane, and sent into France to his Bishopricke: where in all kind of sanctity o
                     •
                   life & miracles, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, two hundred and fourscore. His body is kept vntill this day at Roane in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty, neere to the body of S. Nicasius with great honour & veneration of the Inhabitants.
               THE same day at Cullen the passion of S. Cordula Virgin and Martyr, one of the eleuen thousand that suffered with S. Vrsula, 
                  Mart. Rom. Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. R
                        •
                     dulph. in vita Albert. Magni p. 2. cap. 9. who being terrified the first day with the slaughter of her companions hid herselfe: but on the morrow repenting her therof, & discouering herselfe to the Hunnes; was finally also crowned with Martyrdome, about the yeare of Christ 383. Aller
                        •
                     us Magnus caused her body to be brought to Cullen, where the same is kept with great honour.
               
                  
ALso the same day at Fesuli in Tuscane, the Franc. Cat
                        〈…〉
                      Ep. Eesulan. in eius vit. Mart. Rom. ha
                        •
                      die. Deposition of S. Donatus Bishop and Confessour, who borne in Scotland and descended of an honourable family, was created Bishop of F
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     li; where famous for sanctity o
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  fe and miracles in a good old age, he happily rep
                     •
                  sed in our Lord. His feast is kept at Fes
                        •
                     li a orsaid on this day, with great solemnity and deuotion of the Inhabitants.
            
            
               
                  B The three and twentith Day.
               AT the Monastery of Brige neere Paris in France the Commemoration of S. Syra 
                  * Virgin, daughter to K. Eugenius the fourth of Sco
                        •
                     land, who reiecting all worldly pōpe & preferments, in her tender yeares, went ouer Io. Lest. Episto. Ross. l. 4. de gest. Scot. Wion lib. 4. lig. vitae. into France, with her brother S. 
                     
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     ker, where the receyuing the holy veyle of Cnastity, became a Religious woman in the forsaid Monastery of Brige, vnder S. Phara Abbesse therof: where excelling in all kind of sanctimony of life, and godly conuersation, especially in the vertue of humility, she gaue vp her pure soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and thirty, and was buryed in the same place.
            
            
               
               
                  C The foure & twentith Day.
               AT Paris in France the festiuity of S. Maglore Bishop and Confessour, who being a noble Britan by birth, and kinsman Sur. to. 5. hac die. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. l. 3. c. 50. & l. 4. c. 47. Mart. Rom. & Molā. to S. Sampson, succeeded him afterward in his Bishopricke of Dole in little Britany, and last of all became an Ermite in France, where leading a strict and austere kind of life, famous for miracles, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, 586. His body is kept with great veneration at Paris in a Monastery there of his owne Name, commonly called S. Maglors, wherat it hath pleased God in signe of his sanctity to worke many miracles.
               THE same day in France also, the Commemoration of S. Maxentia Virgin and * Martyr, who being daughter to one Marcolane a noble man of Scotland, and promised in matrimony to one of like dignity that was Rob. Buckl. in eius vita. lib. M. S. de vit. SS. Mulier. Angl. fol. 237. a Pagan, she contēning the same, fled secretly into France with two of her trustiest seruāts, and there lay disguised for a tyme in a Village called Beauuaise, liuing in continuall prayer and contemplation, vntill being pursued by her pretended husband, was at last found out and descried. And when by no meanes she could be induced to yield vnto

his mariage, he turning loue into fury, presently stroke of her head with his owne hands, as also the heads of her two seruants Barbantius and Rosebea. The Innocency of whose cause was presently manifested by a miracle, which was, that she taking vp her owne head from the ground, carried it to the place where it now remayneth, where afterward was a goodly Church 
                     •
                  rected in her honour, and God glorified therin by many miracles. Whose sacred body Charles then King 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  France is said to haue greatly reuerenced, & adorned with sundry Royall giftes.
            
            
               
                  D The fiue & twentith Day
               AT the Towne of Ceprano in the Kingdome * of Naples, the Commemoration Registr. Eccles. Cepranēs. & inscript. eius Sepulturae ibidem sculpt. of S. Ardwyne Priest and Confessour, who borne in England of very worshipfull parentes, and going to Hierusalem to visit the holy Sepulcher of our Sauiour, in his returne backe from thence, came into Italy, where at that tyme the Plague sorely infecting the Kingdome of Naples, in great sanctity of life, he there gaue vp his blessed soule to rest. His body was with all solēnity interred in the forsaid Towne of Ceprano, where vntill this day it is kept with great

honour and veneration of the Inhabitants, for the dayly miracles it pleaseth God to worke therat, in testimony of his holinesse, and increase of the peoples deuotion to that place.
            
            
               
                  E The six and twentith Day.
               AT Lindisserne in the Kingdome of the Nor humbers, the Deposition of S. Eatta Co
                     ••
                  ssour and Bishop of that Sea, who Vē. Bed. lib. 4. c. 27. & 28. Tritem. lib. 4. c. 16
                        •
                     . W
                        •
                     st. W
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      C
                        •
                     tal. Episco. Lin
                        〈…〉
                     f. Her eber. in fast. SS hac die. being first a Monke and then Abbot of the Monastery of Mailros in the same Prouince, wa
                     •
                   afterward ordayned Bishop of Lindisfarne (now translated to Durham) and predecessour to S. Cuthbert; which when he had gouerned in all kind of vertue and sanctity of life for fiue yeares or therabout, he was remoued to the Church of Hagustald, resigning the Sea of Lindisserne to S. Cuthbert, and within a while after in great holines, famous for Miracles, he departed to our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore and six.
               THE same day in Lorayne, the Deposition of S. Albuine Bishop and Confessour, Io. Tri
                        •
                     . l. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 267 & l. 4. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 190. Wi
                        〈…〉
                      l. 2. lig. vit. who being an Irishman by birth, and Mōke of a Monastery in the Iland of Hoy, ne
                     •
                  re Sco
                        •
                     land, went ouer into Germany to preach the Christian faith, where he conuerted

the whole Dukedome of Lorayne, and became in Catal. Epis
                        •
                     o. Frislar. et in Mart. Benedict. the Apostle of that Prouince. He was afterward made Bishop there of a place called Frislarium in the Towne of 
                     
                        •
                     urbach; where teaching and preaching continually to his flocke, in great sanctity of life & miracles, he finally ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and fifty.
            
            
               
                  F The seauen & twentith Day.
               AT Mechlyn in Brabant the Translation of S. Romwald Bishop and Martyr, Sonne to the King of 
                     aliter Scotland. 
                  Ireland, who being ordayned Archbishop of Dublyn in the same Kingdome, went to Rome for deuotion, and thence backe into the lower Germany, where in the Territory of Mechlyn, vnder Io. Molā. i. addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Count Ade of Flanders, he first planted the Christian faith, and became the Apostle of that Prouince. He was afterward slayne in hatred of Christ, by two soldiours, in the same Territory, in the yeare, seauen hundred threescore and fifteene. Whose venera
                     〈…〉
                   body was afterward on this day translated to Mechlyn with great solemnity and ven
                     •
                  
                  tion, & put into a goodly Shrine of siluer very richly set with precious stones, and other ornaments, wherat it hath pleased God to worke many miracles. He was canonized

for a Saint by Pope Alexander the fourth.
            
            
               
                  G The eight & twentith Day.
               IN Persia the Passiō of the glorious Apostle S. Symon, surnamed Zelotes, who according to diuers ancient wryters, among other his peregrinations, came into our Iland of Britany, about the yeare of Christ, fourty Ni 
                        〈◊〉
                     . l. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 4. P
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                        •
                     ir. li
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . W
                        〈…〉
                     . a
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                        •
                     6. & 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 2. Dorot
                        •
                     . in Synop. and six, and there preached the Christian faith, baptized, ordayned Priests and Deacons, er
                     •
                  cted C
                     •
                  urches and the like, wherby we may worthily call him our Apostle, and with greater so emnity celebrate his fea
                     ••
                  , by whome we receyued so singular grace
                     •
                   and benefitts. He afterward went into Persia with S. I
                        •
                     de to preach the Christian faith to the Inf
                     •
                  dels of that Countrey, where at last he receyued the reward of his labour by Martyrdome, being nayled to a Crosse: though Dorotheus wryteth, that he 
                     〈…〉
                  ed, and was buryed in Britany.
               THE same day at VVinchester in Hāpshire the Deposition of B
                     ••
                  ssed Alfred King of the VVestsixons and Confessour, who after A
                        ••
                     o 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Scot in hist. many glor
                     •
                  ous and victorious battayles achieued against the 
                     •
                  agā 
                  Danes that infested his realme; in great sanctity and holines of life he ended his blessed dayes, in the yeare

of Christ, eight hundred fourscore and Regist. de Hide Wion & alij. nynteene, and lieth buried at VVinchester. He founded diuers goodly Monasteryes, as t
                     ••
                  t of Shaftesbury, of VVinchester, of Ethelingsey, besides the famous Vniuersity of Oxford.
               
            
            
               
                  A The nine & twentith Day.
               AT Canterbury the deposition of S. Eadsine Bishop and Confessour, who being Henr. Hūtington. in sua hist. an. 1050. Regist Eccles. Cant. & Catal. Episco. Cantuar. Chaplyn to King Harold, was first preferred to the Bishopricke o
                     •
                   
                  VVinchester, and thence to Canterbury, whose innocency of life and other vertues haue byn famous in our Iland vntill these our dayes. He spent the greatest part of his time in continuall prayer & meditation of heauenly things. And when he had gouerned the flocke committed vnto his charge for twelue yeares, in a venerable old age he gaue vp his soule to rest, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand and fifty: and was honourably interred in his owne Cathedrall Church of Canterbury, where his body was wont to be kept with great veneration, for the miracles that haue byn wrought therat.
               THE same day in Scotland the Commemoration * of S. Motifer Monke and Confessour, who borne in Ireland and disciple

to S. Columbe the Great, came with him ouer into Scotland, & was his coadiutor Hect. Boet. de gest. Sco. Io. Lest. l. 4. hist. Scot. there in preaching the Christian saith to the Pictes, who in those dayes inhabited that Kingdome, where famous for sanctity of life, he made a holy end, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred and fourscore.
            
            
               
                  B The thirtith Day.
               AT Cāterbury the depositiō of S. Egelnoth, surnamed the Good, Confessour and Matth. West. an. 1038. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Pol. Vir. l. 7. in fine. wion in Mart. Benedict. Anchbishop of the same Sea, sonne to Earle Agehmare, and sometimes Deane of Christs Church in Canterbury, whose great holines of life togeather with his learning and vertues haue byn famous throughout Christē
                  dome, but especially in our Iland of Great Britany. He died on this day, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and fourty, hauing byn Bishop seauenteene yeares, & was solemnly interred in his owne Church at Canterbury, in the raigne of King Hareld of England. It is recorded that he going to Rome to fetch his Archiepiscopall Pall, brought thence with him an Arme of S. Augustine the Doctor, and bestowed it vpon the Abbey of Couōtry in VVarwickshire, where the same was kept with great reuerence, vntill the tyme of King Henry the eight, and

decay of that Monastery.
            
            
               
                  C The one & thirtith Day.
               IN Hennalt the Passion of S. Foillan Bishop and Martyr, Sonne to Philtan King of Vē. Bed. l. 3. hist. Angl. Petr. in Catal. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. Vincent. in spec. lib. 22. Io. Molā. in addit ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij 
                  Ireland, who-being first a Monke, and then Abbot of a Monastery called Knobhersburge; in the Kingdome of the Eastangles, went to Rome, and being there ordayned Bishop by Pope Martyn the first, was sent backe into Frace & Flanders to preach the Christiā faith, whereat last as he was exercising of his Pastorall function, he was slayne, togeather with three other Companions, in the Territory of Hennalt, in the Diocesse of Namures: whose death being reueyled to his brother S. Vltan and S. Gertrude Abbesse of Niuelle, his body was presently sought out, and being found, was with all solemnity brought to the Monastery of Fossis, and there is yet conserued with great veneration of the Inhabitants. He suffered about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourty.
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF NOVEMBER.
            
               
                  A The first Day.
               
                  AT Fulda in the higher Germany the Translation Vē. Bed. in Epit. Sigeb. in Chron. Mar. Scot. l. 2. hist. an. 717. Wion hac die in Mart. Benedict. of S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz and Martyr, who borne in the Citty of London, and going into Germany to preach the Christian faith, went thence to Rome, and was there by Pope Gregory the second ordayned the first Bishop of Mentz, and sent backe to his Bishopricke; where teaching and preaching the faith of Christ to the Germans, he conuerted the greatest part of that Countrey, & became their Apostle. He was finally martyred in Frizeland, at a towne called

                  Dockum, with fifty other companions, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred firty & foure. His body was afterward of this day translated to the Monastery of Fulda, which himselfe had founded, where the same is kept with great honour and veneration, for the miracles that haue byn wrought therat.
               THE same day in the Monastery of Hampole neere Doncaster in Yorkeshire, the Cō
                  memoration * of Blessed Richard Confessour Sixtus Senens. in Biblioth. Script. Illustr. lit. R. Codex M. S. in Coll. Angl. Duacens. & Ermite, whose singular spirit of piety & deuotion, is left written, and manifest to the world by his owne workes yet extant. He was first a Doctor, and then leauing the world became an Eremite, and led a solitary life neere to the forsaid Monastery of Hampole: to which place he was wont often to repayre, to sing psalmes and hymnes in honour of God, as himselfe testifieth in his workes. And after many spirituall bookes and treatises by him wrytten, full of great sanctity of life and venerable old age, he finally rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand three hundred fourty and nyne: and was buryed at Hampole.
               
            
            
               
               
                  E The second Day.
               AT Lens in the Prouince of Artoys, the 
                     〈…〉
                  iuity of S. Vulganius Bishop and Confessour, who borne in Ireland, and going thence with the Saintes Foillan, Obodius, and Chron. Camerac. La
                        •
                     b. de Loos Mo
                        〈…〉
                     . 8. A
                        •
                     tbert. & Molan. in Indi
                        •
                     . SS. Belgij others of that Nation, into the lower German
                        •
                     , began there to preach the Christian saith, and was at last consecrated Bishop. Where after infinite labours and trauayles taken for the loue of Christ, in propagating his name and faith among the Infidells of those partes in all 
                     〈…〉
                  ctity and holines of life, he ended his blessed dayes about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and foure. His body is yet kept with great honour and veneration at the forsaid towne of Lens, in the Monastery there of the Chanons-regular, where his feast is yearly celebrated on this day with great solemnity and deuotion of the Inhabitantes of that place.
            
            
               
                  F The third Day.
               
                  IN North-wales the Deposition of S. VVenefride Virgin and Martyr, daughter to a noble Britan of those partes, called Trebuith, whose head being cut of by Cradocus Sonne

to Alane King of North-wales, for not consenting to his vnlawfull Iust, was by her Sur. 
                        •
                     o▪ 6▪ de vit. SS. Robert. Salop. in eius vita. Bre▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Sarum. Mart. Rom. & alij. omnes hac die. Maister S. Beno set on againe, she liuing fifteene yeares a ter, to the admiration of the whole world for so famous a miracle. In the place where she was beheaded, presently sprang vp a miraculous fountayne, very soueraigne for the curing of many diseases: which vntill this day is a great pilgrimage and place of deuotion for all Catholickes of England, commonly called S. VVenefrides well. Her body was afterward translated to Shrewsbury, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred thirty and eight. This festiuity of hers was wont to be celebrated in our Catholicke Church of England with an Office of nyne lessons, according to the vse of Sarum, and in many places kept holiday.
               THE same day at VVilton in Wi
                        ••
                     shire the Translation of S. Edith Virgin, daughter to holy Edgar King and Monarch of Sur. to. 5. 17. Septē. wion in Mart. Bened. hac die. England, who after the death of her Mother VVilfred, was ordayned Abbesse of the Monastery of VVilton aforsaid: where in all sanctimony and holines of life, she gaue vp her soule to rest, and was buryed there in the Church of S. Dionyse, which herselfe had somtyme built, about the yeare of Christ 984. whose body was afterward on this day taken vp, and translated to a more eminent

place of the same Church, wherat it is recorded many miracles to haue byn wrought This woman is commonly called by the name of S. Edith the yonger.
            
            
               
                  G The fourth Day.
               IN France the Passion of S. Cl
                        •
                     re Priest and Martyr, who descended o
                     •
                   a worthy British stocke, and borne in the Citty of Rochester in Kent, his worldly friends would haue Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Brit. Mart. Rom. & Vsua. hac die. had him to marry a wife against his will, for which he forsaking both Coūtrey & friēds, went ouer into Normandy, where he taking holy Orders, was made Priest: and afterward going thence into France, for that he refused to yield to the lust of a noble womā of that Coūtrey, was slayne by her procurement in defence of his charity, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and six. His body was buryed there in a Village called Volcassine, wherat it pleased God in signe of his innocency to worke many miracles.
            
            
               
                  A The fifth Day.
               AT Clar
                        •
                     uallis in the Territory of Lāgres in France, the festiuity of S. Malachy Bishop

& Cō
                  
                     〈…〉
                  our, who being first a Monke Sur. to. 6. hac 
                        〈◊〉
                     . vnà 
                        〈◊〉
                      Molan. i
                        •
                      ad
                        •
                     it. ad vs
                        〈…〉
                     r. B
                        〈…〉
                     . in not ad Ma
                        ••
                     . Rom. 3. nonas 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     a. d. in 
                        〈◊〉
                      vita 
                        •
                     t i
                        〈…〉
                      Epist. Mombr. 
                        •
                     om. 1. vit. SS. o
                     •
                   
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     hor 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , & then Abbot, was after or
                     〈…〉
                  ned Bishop or 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     rthen 
                  
                     •
                  n the same 
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     〈…〉
                   & Pr
                     〈…〉
                  ate o
                     •
                   
                  Ireland▪
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                   and di
                     •
                  d in the tyme of S. Bernard, 
                  
                     •
                  bout the care of Ch
                     〈…〉
                  , on
                     •
                   thousand one hūd
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   & eight; who wrote vnto him diuers learned 
                     〈◊〉
                  s, as also his whole life, yet extant among S. Bernards workes. He desceas
                     •
                  d the second day o
                     •
                   this moneth in the forsaid Monastery of Clareuallis, though his 
                     〈…〉
                  iuity be cōmonly celebrated on this day, because on the other is kept the Commemoration of All-Soules, especially among the Monkes of the Venerable Order of Cisterce.
               
            
            
               
                  B The sixt Day.
               IN the Monastery of VVoromholt by Berg
                        •
                     en 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Flanders the depositio o
                     •
                   S. VVinocke Abbot and Confessour, who d
                     •
                  sc
                     •
                  nded or a Sur. to. 6. Marcell. in vita. S. Switber. Molan. in 
                        〈…〉
                     it. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Be
                        〈…〉
                     ij most noble & Royall bloud in Britany, went ouer into the lovver Germany to S. Ber
                        〈…〉
                     , who then liued there in great fame for his holynes, and was by him ordayned Abbot of a Monastery erected in Flanders, called Woromhol: where full of wonderfull holines & sanctity of life, togeather with working of many miracles, he reposed in our Lord,

about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and sixteene. His body was afterward Iacob. Meyrus in Ann. Flandr. lib. 1. translated to Berghen a orsaid, where the same is preserued, euen vntill these our dayes with great veneration of the Countrey round about: In whose honour the said Towne is now also commonly called of him by the Name of VVinockes-Berghen.
               
            
            
               
                  C The seauenth Day.
               AT Epternake in the higher Germany the depositiō of S. VVillebrord Bishop & Cōfessour, Sur. to. 6. Marcell. in vita S. Simib. Molan. in addit. & Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij. who being a Mōke of Rippon in Yorkeshire, was sent out of England by the holy Abbot Egbert, with a dozen other Companions to preach the Christian faith in the Low-Countreys and Germany; and going thence to Rome, was by Pope Sergius consecrated Archbishop of Maestricht in Brabant, and sent backe to that Sea. Where after the conuersion of many thousand soules to the true worship of one God, he there ended his blessed dayes, in a Monastery at the forsaid place of Epternake, in the Diocesse of Treuers, which himselfe had built, in the yeare of Christ, scauen hundred thirty and six.
               THE same day at Strasburge in the higher Germany also, the deposition of S. Florentius Bishop and Confessour, who being

borne in Scotland of an honourable parentage, Mart. Rom. hac die. Lesl. l. 4. de gest. Scot. Democ. tom. 2. de sacrif. Missae cap. 35. went ouer into Germany, in the tyme of King Dagobert of France, whose daughter being dumbe and blind from her natiuity, he by his prayers restored both to speach and sight. And after going into the Prouince of Alsatia, was ordayned Bishop of Strasburge: where in all holines of life, attending diligētly to his charge, he gaue vp his soul to rest, about the yeare of Christ, six hū
                  dred threescore and fifteene, and was buried there in a Monastery neere to the Riuer of Brusch, which himselfe had founded a little before, for the Scottish nation.
            
            
               
                  D The eight Day.
               AT Bremen in East-frizland the deposition Albert, Cranz. lib. 2. c. 14. & 15. Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Mart. Rom. Sur. to. 6. Tritem. de vir. Illustr. of S. VVillehade Confessour & first Bishop of the same Sea, who going out of England, where he was borne, for the Gō
                  uersion of his Neighbour-countreys, after he had preached to the Saxons & Frizians for more then fifty yeares togeather, & cōuerted many thousands to the Christian faith, was at the request of Charles the great, ordayned Bishop of Bremen in Frizland. Where after he had passed a venerable old age, ioyned with sanctity of life, he finally rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, seauen

hundred fourscore and eleuen. His body was buryed in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty dedicated to S. Peter, which himselfe had built, and was there wont to be kept with great honour and veneration of the Inhabitants, as chiefe Patrone and Apostle of that Prouince, euen vntill these our later dayes of schismes and heresyes in those partes.
            
            
               
                  E The ninth Day.
               AT VVhitby in Yorkeshire the Commemoration of S. Congilla Virgin and Abbesse * whose godly and vertuous life, togeather with the obseruation of Monasticall discipline, Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl. Wiō l. 4 lig. vitae. hath deserued to be famous, in Catholicke tyme, throughout England. She was cōstituted Abbesse of an ancient Monastery now called VVhitby, which Oswy King of the Northūbers had newly foūded; wherin he caused his owne daughter Ethelfred to be brought vp, vnder the care and gouerment of the forsaid Congilla; who famous for sanctimony of life and miracles, gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and eleuen.
            
            
               
               
                  F The tenth Day.
               AT Canterbury the Deposition of S. Iustus Archbishop of the same Sea and Confessour, who comming into England with Bed. l. 1. c. 29. et l. 2. c. 3. 5. 8. Mart. Rom. Molan. S. Augustine and his fellowes, was first ordayned Bishop of Rochester, and after of Canterbury, where in all holines of life, he desceased, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred thirty and two, and was buryed at Canterbury.
               
               THE same day at Michelmburgh in VVandalia the passion of S. Iohn Bishop and Albert. Stadens. in Chron. hac die. Helmod. in Chron. Scla
                        •
                     . l. 1. c. 23. Cranz. Me
                        〈…〉
                     op. l. 4. c. 43. Tri em. de vir. Illustr. Martyr, who being an Irishman by byrth, & a Monke, went ouer into the lower Germany, and thence into VVandalia to preach the Christian faith; where being consecrated Bishop of Michelmburgh, was at length taken by the Infidels of that Countrey, and sorely beaten with cudgells. And when they could not auert him from calling vpon the name of IESVS, they first cut of his hands, and then his feet, and last of all his head, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand threescore and six.
            
            
               
               
                  G The eleuenth Day.
               IN the Monastery of Malòn in the Territory of Namures, the Deposition of S. Bertuine Bishop and Confessour, who borne in Ireland of a noble parentage, and going ouer into the Lower Germany, to preach the Christian faith, built himselfe a little Oratory in honour of our Blessed Lady, in a Io. Molā. in oddit ad Vsua. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Village called Malòn in the forsaid Territory of Namures, where in very great austerity & holinesse of life, he gaue himselfe wholy to contēplation and meditation of heauenly things, vntill his dying-day, which happened full of miracles, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and one. In the same place where he had built his said Oratory, was afterward erected a goodly Monastery of the Institute of S. Augustine, where his body is yet kept with great veneration of the Inhabitants therabout.
            
            
               
                  A The tweluth Day.
               AT Asche in Flanders the Passion of S. Liuinus Bishop & Martyr, who being borne in Scotland, & scholler to S. Augustine our English Apostle, went ouer into Flanders
                  
with three other Companions to preach Io. Molā. in addit. ad vsuar. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Marcell. in vita. S. Benifac. Suitbert. & eius. the faith or Christ, where he was slayne in hatred therof by the Pagans of that Countrey, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and three. They first cut out his tongue, which being miraculously restored vnto him againe, he was finally beheaded. His body was first buryed at Hauten, but afterward translated to Gaunt in the yeare 1007.
               THE same day in Ouerysle o
                     •
                   
                  Gelderland the f
                     〈…〉
                  uity of S. Lebuine Priest and Confessour, who being a Monke of Rippon in Yorkeshire, and disciple to S. VVillebrord, went Sur. to. 6. Tritem. lib. 3. de vir. Illustr. cap. 146. Molan. in addit. ad vsuar. et in Ind. SS. Belgij ouer to S Gregory Bishop of Maestricht in Brabant, of whome he was sent to p
                     •
                  each to the Saxons beyond the Riuer of Ysle; where after he had conuerted many thousands to the faith of Christ, full of sanctity and miracles he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare o
                     •
                   Christ, seauen hundred and threescore. His body was afterward translated to Dauentry, and there is kept in the Cathedrall Church of that Citty with great veneration, as one of the chiefe Patrons of the Diocesse.
            
            
               
                  B The thirteenth Day.
               IN the Territory of Arras in Artoys the Deposition of S. Kilian Bishop & Confessour,

who descended of the bloud-roall of Scotland and Kinsman to King Fugenius the fourth of that Name, despised, 
                     •
                  or the loue of God, a
                     •
                  l wor
                     •
                  dly preferments, and went ouer into the lower Germany, to preach the Christian faith; where when he had reduced Io. Molā. in addit. ad vsuar. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Regist. Priorat. S. Kiliā. Albin. many thousands to Christes flocke, replenished with sanctity o
                     •
                   life, he ended his blessed dayes, in a venerable old age, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourty. His body is kept vntill this day in a Village called Alb
                        •
                     niacke, in the Diocesse of Arras, where there is a goodly Prior
                     •
                   of Chanous-Regular erectd in his name, common
                     •
                   called the Priory of S. Kilian. Th
                     •
                  s man is different from the other S. Kilian of the same Name mentioned vpon the eight of Iuly, who was of the Irish Nation, and a Martyr.
            
            
               
                  C The fourteenth Day.
               AT London the Translation of S. Erconwald Confessour and Bishop of the same Sea, Sonne to Offa King of the Eastsaxons, 
                  M
                        •
                     tth. West. an. Do. 1148. 
                        •
                     alend. sec. vsum Sarum. hac die. whose fame of sanc
                     •
                  ity and holines of life, togeather with working of miracl
                     •
                  s, hath byn notorious throughout Christendome, but especially in England. He died in the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and fifteene, and was buryed at London in S.

                  Paules Church, but afterward taken vp on this day, and trans
                     •
                  ated to a more eminent place o
                     •
                   the same Church in the yeare of Christ 1148. At whose body it is recorded many m
                     •
                  racles to haue byn wrought.
               THE same day at Ewe in Normandy the Mart. Rom. eū Barō. Mo
                        •
                     an. in addit. a
                        •
                      vsuar. Sur. 
                        •
                     o. 6. W
                        •••
                      i
                        •
                      Catal. Epis
                        •
                     o. Dubunē. deposition of S. Laurence Bishop and Confessour, who being first a Monke and then Abbot of Glindalacke in Ireland, was la
                     〈…〉
                  y ordayned Bishop o
                     •
                   
                  Dublyn in the same Kingdome: And thence going ouer into Normandy, in great holines of life and miracles, ended his blessed dayes. He was a
                     •
                  terward canonized for a Saint by Pope Honorius the third, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand three hundred and six. His body still remayneth at Ewe a
                     •
                  orsaid, where it is kept with due veneration of the Inhabitants of that place.
               ALso the same day in Bardsey-Iland in North-wales the deposition o
                     •
                   
                  S. D
                        ••
                     ritius 
                  Matth. W
                        •
                     st. an. 507. Gaufr monum. l 9. c. 4. &. 3. hist. 
                        〈…〉
                     n. Confessour, Archbishop o
                     •
                   
                  Carleon vpon Vske, & Primate of the old Britans of VVales, who resigning his Sea to S. Dauid, King Arthurs vncle, became an Ermite in the wild Mountaynes of North-wales; where in very great austerity of life, full of miracles, in a venerable old age, he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred twenty and two; and was buryed in the a
                     •
                  orsaid Iland of Bardsey.
               
            
            
               
               
                  D The fifteenth Day.
               AT Sainctes in France the Deposition of S. Macloue Bishop and Confessour, who Io. Molā. in addit. ad vsuar. et in Ind. SS. Belgij Petr. in Catal. Vita eius habetur Romae M. S. in Biblioth. Baron. Wion in Mart. Benedict. hac die. being descended of a noble British bloud, & Mōke of the Monastery ot Bangor in Caerneruanshire of VVales, was thence promoted to the Bishopricke of Althene in little Britany (now called of his name in that vulgar language San-Macloue) and consecrated therto by Leontius Bishop or Sainctes: which Sea when he had gouerned most worthily for many yeares, in all sanctity of life and laudable vertues, comming to Sainctes aforsaid, in a good old age gaue vp his soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, 
                     〈…〉
                  e hūdred threescore and foure. His Reliques were afterward translated to the Monastery of Gemblacum, where the same are yet preserued with great honour and Veneration, for the manifold miracles, that in tymes past haue byn wrought therat.
            
            
               
                  E The sixteenth Day.
               AT Pontoyse in France the Deposition of S. Edmund Bishop and Confessour, who being somtyme Treasurer of the Church of

                  Salisbury, was ordayned Archbishop of Canterbery: which Sea when he had gouerned for six yeares in all godly manner, being many wayes 
                     〈…〉
                  red by King Henry the Pol. Vir. lib. 16. Sur. to. 6. de vit. SS Matth. West. an. 1246. Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij. third and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Otho, he resigned the same, went 
                     〈◊〉
                   into France, and liued in voluntary banishment, spending the rest of his dayes in continuall prayer and meditation, in a Monastery of Chanons-Regular at Sorson: where in very great sanctity of life he departed this world, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand two hundred and fourty. His body was brought with all solemnity to P
                        〈…〉
                     yse, where the same is kept with great honour and Veneration vntill this day. He was canonized for a Saint by Pope Innocentius the fourth, six yeares after his death. This day was afterward commaunded to be kept holy in his memory throughout England. King Lewes of France caused his body to be translated to a more honourable place of the Church in Pontoyse, and bestowed theron a sumptuous shryne of siluer, guilt & richly adorned with many precious stones. Sur. to. 3. & Mart. Rom. 10. Iunij. Io. Molā. in addit. ad Vsua. hac die.
               
               THE same day in Scotland the deposition of S. Margaret Queene, wife to holy King Malcolme the third of that Name, and daughter to Prince Edward of England, surnamed the Out-law, whose wonderfull life and vertues, especially in deuotion and liberall

almes to the poore, are famous to posterity. Her principall festiuity is celebrated vpon the tenth of Iune, though she died on this day, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand fourscore and twelue, and in the raigne of K. VVilliam Rusus of England.
            
            
               
                  F The seauenteenth Day.
               AT Lincolne the deposition of S. Hugh Confessour and Bishop of the same Pol. Vir. l. 13. 14. & 15. Petr. Sutor de vita Carthufiana l. 2. c. 5. Silu. Girald. in eius vita West. an. 1297. Mart. Rom. Molan. & alij omnes hac die. Sea, who borne in Burgundy, was sent for into England by King Henry the second, and first made Prior of the Charterhouse-Monks at VVittam in Somersetshire, and thence elected and ordayned Bishop of Lincolne. In which function he so excelled in all kind of vertue and holines of life, that his merits deserued to haue the same manifested to the world, by the wonderfull miracles wrought at his body. He newly built the Cathedrall Church of Lincolne from the foundations. And when he had most laudably gouerned his flocke for fourteene yeares, full of venerable old age, he gaue vp his soule to rest at London, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand and two hundred. His body was presently brought to Lincolne, at what tyme there happened to be present King Iohn of England, and VVilliam King of Scots, with very many

of the Nobility of both Realmes. The two Kinges for the great reuerence they, had vnto his holines, bare-headed carried his body from the gates of the Citty vnto the Church, where the same being most solemnly receyued by the Prelates & Clergy, was buryed behind the high Altar, neere vnto the Chappell of S. Iohn Baptist. He was afterward canonized for a Saint by Pope Honorius the third, in the yeare of Christ 1220.
               THE same day at Strenshalt in the Kingdome Vē. Bed. l. 3. c. 24. & lib. 4. cap. 23. Lippomannus tom. 2. West. an. 680. Tri em. de vir. Illustr. of the Northumbers the Deposition of S. Hilda Virgin and Abbesse, descended of the bloud royall of the Kinges of that Prouince, who forsaking the vanityes of the world became a Religious woman first in a little Nunry neere to the riuer of VVire, and then Abbesse of the Monastery of Hartsey (now called VVhitby in Yorkeshire) & afterward of Strenshalt, where in very great sanctity of life, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hūdred & fourscore. Her feast is in many places obserued vpon the fifteenth of December, where also we haue againe made mention of her.
            
            
               
               
                  G The eighteenth Day.
               AT Santo-Padre a Village in the Kingdome of Naples, the Commemoration * of S. Fulke Cōsessour, who being an English-man by byrth, and descended of a noble Regist. Eccles. Santo-Padrien. & monument. ipsius Sepulch. family in our Iland, tooke vpon him for the loue of Christ, a long peregrination, to visit the holy Sepulcher at Hierusalem. And as he returned homeward by Italy, the plague at that tyme sorely raging in those partes, in very great sanctity and holines of life, he receyued the reward of his labour, and ended his blessed dayes in rest, His body is vntill this day kept with great honour and veneration in the forsaid Village, called by the Italiās Santo-Padre, for the manifold miracles that are dayly wrought therat: wherby the same place is now become a pilgrimage of deuotion to visit his body, especially among the Neapolitans, and people of Calabria.
               
            
            
               
                  A The ninteenth Day.
               IN Kent the festiuity of S. Ermenburge Queene and Abbesse, daughter to Ercombert King of Kent, and wife to Merualdus
                  
King of the Mercians (or midle Englishmen) Matth. West. an. 654. & 676. Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl. & alij. and mother to the three famous Virgin-Saintes Milburge, Mildred, and Milwyde: who hauing built a goodly Church and Monastery in Kent, in honour of her two kinsmen Ethelbrit and Ethelred Martyrs, gathered togeather seauenty other Virgins and holy women, and with consent of her husband, entred into the same, as Abbesse and Gouernesse of the rest: where in all sanctimony of life and vertuous conuersation, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and foure, and was buryed in the same place.
            
            
               
                  B The twentith Day.
               AT Hexam in Northumberland the Passion of S. Edmund King and Martyr, who being a Saxon by bloud, borne in the Citty Abbo Floriac. in eius vita. Petr. in Catal. Osbert. de Stokes in eius vita Mart. Rom. & omnes hac die. of Noremberge in that Prouince, and nephew to Ossa King of the Eastangles, was by him adopted successour and heyre of that Kingdome. And when had most Christianlike gouerned the same for fifteene yeares, was in the first Danish persecution, vnder the Captaines Hinguar and Hubba, for the Confession of Christ, first whipped sorely, and then tied to a tree, and his body shot full of arrowes, was finally beheaded. Whose head

the Danes carrying into a wood neere by, cast among briars and bushes. And when the Tyrants forsooke those partes, and the Christians seeking for the same, lost themselues in the forsaid wood, and one calling vpon another, asking with a loude voyce, VVhere art? where art? where art? the blessed Martyrs head answered, Heere, Heere, Heere. By which miraculous voyce they found out the same. He suffered in the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and seauenty.
               TH
                     •
                   same day, and same place also, the passion of S. Humbert Bishop and Mart
                     ••
                  , who being Counsellour and companion to the 
                     •
                  orsaid King Edmund in the administration of his Kingdome, deserued to West. a
                        •
                     . 870. & 855. be made partaker with him of his martyrdome, & so obtayned a crowne of glory in the yeare o
                     •
                   our Lord aboue mentioned.
            
            
               
                  C The one and twentith Day.
               AT Bobia in Lombardy the deposition of S. Columb
                        •
                     
                   Abbot and Confessour, Vē Bed. in cius vita. Ma
                        •
                     t. Rom. & Molā. hac die. who being an Irishman by byrth, and first a monke, then Abbot of the Monastery of Benchor in the fame Kingdome, went ouer into France, & there founded a Monastery at Luxouium, and thence passing into Italy, he there also founded another at Bobia, by the

helpe of Agilulph King of the Lombards, of Io. Lest. de gest. Scot. Hect. Boet ibid. in Eugenio 4. Carol. Sigon. de regno Italiae. l. 2 which himselfe became Abbot. And after all these, and diuers other labours and toyles taken for the aduancement of Christian Religion in Gods Church, full of wonderfull sanctity of life and miracles, he ended his venerable dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourteene, and was buried in the forsaid Monastery of Bobia.
               
            
            
               
                  D The two and twentith Day.
               IN France the Cōmemoration of S. Osmane 
                  * Virgin, descended of the Bloud - Royall Vide fusius eius vitā l. Manuscript. Rob. Buckl. de vita SS. Mulier. Angl. pag. 239. ex antiq. monum. Hi
                        •
                     erniae et Frāciae of Ireland, whose parentes being Pagans, she notwithstāding in her tender years was priuately instructed in the Christian faith. But afterward being to be espoused to a Noble mā of the same Kingdome but an Ethnicke, forsooke both Countrey and friends and fled secretly ouer into France, accompanied only with a mayd-seruant, that wayted on her called Aclitenis, where in a wood neere to the Riuer of Loyre, she liued a very austere life, being clad with a coate made of bulrushes, and feeding her hungry body only with hearbes. It chanced one day, that a wild boare being chased in that wood by the hunters, came running to her, as it were, for succour. The huntesmen eagerly

pursuyng the beast, stroke him with their speares with all their force, but could not once pearce his skynne. Heerupon the Virgin being discouered, was suspected to be a witch; & being brought to the Bishop, and found to belieue in Christ, was by him baptized, & had a little territory assigned her, & a Gardener appointed to cultiuate the same, for her bodily reliefe and sustenance: who being on a tyme deluded by the diuell to attempt some thing against her, was by diuine iustice suddainly stroken blynd: wherof he repenting himselfe, was by her prayers againe restored to his sight. And so she perseuering a longe tyme in that holy conuersation, full of sanctimony of life, was finally called thence vnto Christ her spouse, whome she had so entyrely loued and serued.
            
            
               
                  E The three and twentith Day.
               AT Chepslow 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Mōmouthshire of VVales, the Cōmemoratiō of S. Tathar Confessour * and Eremite
                     •
                  , who being descended of a Re
                        •
                     istr. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Chepst. et antiq. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Pro
                        •
                     in
                        •
                     . Mo
                        〈…〉
                     
                   noble British lynage, cōtemned the world, & became an Ermite in the Mountaynes of Monmouthshire, in the raigne of Cradocke King of South-wales, about which tyme also in great sanctity of life and miracles, he ended

his blessed dayes. He built of his owne inheritance a goodly Church in the forsaid Towne of Chepstow, togeather with a fayre Schoole for the education of youth in learning and vertue: for which his memory is yet famous in our Iland, especially among the ancient Britans of South-wales.
               
            
            
               
                  F The foure & twentith Day.
               AT Strenshalt in the Kingdome of the Northumbers the Commemoration of * Blessed Eanslede Queene, daughter to Edwyn, 
                  Bed. l. 4. Eistor. Angl. cap. 26. Arnol. Wion lib. 4. lig. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . and wife to Oswy Kinges of Northumberland; who after the death of her Lord, and husband, setting aside all worldly pompe and pleasure, tooke a Religious habit, and became a Nunne in the Monastery of S. Peter at the forsaid place of Strenshalt, vnder the care and Gouernement of her owne daughter Ethelfred that then was Abbesse of the same. Where in all kind of profound humility, sanctimony of life, and other vertues, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourscore.
            
            
               
               
                  G The fiue & twentith Day
               AT Landaffa in Clamorganshire of VVales the * Commemoration of S. Telean Martyr, and second Bishop of the same Sea, whose Regist. Eccles. Land
                        •
                     f. & Catal. Episco. eiusdem Eccl. ex antiq. monum. Cambriae rare life, learning, & other eminent vertues haue in tymes past byn famous throughout England, especially among the ancient Britans of our Nation, where his memory is fresh euen vntill this day. He was very nobly borne, and brought vp vnder S. Dubritius Archbishop and Metropolitan of VVales, togeather with S. Dauid. And a little after his comming to his Bishopricke, he was constrayned, through a vehement plague infecting those partes, to go ouer into France. The which being ceased and he returned, was soone after slayne by a certaine noble Man of that Countrey, called in the British tongue Gueddan, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred twenty and six. His body was buryed in his owne Cathedrall Church of Landaffa (to whome the said Church is now dedicated) where the same was preserued with all honour and veneration, euen vntill the dayes of King Henry the eight of England.
               
            
            
               
               
                  A The six and twentith Day.
               AT Fulda in the higher Germany, the Commemoration of S. Egbert Abbot * and Confessour, who being a Scottishman by birth, and descended of a noble family Io. Lest. Episco. Rossens. l. 5. de gest. Scot. Wion in append. ad lib 3. lig. vitae. in that Kingdome, forsooke his Countrey, and went ouer into Germany in that Primitiue Church, and there became first a Monke, and after Abbot of a Monastery which S. Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz and Apostle of the Germans had newly erected at Fulda aforsaid. Where in very great sanctity of life and doctrine, especially in the obseruāce of Monasticall discipline he finally reposed in our Lord. Where also his body is yet kept with great honour & veneration of the Inhabitants of that place. This man is different from the other S. Egbert of the same Name, that was Abbot of S. Columbs in Scotland, whose feast is obserued vpon the foure and twentith day of Aprill.
            
            
               
                  B The seauen & twentith Day.
               AT Rhode in Brabant the deposition of S. Oda Virgin, who borne in Scotland
                  
of the Roall bloud of that Kingdome, and being strokē blind, wēt ouer into the lower Germany to the body of S. Lambert at Liege, where by his merits and her owne prayers she receyued againe her sight, vowing perpetuall Chast
                     ••
                  y to God, that had so miraculouily Io. M
                        •
                     lā. in a
                        〈…〉
                     . ad vs
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     r. 
                        •
                     t in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . SS▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      hac die. deliuered her of that insirmity. Her Father, notwithstanding, would haue had her to marry; but she detesting the same, neuer returned backe into her Countrey, but lead a solitary and most holy life in the Territory of Liege: where in all sanctimony spending the rest of her dayes in continuall prayer and contemplation of heauenly things, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ seauen hundred & thirteene. Her body remayneth in the forsaid Village of Rhode, and there, as Patronesse of that Towne, is kept with great veneration, for the often miracles that haue byn wrought therat.
            
            
               
                  C The eight & twentith Day.
               AT Dorchester in Oxfordshire the deposition of S. Edwold Confessour and Ermite, Gul. Mal
                        •
                     nes. l. de P
                        •
                     t. Angl. hac die. 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     . i
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     st. S. brother to King Edmund the Martyr, who refusing the Kingdome of the Eastāgles, after his Brothers passion, gaue himselfe wholy, for the loue of Christ, to a kind of

solitary life and heauenly contemplation. In which after he had liued many yeares with great signes of sanctity & holines, ended his blessed dayes in an old Monastery, at Dorchester aforsaid, somtime called Corn-house, and was there with great veneration interred, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred threescore and eleuen.
            
            
               
                  D The nine & twentith Day.
               IN Clamorganshire of VVales the Cōmemoration of S. Barucke Confessour and Ermite, * who being descēded of a noble British race in our Ilād, did for the loue of God contēne Ex antiq. Mo
                        〈…〉
                     m. Cambr. de Prou. Clamorg. the world, and become an Ermite, leading a most strict and seuere kind of life in a little Iland of the sea, in Clamorganshire, called afterward of his Name, Barucks-eye (but now more corruptly Bardsey: where in very great holines & sanctity of life, he gaue vp his blessed soule to rest in our Lord. His memory is yet very famous in the forsaid Prouince of Clamorgan, as also among the ancient Britans of our Iland.
            
            
               
               
                  E The thirtith Day.
               AT Derham in Nor
                        •
                     olke the Cōmemoration of S. VVithburge Virgin, daughter * to Annas King of the Eastangles, and sister to S. Audry and S. Sexburge Queenes who building with her owne patrimony a Nunry at Eius vit. extat M. S. 
                        〈…〉
                     a Rob. Buckl inter vit. SS. Mul. Angl. 
                  Derham, entred therin & receiued a Monasticall habit. Where after she had spent her dayes in great holinesse and sanctimony of life, finally rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and threescore. S. Ethelwold Bishop of VVinchester in the yeare of Christ 974. hauing repayred the Abbey of Ely defaced by the Danes, and adioyning vnto it this forsaid Nunry of Derham, caused her body to be taken vp (which was found whole and vncorrupt, after aboue 300. yeares from her death) and translated to the Abbey of Ely, by Abbot Britlmote, and there placed neere to the holy body of S. Audry her sister. The said Monastery which she built, being afterward conuerted into a parish Church, remayneth vntill this day in Norsolke, still retayning the forsaid name of Derham.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE MONETH OF DECEMBER.
            
               
                  F The first Day.
               
                  AT Bangor in Caerneruanshire 
                  * of VVales the Commemoration of S. Daniel Confessour, and Bishop Io. Capg. in Catal. SS. Brit. ex Regist. Eccles. Bangorē. of the same Sea, whose great sanctity of life and miracles, haue byn famous in former ancient tymes throughout our whole Iland, both aliue and dead, especially among the anciēt Britans of VVales. His body was buryed at Bangor aforsaid, where the Cathedrall Church of that Bishopricke, that now is, was erected and dedicated in his honour. He was the first Bishop of that Sea, and liued about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred

and sixteene, and in the Raigne of King Arthur of Britany.
               
            
            
               
                  G The second Day.
               AT Dormundcaster two miles from Peterburrow in Northamptonshne the Commemoration * 
                  †
                        •
                     aliâs Eue
                   S. VVe
                        •
                     de Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to Penda a Pagan King of the Mercians, and sister to the holy Virgins Kinneburge, Kinisdred, Kinisuide and Edburge, who contēning all worldly pompe and delightes, for the loue of Christ, entred into the Monastery of Dormundcaster asorsaid, and Wiö l. 4 lig. vita Chron. Britan. fol. 276. Regist. Eccles. Petribur. there tooke the holy veyle of chaltity and monasticall habit, vnder the gouerment of her owne sister Kinneburge that then was Abbesse of the same; where after the death of her sister Idlurge, that succeeded Kinneburge, she was elected also to that Office. Which three sisters one succeding another in the same dignity of Abbesse, did, as it were, by an hereditar) right, leaue one the other their sanctimony and holines of life, which e
                     •
                  h one conserued and augmented vntill her dying day. This was the yongest of fiue sisters, all Saintes, and died about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fourscore & twelu
                     •
                  . Her body was translated to Peterburrow, and

there intombed very richly with the rest of her sisters
            
            
               
                  A The third Day. Eyseugr. cent. 2. p. 5. dist. 2. p. 2. d. 7. p. 3. d. 2. p. 4. d. 2. 10. Nauc. vol. 8. gē. 6. Petr. de Natal. l. 1. c. 24. Annal. Curiens. Ratisbō. Bauar. et Monast. S. Lucij ibidem. Bernard. Guido in Catal. Pōt. sub Eleuth.
               
               AT Chure in Heluetia the Passion of S. Lucius the first Christian King of Britany and Martyr, who being conuerted to the faith of Christ by the Saintes Fugatius & Damianus, sent from Rome by Pope Eleutherius, afterward became himselfe a preacher of the same Doctrine, and went ouer into France and thence into Germany, where after many persecutions sustayned for the confession of Christ, being at last (according to ancient traditions) ordayned the first Bishop of Chure, was there finally put to death by the incredulous people of that Nation, about the yeare of Christ, one hūndred fourscore & twelue. His feast is very solēnely celebrated with Octaues at Chure aforsaid, as is to be seene in the Breuiary of that Diocesse, wherin the whole story of his li
                     •
                  e is recounted at large.
               THE same day at Dorcester in Dorcetshire the deposition of S. Birine Confessour, Vē. Bed. l. 3. c. 7. West. an. 637. & 644. Mart. Rom. and first Bishop of that Prouince, who conuerted the VVestsaxons to the faith of Christ, togeather with their King Kinegilsus, and so became their Apostle. He died in the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fifty, and

was buryed at the forsaid towne of Dorcester, 
                  Gul. Ramesius in eius vita. Wiō l. 2. lig. vitae. in Catal. Episco. Dorcestrens. but afterward translated to VVinchester by S. Hedde Bishop of that Citty, and there with great solemnity and veneration being placed in the Cathedrall Church of S. Peter and S. Paul, deserued to be honoured with this Epigram of an ancient Poet, that wrote his life in verse.
               
                  Dignior attolli quàm sit Tyrinthius heros,
                  Quàm sit Alexander Macedo. Tyrin hius hostes
                  Vicit, Alexander mundum, Birinus verum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     .
                  Nec tantùm vicit mundum Birinus & hostem;
                  Sed sese bello vincens, & victus eodem.
               
               IN like manner the same day in the Territory of Liege in the Lower Germany the deposition of S. Eloquius Priest & Confessour, who borne in Ireland, went ouer the sea, with diuers other Companions to preach the Christiā faith to the Netherlanders; where 10. Molā. in addit. ad vsuar. et in Ind. SS. Belgij. after much fruite reapt in great sanctity of life he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty & one: whose body was afterward translated to the Towne of VValciodore, and there is kept with great veneration, as Patrone of that place.
            
            
               
               
                  B The fourth Day.
               AT Salisbury in VViltshire the deposition of S. Osmund Confessour and Bishop of the same Sea, who being a Norman of noble birth, came into England with King VVilliam the Cōquerour, by whome he was first made Chancellour of the Realme, and Earle of Dorset, and afterward, for that he Ranulp. Cestrens. in eius vita. l. 7. c. 3. Mart. Rom. & alij onmes hac die. was a most vertuous and learned man, he was elected Bishop of Salisbury: which Church being begon by his Predecessour he finished, adding therto a goodly Library, which he furnished also with many excellent bookes. And when he had most laudably gouerned his flocke for sixteene yeares, in great sanctity and holines of life, he happily reposed in our Lord, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand fourscore and nynteene, and was buryed in his owne Cathedrall Church of Salisbury, at whose body it pleased God to worke miracles. He was canonized for a Saint by Pope Calixtus the third, two hundred and fifty yeares after his death.
               THE same day at Triuis in the Territory of Chure in the Prouince of Heluetia in Germany, the festiuity of S. Emerita Virgin & Martyr, sister to King Lucius of Britany, who

going into Germany with her said brother, was by the pagā people of that Coūtrey, for Eysengr. p. 3. Cent. 2. d. 1. Breuiar. Curiens. in Offic. 9. lection. hac die. the confession of Christian saith, put to death, ending her glorious martyrdome by fire, about the yeare of Christ, one hundred fourscore and thirteene. The whole story of her life is set forth at large in the Breuiary of the Diocesse of Chure aforsaid, in her Office on this day.
            
            
               
                  C The fifth Day.
               AT VVinchester in Hampshire the Commemoration of S. Christine Virgin and * Abbesse, daughter to Prince Edward surnamed Matth. West. an. 10
                        •
                     7. Paris. eodem an. & 1209. Pol. Vir. lib. 9. hist. Angl. the Out-law, and sister to the famous S. Margaret of Scotland, who togeather with her mother Agatha, entred into the Monastery of VVinchester, and there became a Religious woman first, and afterward Abbesse of the whole house. In which dignity she perseuering in all kind of exemplar sanctimony of life, and Monasticall discipline, gaue vp her soule at last to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and fourscore, and in the raigne of King VVilliam the Conquerour.
               
            
            
               
               
                  D The sixt Day.
               IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Congellus 
                  * Abbot and Confessour, who being Bernard. in vita. S. Malac. Episcop. Wion in append. ad lib. 3. lig. vitae. a most venerable Monke of the Order of S. Benedict, and liuing with S. Malachias, at that tyme Bishop of Connerthen in Ireland, was by him ordayned Abbot of an ancient Monastery neere to the forsaid Bishops Sea in the same Kingdome; where in very great sanctity of life & miracles he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand, one hundred and fourty.
               THE same day at Cullen in Germany the * Commemoration of S. Florentina Virgin and Martyr, who being one of the number of the eleuen thousand holy British Virgins martyred with S. Vrsula, was for defence of her Chastity there put to death Tabulae Coleniēs. with the rest of her fellowes, about the yeare of Christ, three hundred fourscore and three, herselfe afterward miraculously reueyling her name.
            
            
               
                  E The seauenth Day.
               AT Durham in the Bishopricke, the Cōmemoration of S. Odwald Abbot and Cō
                  fessour, *
                  
who of a Monke of wonderfull Innocency, and godly conuersation, was elected 10. Trit. de vir. Ill
                        •
                     str. l. 3. c. 128. Wion in appēd. l. 3 lig. vita. Abbot of the monastery of Lindisserne in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, where in ad kind of holines of life and Monasticall discipline, full of miracles, he reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and six, and was afterward buryed at Durham aforsaid.
               THE same day in Scotland the Commemoration * of S. Gallanus Monke and Confessour, who borne in Ireland, and descēded Hect. Boet de gest. Sco. Io. Lest. Episco. Ross. l. 4. Ibidem. of a noble bloud in that Kingdome, came ouer into Scotland with S. Columbe the Great, whose senoller and disciple he was, where teaching & preaching the Christian faith to the Pictes that in those dayes inhabited Scotland, famous for sanctity of life and miracles, he departed this world, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred and fourscore.
            
            
               
                  F The eight Day.
               THE CONCEPTION of the most glorious and immacusate Virgin MARY mother of God, by the grace and power of her Sonne, that preserued her from all inquination of synne: which feast being first of all begun to be celebrated in our Iland of

                  Great Britany in the tyme of S. Anselme Archbishop Petr. in Catal. l. 1. c. 41. Sixt PP. 4. Extrau. commun. tit. de Relig. & Vener. SS. Conc. Trid. Baron. in Not. ad Mart. Rom. hac die. * of Canterbury, and King VVilliam the Conquerour, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand threescore & ten, by the Monkes of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, to the honour and glory of the blessed Virgin; was afterward confirmed by our Mother the holy Roman Church, and cōmaunded to be kept holiday throughout Christendome, to the increase of deuotion towards so mighty a Patronesse.
               THE same day at VVinchester in Hampshire the Commemoration of Blessed Agatha Queene, daughter to Salomon King of Hungary, and wife to Prince Edward of England surnamed the Outlaw, and Mother to the Histor. Scot. ex
                        〈…〉
                     sa Francof. an. 1584. lib. 7. Matth. Wesi. & Paris. an. 1067. Wiō l. 4 lig. vitae two famous Saintes Margaret and Christine, who when, after the death of her husband, she saw her Sonne Edgar, to whome the succession of the Crowne of England by right belonged, to be iniustly depressed and molested by the inuasions of King Harold first, and after of the Conquerour, and therby frustrated of the recouery of the Kingdome, she with her two daughters, resolued to take their iourney backe towards Hungary by sca; but being driuen by tēpest into Scotlād, they were very honourably receyued by King Malcolme, who tooke the forsaid Margaret to wife. And after a while that they had stayed there, Agatha the Mother, and Christine the

other daughter, returned into England, entred both into the Monastery of Religious women at VVinchester, where in very great sanctimony of life, they finally ended their blessed dayes; the Mother desceasing about the yeare of Christ, one thousand threescore and twelue: whose body being interred in the same Monastery, hath byn kept with great veneration, euen vntill our dayes.
            
            
               
                  G The ninth Day.
               AT Shaftesbury in Dorcetshire the Commemoration * of S. Ethelgine Abbesse, daughther to Alfred King of the VVestsaxons, who despising all temporall and worldly preferments, Matth. West, an. 871. & 888. Gene
                        〈…〉
                     l. Alf
                        ••
                     d
                        •
                      R
                        •
                     gis an. 870. Pol. Vir. lib. 5. & alij. tooke a Religious habit, and became a Nunne in the Monastery of the forsaid Towne of Shaftesbury, which her Father had there newly erected: wherof at last she being ordayned Abbesse, gouerned the same in all sanctimony of life, and exact Monasticall discipline, vntill her dying day, which happened about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred fourscore and sixteene.
            
            
               
               
                  A The tenth Day.
               AT Glower in Clamorganshire of VVales the Commemoration of S. Chi
                        ••
                     d Confessour * and Eremite, who borne in Wales, and there descended of an ancient and noble Io. Capg. in Ca
                        ••
                     l. SS 
                        〈◊〉
                      it. ex antiq. Mo
                        〈…〉
                     . Camb
                        •
                      i. e British lynage, contemned the vanityes of the world, and for the loue of Christ, became an Eremite, leading a most strict and seuere kind of life in the Mountaynes of the forsaid Prouince of Clamorgan, where in very great sanctity and holines of life, he finally ended his happy dayes. His body was buryed at the forsaid Towne of Glower; whose memory hath in tymes past, byn very famous throughout England, but especially among the ancient Britans of VVales.
               
            
            
               
                  B The eleuenth Day.
               IN Morauia the Commemoration of S. * 
                  Geruadius Bishop and Confessour, who borne in Scotland and descended of a noble Io. Lest. Episcop. Ross. l. 5. hist. Scot. Wion in append. ad lib. 3. lig. vitae. parentage in that Kingdome, tooke a Religions habit, and became a Monke there of the Venerable order of S. Benedict, and thence went ouer into Germany, and lastly into Morauia, where being created Bishop, he preached the Christian faith incessantly to that

Nation, and became their Apostle. And a ter that he had brought many thousands from their Idolatry to the true worship of one God, full of venerable old age, in great sanctity and holines of life, he finally rested in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and soure.
            
            
               
                  C The tweluth Day.
               IN the Ile of Crowland in Lincolnshire the Commemoration o
                     •
                   S. El
                        •
                     rede Virgin, * daughter to Offa the Pagan King of Mercia, 
                  Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl. Steph. Lvsingā. cor. 4. c. 9. Wion lib. 4▪ lig. vitae. who being conuerted to the Christiā faith principally by the murder cōmitted by her Mother vpon King Ethelbert of the Eastangles that came to demaund her in Marriage for his wife, forsooke her said parents, friends and all other worldly prefermēts, and tooke a Religious habit, in the Monastery of S. Guthlacke in the forsaid Ile of Crowland, where in great sanctimony of life, and obseruance of Monasticall discipline, she gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred fourscore and thirteene,
            
            
               
               
                  D The thirteenth Day.
               AT Pontoyse in France the Deposition of S. Ioyce. 
                  Iudo
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Confessour and Ermite, who being desce
                     ••
                  ed of a most noble British Sur. to 6. Pet
                        •
                     
                     ▪ in Catal. l. 1. cap. 25. Vince
                        •
                     t. in sp
                        〈…〉
                     . Wiō l. 4 lig. vitae. Rodu
                        ••
                     . Ag
                        •
                     icol. in distich. bloud, forsaking all worldly prefermentes, went ouer into France, and there for the loue of Christ, became an Ermite. In which kind of life he so excelled in sanctity and holines, that it pleased God to manifest the same by the incorruptibility of his body, which is kept whole vntill this day with great veneration at the forsaid Towne of Po
                        〈…〉
                     oyse. He gaue almes foure tymes to Christ visibly in the habit of a poore man, that demaunded the same; and died in the yeare of Christ, six hundred fifty and three. Whose worthy praise this distich declareth.
               
                  Regia Progenies veterum styrps clara Britannúm,
                  Ecce nitet ru
                        •
                     la Iudocus luce per Orbem.
               
               THE same day in the 
                     •
                  le of Thanet in Registr. E
                        •
                     cles. Cantuar. & Rob. B
                        〈…〉
                     . in eius vital. M. S. de SS. Mulier. Angl. pag. 115. 
                  Kent, the deposition of S. Edburge Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to blessed Ethelbert the first Christian King of that Prouince, who being baptized and instructed in the Christian 
                     •
                  aith by S. Augustine our Apostle, forsooke the world, and entred into the Mona
                     〈…〉
                  ery of holy Virgins erected in the Ile of Thanet aforsaid, vnder the gouerment of her

neece S. M
                        •
                     ldred, after whose death she became Abbesse of the same place: where in all sanctimony of life, she ended her blessed dayes. S. Lansranke Archbishop of Canterbury in the yeare of Christ, one thousand fourscore and siue, translated her body, as also S. Mildreds, vnto Canterbury, and placed them there in the Church of S. Gregory, which he had newly repayred, and enriched, wherat miracles are recorded to haue byn wrought.
            
            
               
                  E The fourteenth Day.
               AT Cullen in Germany the Cōmemoratiō 
                  * of S. Munborine Abbot and Confessour, who borne in Scotland, and descended of a Io. L
                        •
                     st. E
                        〈…〉
                     . R
                        〈…〉
                     . 4. Hi
                        •
                     tor. Se
                        •
                     t. A
                        〈…〉
                     l. Wi
                        •
                     . in a
                        〈…〉
                     d ad lib. 3. lig. vit
                        〈…〉
                     . R
                        〈…〉
                     t. M
                        〈…〉
                     . S. Mar
                        〈…〉
                     . Colon. noble bloud in that Kingdome, despised the world, and became first a Monke of the Venerable Order of S. Benedict, and afterward went ouer into Germany, and there was made Abbot of a Monastery dedicated to S. Martin in Calles: which when he had most laudably gouerned for twelue yeares or therabout, in great sanctity of life and miracles he ende
                     •
                   his blessed dayes, in the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred four score and thirteene, and was buryed in the same place.
            
            
               
               
                  F The fifteenth Day.
               AT Strenshalt in the Kingdome of the Northumbers, the Translation of S. Hilda Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to Prince Herericke nephew to Edwyn King of the same Prouince, who from her infancy giuing Vē. Ded. l. 3. c. 24. & l. 4. c. 23. West an. 665. & 680. Trit. de Vir. Illu. l. 3. c. 123. herselfe wholy to deuotion and piety became a Religious woman first in a little Nunry by the Riuer of Wyre, and then was ordayned Abbesse of a Monastery erected in the forsaid Kingdome, neere to the sea side called Hartsey (at this day cōmonly knowne by the name of VVhitby in Yorkeshire) & afterward of another Monastery also in the same Prouince called Strēshalt, which herselfe had built; where in all kind of holines of life & excercise of Monasticall discipline, glorious for miracles she finally wēt vnto her spouse, in the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourscore. Her body was after many yeares taken vp, and set in a more eminent place of the forsaid Church of Strenshalt, where before she lay buryed, wherat it pleased God to worke many miracles.
            
            
               
               
                  G The sixteenth Day.
               AT Aberdine in Scotland the depositiō of S. Bean Confessour and Bishop of the Mart. Rom. 10. 
                        •
                     lolā. i
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      it. ad vsuar. ex vet. manuscr. same Sea, whose wonderfull holines of life, togeather with the Miracles he wrought both aliue and dead, haue in tymes past byn famous throughout the Christian world, but especially in Scotland and Ireland, where also many goodly Churches & Altars haue byn erected and dedicated in his honour.
               THE same day at Dormundcaster-Monastery two miles from Peterburrow in Northāptonshire, 
                  * the Commemoration of S. Tibbe Virgin and Anchoresse, who descended of De hac vid. l. manuscript. de vit. SS. Mulier. Angl. pag. 177. Regist. Eccles. Petribur. a noble bloud in our Iland, and Kinswomā to the Saints Kinisdred and Kiniswide, forsooke the pleasures of the world, and became an Anchoresse for the loue of Christ, liuing a most strict and seuere kind of reclused life in great holines and sanctimony vntill her dying day, which happened about the yeare of Christ, six hundred threescore and nyne, and was buryed with her forsaid Kinswomen at Dormundcaster.
               
            
            
               
               
                  A The seauenteenth Day.
               AT VVimborne in Dorcetshire the Commemoration * of S. Tetta Abbesse, sister to Cuthredus King of the VVestsaxons, who forsaking Rodulph. Monac. in vita S. Liobae apud Sur. to. 5. 28. Sept. Wion lib. 4. lig. vitae. Vita S. Bonifac. Episcop. Mogunt. et Germ. Apost. the vanityes of the world, and receyuing the holy veyle of Chastity in the Monastery of VVimborne aforsaid, was after the death of S. Cuthberge foundreste therof, made Abbesse of the same place, where in very great sanctimony of life, & obseruance of monastical discipline, she gaue vp her blessed soule to rest, about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and six. There is a letter yet extant wrytten by S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz to this S. Tetta, for the sending of the Virgins Tecla, Lioba, Agatha, and others out of her Monastery into Germany, in the beginning of that Primitiue Church, to be made Abbesses and directresses of diuers new Monasteryes, which S. Boniface aforsaid had erected in that Countrey.
            
            
               
                  B The eighteenth Day.
               AT Heydelmayne in Franconia the Depositiō of S. VVinibald Abbot & Cōfessour, Sonue to S. Richard King of the English,

who going ouer into the low-Countreys and Germany with S. Boniface his V
                     〈…〉
                  cle, Democh. l. 2. de sacrif. Miss. Petr-Cratep. de Epis. Germ. Molā. in Ind. SS. Belgij. Wion et alij hac die. Archbishop of Mentz and Apostle of the Germans, was by him ordayned Abbot of a Monastery which himselfe had there founded in the same Prouince, called Heydelmayne; which when he had gouerned for ten yeares in great sanctity of life, glorious for miracles and other renowned vertues, he ended his blessed dayes in rest, in the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred and threescore, and was buryed in the same Monastery, with this Epitaph engrauen on his tombe.
               
                  Hic VVinibaldus Richardi. silius almus,
                  Qui Regnū Anglorū 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ox linquens, hoc Monachorū
                  
                  Claustrum fundauit, Benedicti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      dicauit
                  Nomine, septingento quinquagesimoue anno.
               
               His body was afterward translated to Eyst in Germany, and there interred with his brother S. VVillebald, where it is kept with great Veneration.
            
            
               
                  C The ninteenth Day.
               AT VVirtzburgh in the higher Germany the Commemoration of S. Marcharius Abbot * and Confessour, who borne in Scotland 
                  Io. Trit. Chron. Hirsaug. Arnol. of a worthy family, and taking vpon him a Monasticall habit in the same Kingdome, went ouer into France, and thence into Germany,
                  
and was ordayned Abbot there of Wiō in append. ad lib. 3. lig. vitae. an ancient Monastery in the forsaid Citty of VVirtzburgh, where in very great sanctity of life, renowned for miracles, he ended his blessed dayes in peace, about the yeare of Christ, one thousand one hundred and fourty. Among other his Miracles one is recounted, that sitting at a banquet, he turued wyne into water, to the astonishment of all the behoulders there present.
            
            
               
                  D The twentith Day.
               IN Ireland the Commemoration of S. Comogel Abbot and Confessour, whose holy * life and doctrine haue byn famous in tymes Vita S. Columb. apud Bedam tom. 3. Wiō l. 3. lig. 
                        〈…〉
                     ae in not ad Mart. Bened. past in the Kingdome of Ireland, especially for the reformation & obseruance of Monasticall discipline. He was Abbot of the great and ancient Monastery of Benchor in Ireland, & maister to the famous S. Columbane of that Nation, whome he instructed in all kind of good learning and other vertues, before his sending into France and Italy. And when he had gouerned the same Monastery for many yeares, full of sanctity and venerable old age, he finally gaue vp his soule to rest in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and foure.
            
            
               
               
                  E The one and twentith Day.
               AT Dormundcaster two myles from Peterburrow in Northamptonshire, the Commemoration * of S. Edburge Virgin and Abbesse daughter to Penda the Pagan King of the Chronog. Britan. fol. 276. Arnol. Wiō. l. 4 lig. vita. 
                  Mercians, who contemning all worldly and temporall pleasures, became a Religious woman in the Monastery of Dormundcaster aforsaid, vnder the care of S. Kinneburge her sister; after whose death, she being chosen Abbesse, gouerned the same in all sanctimony of life and other vertues, vntill her dying day, which happened about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and fourscore, and was buryed in the same place neere to her said sister. This holy woman is different from the other three of the same Name, whose festiuall dayes are celebrated vpon In vita S. Edburgae Abbatiss. Thanat. insulae 13. Decēb. the fifteenth of Iune, eighteenth of Iuly, and thirteenth of December. And besides these, there was another Edburge also, Virgin and Abbesse, daughter to Ethelnulph King of the VVest saxons, who gouerned the Monastery of holy Virgins at VVinchester in Hampshire, full of renowned holynes and same about the yeare of Christ, eight hundred and threescore.
            
            
               
               
                  F The two and twentith Day.
               AT Barking in Essex the Commemoratiō 
                  * of S. Hildelide Virgin and Abbesse, who for her great vertue and sanctimony of life Vē. Bed. l. 4. c. 20. Io. Trit. l. 3. c. 121. Wion in append. ad lib. 3. lig. vita. Rob. Bu
                        〈…〉
                     . in eius vita l. M. S. pag. 183. was made Abbesse of the Monastery of holy Virgins at the forsaid towne of Barking, and succeeded in that office S. Edilburge, inter to to S. Erconwald Bishop of London, by whome the said Monastery was crected: where in the exercise of all kind of vertue & obseruāce of Monasticall discipline, renowned for miracles, she ended her blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, scauē hūdred. There is a story recorded, how that three blynd womē on a tyme came to this said Monastery of Barking to beseech the help and patronage of three holy Virgins there desceased, and all famous for holines, to wit, the forsaid Edilburge VVulfhild, and this our Hildelide, and there praying a long tyme, they were at last restored to their sight; but ech one by the intercessiō of that particular Saint, to whome she prayed. This Monastery was afterward in the Danish persecution burned to the ground, defaced and spoyled, to the great lamentation or all England.
            
            
               
               
                  C The three and twentith Day.
               IN VVales the Commemoration of S. Inthware Virgin and martyr, who being descended of the ancient British bloud in * our Iland, liued a most godly and vertuous life in her Fathers house, being wholy occupied Eius vita habetur fi siùs in l. M. S. de vit. SS. Mulier. Angl. à Rob. Buckl. collect. ex antiq. Monum. Cambriae in intertayning & seruing of pilgrims and strangers that resorted thither. After her Fathers death, she being enuied for her holines of life by her stepmother, was by a malitious deuise of hers, accused to her own brother, called Bana, to be an harlot: whervpon in this rage, he slew her with his owne hands, as she came one day from the Church. Whose innocency was presently testified by this wonderfull miracle; that hauing her head cut of, she instantly with her owne handes tooke it vp from the ground, and carried it to the Church from whence she came: as also in the same place where she was beheaded, there sprang vp a fountaine of cleere water, very soueraigne for many diseases. She suffered about the yeare of Christ, seauen hundred. About which tyme also there liued three sisters of hers, all very holy women, called Edware, VVilgith, and Sidewell; who as they were conioyned to her by neernes of bloud and

byrth; so where they also vnited in singular sanctimony of life.
            
            
               
                  F The foure & twentith Day.
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. Ruthius Monke and Confessour, who * being an Irishman by byrth, descended of a Hect. Boet. de gest. Sco. Io. Lest. Episco. Ross. l. 4. hist. Sco. pag. 150. noble bloud in the same Kingdome, became a disciple first to S. Columbe the Great of that Nation, and afterward comming ouer with him into Scotland, was his coadiutor in the Cōuersion of the Pictes to the Christiā faith, that in those dayes inhabited that Kingdome: where after the reducing of many soules from their errours, to the knowledg & worship of Christ, famous for sanctity of life & grace of Miracles he finally reposed in our Lord, about the yeare of Christ 588.
            
            
               
                  B The fiue & twentith Day
               IN the Monastery of S. Meginhard in the higher Germany the Commemoration * of S. Gregory Priest and Confessour, Sonne to King Edward of the VVestsaxons, surnamed Io. Trit. de vir. Illu. ord. D. Bened. l. 3. c. 225. the Elder, and brother to the holy Virgin S. Edburge of Wilton, who being admonished by an Angell, forsooke both Countrey and

friends, in the troublesome tyme of his Fathers raigne and incursions of the Danes, and went ouer into Germany to S. Eberhard 
                  Arnol. Wiō. l. 4 lig. vitae. pag. 510. a monke then famous in those partes both for sanctity of life and gift of prophesy; vnto whome he associating himselfe in the forsaid Monastery of S. Meginhard, became a Monke in the same place: where in very great holines of life, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, nyne hundred fourty and fiue.
            
            
               
                  C The six and twentith Day.
               AT VVhitby in Yorkeshire the Commemoration of Blessed Ethelfrede Virgin, * daughter to Oswy King of the Northumbers, 
                  Pol. Vir. l. 4. hist. Angl. Wiō l. 4 lig. vitae. who contemning all worldly pompe and trāsitory glory, tooke a Religious habit, togeather with the holy veyle of Chastity, in a Monastery of the same Prouince, called afterward VVhitby, which her said Father had there newly founded; where vnder the Gouernment of S. Congilla, that was then ordayned Abbesse therof, in all humility & sanctimony of life, she made a holy end, and gaue vp her soule to her heauenly spouse, about the yeare of Christ, six hundred and seauenty.
            
            
               
               
                  D The seauen & twentith Day.
               AT Gallinaro a Village in the Kingdome * of Naples, the Commemoration of S. Gerard Confessour, who being an Englishman by byrth, and descended of a Registr. Eccl. Gallinar. & Inscript. ipsius sepulchri ibidem sculpt. a worthly parentage in our Iland, tooke vpon him for the loue of God a long peregrination to visit the holy Sepulcher of Christ in Hierusalem; which when he had performed and returning backe by Italy, where at that tyme the plague sorely raged, in very great sanctity of life, gaue vp his soule to rest in our Lord. His body is vntill this day kept with great honour and veneration, in the forsaid Village of Gallinaro, wherat in testimony of his holy life, miracles are yet daily wrought: So as the place is therby become a great pilgrimage, especially for the Neapolitans & people of Calabria.
               
            
            
               
                  E The eight & twentith Day.
               AT Canterbury the Translation of S. Elphege Bishop and Martyr, who being Sur. to. 5. 19. Agr. Pol. Vir. l. 7. hist. first Abbot of a Monastery neere vnto Bath in Somersetshire, was thence promoted to the bishoprick of VVinchester & lastly to Cāterbury.
                  
He was slayne at Greenwich in Kent in the second Danish persecution by those barbarous 10. Capg. & Breu. sec. vsū Sarum Pet. in Cat. Osb. in cius vita. Mart. Rom. 19. Apr. Maurol. & Wiō hae die. people in defence of his Church of Canterbury, and for not deliuering them three thousand Markes of money belonging to the said Church, in the yeare of Christ, one thousand and twelue. His body was first brought to London, and afterward on this day solemnely translated to Canterbury, and there placed in his owne Cathedrall Church of that Citty, where it was wont in Catholicke tyme to be kept with great honour and Veneration.
            
            
               
                  F The nine & twentith Day.
               AT Canterbury the Passion of S. Thomas Archbishop of the same Sea, Legate Apostolicall and Primate of England, who Sur. to. 5. hac die Breuiar. sec. vsum Sarum Mart. Rom. Eius vit. habetur in hist. quadrip, impress. Parisijs an. Dom. 1495. for defence of the liberties of the Church, being many wayes iniured by King Henry the second, was forced to appeale to Pope Alexāder the third; of whome being acquited of all the calumniations and slaunders laid to his charge, was againe restored to his Bishopricke, but within a while after being violently oppressed by some of the forsaid Kinges seruants, to wit, Syr VVilliam Tracy, Syr Reynold Fitzvrson, Syr Hugh Moruill, Richard Breton, and others, was slayne in his owne

Church of Canterbury, in the tyme of Euensonge, before the high Altar, in the yeare Staplet. de trib. Thomis & omnes auj hac di
                        •
                     . of Christ, one thousand one hundred threescore and eleuen. Whose martyrdome is heere described in these old verses:
               
                  Richardus Breton, nec non Moruillius Hugo,
                  
                     Guillelmus Tracy, Reginaldus Filius-vrsi,
                  
                     Thomam Martyrium secêre subire beatum.
                  Fortis & inuictus his quattuor ensibus ictus
                  Primas Anglorum Thomas petit alta polorum.
               
               His body was shortly afterward put into a goodly shrine, beset with costly iewells & pretious stones, and placed in his owne Nicol. Sand. l. 1. de schis. Angl. Cathedrall Church of Canterbury, wherat infinite miracles were wrought; and so continued vntill the tyme of King Henry the eight, by whose commandement the said monument was vtterly destroyed, and his sacred Reliques burned to ashes, in the yeare of Christ 1538.
            
            
               
                  G The thirtith Day.
               IN the Abbey of Flay the Commemoration of S. Eustach Abbot and Confessour, * who for his singular vertue and innocency Matth. West. in Hist. maiori ad an. 1200. of life, being first a Monke, was ordayned Abbot of the forsaid Monastery of Flay. In which dignity he so excelled, in all kind of profund humility, charity to poore Orphans,

and other eminent vertues, especially in the exercise and obseruance of Monasticall Wiō in append. ad lig. 3. lig. vitae. discipline, that his name deserued to be famous throughout our whole Iland, in former Catholicke tymes. He died about the yeare of Christ, one thousand and two hundred. At whose body it pleased God afterward, in testimony of his holy life, to worke miracles.
            
            
               
                  A The one & thirtith Day
               IN Scotland the Commemoration of S. 
                  * 
                  Eternane Monke and Confessour, Nephew to S. Columbe the Great of Ireland, who contemning all worldly honours and prefermentes, 10. Lest. lib. 4. de gest. Sco. Wion in append ad lib. 3. lig. vitae. tooke a Religious habit, and became a Monke of the Order of S. Benedict in á Monastery in the Iland of Hoy by Scotland, vnder the gouerment of his forsaid vncle S. Columbe; where in all kind of sanctity of life, he ended his blessed dayes, about the yeare of Christ, fiue hundred fourscore and eighteene. Whose memory hath continued famous both in Scotland where he liued, and in Ireland where he was borne, euen vntill this last age.
               Laus Deó & Beatiss. Virg. Mariae.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE SAINTES NAMES CONTEYNED in the former Martyrologe.
            
               A
               
                  AAron Martyr 1. Iuly.
               Acca B. 19. Feb.
               Adaman Ab. 2. Sept.
               Adaman Confess. 31. Ianuar.
               Adelme B. 31. Mar. 15. May.
               Adalbert conf. 25. Iune.
               Adelhere Mart. 5. Iune.
               Adlar Mart. 20. Apr. 5. Iune.
               Adrian Abbot. 9. Ianuar.
               Adrian Priest 1. April.
               Adolph Mart. 5. Iune.
               Agatha Virgin 12. Iune.
               Agatha Queene 8. Decem.
               Agnes Virg. Mart. 28. August.
               Aidan Bishop 31. August.
               Alban Protomart. 16. Apr. 16. May & 22. Iune.
               Albuine Bishop 26. Octob.
               Albuine Abbot 19. May.
               Alkmund Mart. 19. March.
               Alexander Conf. 6. August.
               Alfred K. of Northūb. 15. Ian.
               Alfred K. of Westsa. 28. Oct.
               Algiue Queene 5. May.
               Alice Prioresse 24. August.
               Alnoth Mart. 27. Febr.
               Alred Abbot 16. March.
               
                  
Alricke Ermite 2. August.
               Altho Abbot 5. Septemb.
               Amnichade Conf. 30. Ian.
               Amphibale Mart. 25. Iune.
               Anselme B. 21. Apr. 5. Iuly.
               Arbogastus Bishop 21. Iuly.
               Archibald Abbot 27. March.
               Ardwyne Conf. 25. Oct.
               Aristobulus Bish. 15. Mar.
               Arnulph Conf. 22. August.
               Arwaldi martyrs 28. Ian.
               Assaph Bishop 1. May.
               Audry vide Ediltrude.
               Augulus mart. 7. Febr.
               Augustine Bishop 26. May.
            
            
               B
               BAldred Conf. 29. March.
               Barucke Conf. 29. Nou.
               Bather Conf. 11. Septemb.
               Bean Bishop 16. Decem.
               Beatus Conf. 9. May.
               Bede Priest 10. & 27. May.
               Bega Virgin 6. Sept.
               Benedict Abbot 12. Ian.
               Beno Conf. 14. Ian.
               Berectus Conf. 24. Febr.
               Bernard Conf. 14. Sept.
               Bertelme Ermite 12. Aug.
               Bertuine Bishop 11. Nouemb.
               Birine Bishop 3. Decemb.
               Birstan Bishop 22. April.
               Boniface B. 5. Iune. 1. Nouem.
               Bosa Bishop 9. March.
               Boso Mart. 5. Iune.
               Botulph Abbot 17. Iune.
               Boysil Abbot 23. Ian.
               Brādan Abb. 16. May 14. Iun.
               Brigit Virg. 1. Febr.
               Brituald of Canterb. 9. Ian.
               Brituald of VVinch. 22. Ian.
               Burchard B. 2. Feb. 14. Oct.
               Burgundosora Abbesse 3. Apr.
               Burien Virg. 29. May.
            
            
               C
               CAdocke mart. 24. Ian.
               Canicke Abbot 11. Octob
               Canoch Conf. 11. Feb.
               Ceadwall King 20. Apr.
               Ced Bishop 7. Ian.
               Celsus Bishop 6. Apr.
               Ceolfride Abbot 25. Sept.
               Ceolnulph King 14. Mar.
               Chad Bishop 2. Mar.
               Chinede Ermite 10. Dec.
               Chineburge Queene 15. Sept.
               Christian Bish. 18. Mar.
               Christian Virg. 26. Iuly.
               Christine Virg. 5. Decemb.
               Clare Mart. 4. Nouemb.
               Clintanke K. mart. 19. Aug.
               
                  
Cogan Abbot 29. Sept.
               Colman Bishop 13. Octob.
               Colman mart. 8. Iuly.
               Columbe Abbot 9. Iune.
               Columbane Abbot 21. Nou.
               Columbane Monke 28. Iune.
               Conine Abbot 6. Octob.
               Comogel Abbot 20. Decemb.
               Cōception of our B. Lady 8. De.
               Congellus Abbot 6. Decemb.
               Congilla Abbesse 9. Nou.
               Constantine Emp. 21. May.
               Conwalline Abbot 5. Octob.
               Conwan Conf. 14. Feb.
               Cordula Virg. 22. Oct.
               Chroniacke Conf. 4. Ian.
               Cuthbert B. 20. Mar. 4. Sept.
               Cuthberge Abbesse 31. Aug.
               Cymbert Bish. 21. Febr.
               Cyhthacke Conf. 20. Sept.
            
            
               D
               DAmianus Conf. 26. May
               Daniel. B. 1. Decem.
               Dauid Bish. 1. March.
               Dauid Conf. 15. Iuly.
               Decuman Mart. 27. Aug.
               Deicola Abbot 18. Ian.
               Deifer Conf. 7. March.
               Deusdedit Bishop 30. Iune.
               Diman Conf. 19. Iuly.
               Disibode Bish. 8. Iune.
               Domitius Conf. 3. Aug.
               Donatus Bish. 22. Octob.
               Dronston Conf. 11. Iuly.
               Drusa Mart. 5. Febr.
               Dubritius B. 6. May. 14. Sept.
               Dunstan B. 19. May. 7. Sept.
               Dunstan Abbot 18. Iune.
               Duuianus Conf. 8. April.
               Dympna Virg. Mart. 15. May.
            
            
               E
               EAdgith Queene 15. Iuly
               Eadsine Bish. 29. Octob.
               Eadware Virg. 23. Decem.
               Eanslede Queene 24. Nou.
               Eanswide Abbesse 31. Aug. 12. Sept.
               Eatta Bishop 26. Octob.
               Ebba Mart. 25. August.
               Ebba Virg. 2. April.
               Eboam Martyr 5. Iune.
               Edbert Bish. 6. May.
               Edburge of VVilson 15. Iune.
               Edburge of Edburton 18. Iuly
               Edburge of Kent 13. Dec.
               Edburge of Peterb. 21. Dec.
               Edelfled Abbesse 8. Febr.
               Edgar King 25. May.
               Edilburge Queene 9. Iuly.
               
                  
Edilburge of Brige 7. Iuly.
               Edilburge of Barking 11. Oct.
               Edilhun Conf. 21. Sept.
               Ediltrude Q 23. Iun. 17. Oct.
               Edilwald Bish. 12 Febr.
               Edilwald Ermite 11. Iune.
               Edith of Polleswor. 14. May.
               Edith of Wilton 16. Sept. 3. Nouemb.
               Edmund King Mart. 10. Iune. 20. Nouemb.
               Edmund Bishop 16. Nouemb.
               Edward K. mart. 18. March. 20. Iune.
               Edward K. Conf. 15. Ian. 10. Octob.
               Edwold Conf. 29. Aug. 28. Nouemb.
               Edwyn King mart. 4. Octob.
               Egbert King 23. March.
               Egbert Abbot of Scot. 24. Apr.
               Egbert Abb. of Eulda 26. Nou.
               Egelnoth Bish. 30. Octob.
               Egwine Bish. 11. Ian.
               Elerius Abbot 3. Iune.
               Eleutherius Conf. 3. Iune
               Elsled Virg. 13. April.
               Elsled Abbesse 20. Ian.
               Elfred Virg. 12. Decemb.
               Eloquius Conf. 8. Oct. 3. Dec.
               Elphage B. of Winchest. 1. Sept.
               Elphege B. of Cant. 19. Apr. 28. Decem.
               Eluane Bishop 1. Ianuar.
               Emerita Virg. Mart. 4. Dec.
               Engelmund Mart. 21. Iune.
               Eoglodius Conf. 25. Ian.
               Erconwald B. 30. Ap. 14. No.
               Ercongote Abbesse 7. Iuly.
               Ermenburge Queene 19. No.
               Ermenild Queene 13. Febr.
               Erwald Mart. 8. Iuly.
               Eschillus Mart. 10. Apr.
               Ethbyn Abbot 19. Octob.
               Ethelburge Queene 8. Sept.
               Ethelbert King Conf. 24. Feb.
               Ethelbert King Mart. 23. May.
               
                  
                     Ethelbrit

                           Mart. 17. Octob.
                        
                     
                     Ethelred
                  
               
               Ethelsrede Virg. 26. Decemb.
               Ethelgiue Abbesse 9. Decemb.
               Ethelnulph King. 14. Apr.
               Ethelred K. Mart. 23. Apr.
               Ethelred K. Abbot 4. May.
               Ethelwide Queene 20. Iuly.
               Ethelwold K. Mart. 6. Apr.
               Ethelwold Bish. 1. Aug.
               Ethelwyne Bish. 29. Iune.
               Eter
                     •
                  ane Conf. 31. Dec.
               Etto Bishop 10. Iuly.
               Eustach Conf. 30. Decemb.
               Ewaldi Mart. 3. Octob.
            
            
               
               F
               FAgan Conf. 8. August.
               Felix Bishop 8. March.
               Fethno Conf. 12. March.
               Fiaker Conf. 30. August.
               Finan Bish. 17. Febr.
               Florentius Bish. 7. Nouemb.
               Florentina Virg. Mart. 6. Dec.
               Foillan B. 3. Sept. 31. O
                     ••
                  ob.
               Fremund K. Mart. 24. March. 11. May
               Fridegand Conf. 17. Iuly.
               Frideswide Virg. 19. Octob.
               Frithstan Bishop 9. April.
               Frodoline Abbot 6. March.
               Fugatius Conf. 26. May.
               Fulke Conf. 18. Nouem.
               Furseus Abbot 25. Febr. 4. March.
            
            
               G
               GAllanus Conf. 7. Dec.
               Gallus Abbot 16. Octob.
               Gerard Conf. 27. Decemb.
               Gereberne Mart. 15. May.
               German Bish. 2. May.
               George Mart. 23. Apr.
               Geruadius Bish. 11. Decemb.
               Gilbert Bish. 11. Aug.
               Gilbert Conf. 4. Febr.
               Gildas Abbot 29. Ianuar.
               Gislen Conf. 9. Octob.
               Godricke Ermite 21. May.
               Goluin Bishop. 1. Iuly.
               Gotebald Bish 5. Apr.
               Gregory Pope 12. March.
               Gregory Conf. 25. Decem.
               Grimbald Abbot 8. Iuly
               Gudwall Bishop. 22. Feb. 6. Iune.
               Guier Conf. 4. Apr.
               Gunderhere Mart. 5. Iune.
               Guthagon Conf. 3. Iuly. 1. Oct.
               Guithelme Bish. 8. Ianuar.
               Guthlacke Conf. 11. Apr.
            
            
               H
               HAmund Bishop 22. March.
               Hamunt Deacon. 5. Iune.
               Harrucke Bishop. 15. Iuly
               Hedde Bish. 7. Iuly.
               Heiu. Virg. 30. May.
               Helena Empresse. 7. Febr. 18. Aug.
               Henry 
                     •
                  rmite 16. Ian.
               Henry of Opslo 19. Ian.
               Henry of VVinchest. 6. Aug.
               Henry King 22. May.
               Herebert Conf. 20. March.
               Hereswide Queene 23. Sept.
               
                  
Higbald Abbot 22. Sept.
               Hilda Ab. 17. Nou. 15. Dec.
               Heldelide Abbesse 22. Decem.
               Hildebrand Mart. 5. Iune.
               Himeline Conf. 10. March.
               Honorius Bish. 30. Sept.
               Hugh Mart. 27. Iuly▪
               
               Hugh B. of Ely 9. August.
               Hugh B. of Lincolne 17. Nou. 7. Octob.
               Hugh B. of Roane 12. Apr.
               Humbert Bish. 20. Nouemb.
            
            
               I
               IEron Mart. 17. August.
               Inas King 6. Febr.
               Indractus Mart. 5. Febr.
               Inthware Virg. 23. Decemb.
               Iohn of Beuerley 7. May.
               Iohn Conf. 27. Iune.
               Iohn Abbot 17. Iuly.
               Iohn of Le
                     •
                  is 5. Febr.
               Iohn of Birlington 10. Octob.
               Iohn of Constance 26. Febr.
               Iohn of Saltzburge 18. Febr.
               Iohn of Michelmburge 10. No.
               Iohn of Ely 19. Iune.
               Ionas Abbot 28. May.
               Ioseph of Arimathia 27. Iuly.
               Iotaneus Conf. 26. Sept.
               Isenger Mart. 21. March.
               Ithimar Bish. 10. Iune.
               Iudocus Ermite 9. 
                     •
                  anuar. 13. Decemb.
               Iulius Mart. 1. Iuly.
               Iuo Bish. 24. April.
               Iustus Bishop. 10. Nouemb.
               Iustinian Mart. 23. Aug.
            
            
               K
               KEnelme King 17. Iuly.
               Kentigerne Abb. 13. Ian.
               Keyna Virgin 8. Octob.
               Kilian Mart. 13. Febr. 8. Iuly.
               Kilian Con
                     •
                  . 13. Nouemb.
               
                  
                     Kinisdred

                           Virgins 6. Mar.
                        
                     
                     Kinis
                           •
                        ide
                  
               
               Kinneburge Queene 15. Sept.
               Kortil Bish. 28. April.
            
            
               L
               LAnfranke Bishop. 24. March. 3. Iuly.
               Laurence Bish. of Canterb. 2. Febr.
               Laurence B. of Dublyn 14. Nouemb.
               Lebuine Bish. 25. Iune. 12. Nouemb.
               Lefrone Abbesse 3. Iuly.
               Leofgar Mart. 16. Iune.
               
                  
Leuine Bish. 27. Iune. 12. Nouemb.
               Lewyne Virg. Mart. 24. Iuly.
               Liephard Mart. 4. Febr.
               Lioba Abbesse 28. Sept.
               Luane Abbot 12. Iuly.
               Lucius King 3. Decemb.
               Lullus Bish. 26. Octob.
               Lupus Bishop. 29. Iuly.
            
            
               M
               MAcharius Abbot 19. Decemb.
               Macloue B. 15. Nouemb.
               Maglore Con
                     •
                  . 24. Octob.
               Maine Abbot 15. Iune.
               Malachy Bish. 5. Nou.
               Malcaline Abbot 21. Ian.
               Malcus Bish. 10. Aug.
               Malcolme King 2. Iune.
               Marcellus Bish. 4. Sept.
               Marchelme Conf. 14. Iuly.
               Margaret Prioresse 15. Aug.
               Margaret Queene 10. Iune. 16. Nouemb.
               Marianus Conf. 17. April.
               Martyrs at Lichfield 2. Ian.
               Martyrs at Benchor 16. Iune.
               Martyrs at Bardney 26. Mar.
               Maude Queene 7. August.
               Maxentia Virg. 24. Octob.
               Mechtild Virg. 12. Apr.
               Meliorus Mart. 3. 
                     •
                  an.
               Mellitus Bishop 24. Apr.
               Mellon Bish. 22. Octob.
               Menigold Mart. 9. Feb. 15. Iune.
               Meresine Conf. 17. Ian.
               Merwyne Virg. 13. May.
               Midane Conf. 26. April.
               Midwyne Conf. 1. Ianuar.
               Milburge Virg. 23. Febr.
               Mildred Virg. 20. Feb. 13. Iul.
               Milwide Virg. 17. Ian.
               Mimborine Abbot 14. Decem.
               Modane Conf. 26. Apr.
               Modwene Abbesse 5. Iuly.
               Mono Mart. 18. Octob.
               Motiser Conf. 29. Octob.
            
            
               N
               NEoth Conf. 31. Iuly.
               Ninian B. 16. Sept.
            
            
               O
               OBodius Ermite 25. Apr.
               Oda Virg. 27. Nou.
               Odilia Virg. 18. Iuly.
               Odo Bish. 4. Iuly.
               Odwald Abbot 7. Decemb.
               Ortrude Virg. 22. Iune.
               
                  
Osith Virg. 7. Octob.
               Osmane Virg. 22. Nouem.
               Osmund B. 16. Iuly 4. Dec.
               Oswald King 20. Iune 5. Aug.
               Oswald Bish. 28. Febr. 15. April 15. Octob.
               Oswyn King Mart. 11. March 20. August.
               Oswyn Conf. 18. April.
               Otger Deacon 10. Sept.
               Oudocke Bishop 2. Iuly
               Owen Conf. 29. Iuly
            
            
               P
               Palladius Bish. 27. Ian.
               Pa
                     •
                  dwine Virg. 26. Aug.
               Paternus Conf. 10. Apr.
               Pattone Bish. 30. Mar
                     •
                  h.
               Patricke Bishop 17. March.
               Patroke Bishop. 4. Iune.
               Paul Apost. 25. Ian. 29. Iune▪
               
               Pauline Bish. 10. Octob.
               Peter Apost. 29. Iune.
               Peter abbot 6. Ian.
               Piran Conf. 2. May.
               Plechelme Bish. 15. Iuly.
            
            
               Q
               QVemburg Virg. 12. Sept.
               Queran Abbot 9. Sept.
            
            
               R
               REmigius Bish. 12. May.
               Richard King 7. Febr.
               Richard of Chichester 3. Apr. 16. Iune.
               Richard of Calabria 21. Aug.
               Richard Ermite 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Nouemb.
               Robert Bish. 9. Octob.
               Robert Abbot 7. Iune.
               Roger Bish. 1. Octob.
               Romwald Bish. 24. Iune 27. Octob.
               Ru
                     •
                  in Martyr 1. Iune
               Rumbald Conf. 28. Iune.
               Ruthius Conf. 24. Decemb.
            
            
               SAdoch Conf. 1. Apr.
               Sampson Bish. 28. Iuly.
               Scandalaus Conf. 5. May.
               Sebbe King 29. August.
               Senan Conf. 29. April.
               Sethrid Virg. 10. Ian.
               Sewall Bishop 
                     •
                  8. May.
               Sexburge Virg. 6. Iuly
               Sexulse Bish. 27. 
                     •
                  ebr.
               Sidwell Virg. 23. April.
               Sigene Abbot 7. April.
               
                  
Sigebert King 27. Sept.
               Sig
                     •
                  ride Bish. 15. Feb.
               Sop
                     •
                  ias Bish. 24. Ian.
               Souldier Mart. 22. Iune.
               
                  
                     Socrates

                           Mart. 17. Sept.
                        
                     
                     Stephen
                  
               
               Switbert Bish. 1. March.
               Swithin Bishop 2. & 15. Iuly
               Sunaman Mart. 25. Iuly.
               Symon Apost. 28. Octob.
               Symon Conf. 16. May.
               Syra Virg. 23. Octob.
            
            
               T
               Ta
                     •
                  win Bish. 30. Iuly.
               Tancone Bish. 16. Febr.
               Tathar Conf. 23. Nouemb.
               Tecla Abbesse 15. Octob.
               Telean Bish. 25. Nou.
               Tetta Abbesse 17. Decemb.
               Theodore Bish 19. Sept.
               Theorithgid Virg. 26. Ian.
               Thomas of Canterb. 7. Iuly. 29. Decemb.
               Thomas of Hereford 25. Aug. 2. Octob.
               Thomas of Northum. 17. Aug.
               Thomas Monke 16. Aug.
               Tigernake Bish. 5. April.
               Totnan Mart. 8. Iuly.
               Tibbe Virg. 16. Decemb.
               Trans
                     •
                  . of 11000. Vir. 17. May
            
            
               V
               VIgane Conf. 13. March.
               Vintruge Mart. 5. Iune.
               Vl
                     •
                  ade Mart. 1. Iune.
               Vlsricke Ermite 20. Feb.
               Vl
                     •
                  ride Bishop 18. Ian.
               Vltan Abbot 1. May.
               Vnaman Mart. 25. Iuly.
               Vodine Bishop. 23. Iuly.
               Vrsula Virgin 21. Oct.
               Vulganius B. 2. Nouemb.
            
            
               W
               VVAccare 5. Iune.
               Walburge Virg. 27. Apr. 4. August.
               Walter Abbot 3. May.
               Walter Mart. 5. Iune.
               Wasnulph Conf. 1. Octob.
               Weede Abbesse 2. Decemb.
               Wendelin Abbot 20. Octob.
               Wenlocke Abbot 3. March.
               Wenefride Virg. 3. Nou.
               Wereburge Virg. 3. Febr.
               Weren
                     •
                  ride 14. Aug. 13. Sep.
               Wiaman Mart. 25. Iuly.
               Wigbert Conf. 13. Aug.
               
                  
Wilfride of Yorke 24. April. 12. Octob.
               Wilfride of VVorcester 10. Febr.
               Wilfred Queene 22. Iuly.
               Wilgise Conf. 5. March.
               Wilgith Virg. 23. Decemb.
               Willeicke Conf. 2. March.
               Willebrord Bish. 19. Octob. 7. Nouemb.
               Willebald Bish. 7. Iuly.
               Willehade Bish. 8. Nouem.
               Wilhere Mart. 5. Iune.
               William of Yorke 8. Ianuar. 8. Iune.
               William of Rochester 23. May
               William of Norwich 25. March.
               William of Tyre 11. Feb.
               Winfride Abbot 6. March.
               Winibald Abbot 24. Sept. 10. Decemb.
               Winocke Abbot 8. Sept. 6. Nouemb.
               Wolstan Bishop. 19. Ianuar. 7. Iune.
               Wolstan Mart. 31. May.
               Wulf hild Abbesse 9. Sept.
               Wulsy Abbot 26. Sept.
               Wyre Bishop 8. May.
            
            
               Y
               YVVy Deacon 6. Octob.
            
         
         
            
            THE AVTHORS Alleaged in this Booke, out of whome the former Saintes Liues are gathered.
            
               Abbo Floriacensis
               Adam Bremensis
               Ado. Alanus Copus
               Albertus Crantzius
               Albertus Stadensis
               Albinus Flaccus
               Almannus Monachus
               Aloysius Lippomannus
               Alredus Rhieuallensis
               Andreas Leucander.
               Annales Baroniani
               Annales Heluetiorum
               Antonius Demochares
               Arnoldus Mirmannus
               Arnoldus Wion
               Asser Meneuensis
               Aymo
               Baronius Card.
               Beda. Bernardus
               Bernardus Guido
               Breuiarium Cameracense
               Breuiarium Curiense
               Breuiarium Gandauense
               Breuiarium Moguntiuum
               Breuiarium Saltzburgense
               Breuiarium Sarum
               Breuiarium Sueticum
               Carolus Sigonius
               Chronicon Cameracense
               Chronicon Cluniacense
               Chronograph. Britanniae
               Chronicon Hyberniae
               Concilium Tridentinum
               Continuator Bedae
               Cornelius Tacitus
               Egilwardus Monachus
               Extrauagans Xysti PP. 4.
               Felix Crolandiensis
               Folcardus Doroborniensis
               Franciscus Cattanius
               Franciscus Belleforestius
               Franciscus Maurolycus
               Gaufredus Monumetensis
               Georgius Lilius
               Gerardus Liegh
               Gildas Sapiens
               Gotzelinus Morinensis
               Gregorius Magnus
               Gregorius Turonensis
               Gulielmus Eysengrenius
               Gulielmus Malmesburiēsis
               Gulielmus Neubrigensis
               Gulielmus Tyrius
               Gulielmus Ramesius
               Hector Boetius
               Hector Deidonatus
               Helmodius Presbyter
               Hermannus Contractus
               Herebertus Rosweyde
               Hieronymus Platus
               
                  
Historia Quadripartita
               Historia antiqua Scotorum
               Hucbaldus Monachus
               Humfridus Lhuide
               Iacobus Meyrus
               Ioannes Capgrauius
               Ioannes Frosyard
               Ioannes de Kirkstat
               Ioannes Lesleius
               Ioannes Maior
               Ioannes Magnus
               Ioannes Molanus
               Ioannes Nauclerus
               Ioannes Tritemius
               Ioannes Rouse
               Lambertus de Loos
               Laurentius Dunelmensis
               Laurentius Surius
               Marcellinus Monachus
               Matthaeus Parisiensis
               Mathaeus Westmonaster.
               Mombritius. Mosander
               Nicolaus Harpesfield
               Nicolaus Sanderus
               Olaus Magnus
               Osbertus de Stokes
               Paulus Diaconus
               Paulus Morigia
               Petrus Blesensis
               Petrus Cratepolius
               Petrus Gaselinus
               Petrus de Natalibus
               Petrus Sutor
               Petrus de Viel
               Polidorus Virgilius
               Prosper Aquitanius
               Ranulphus Cestrensis
               Registrum Cantuariense
               Registrum de Hide
               Registrum Lichfeldiense
               Registrum Lincolniense
               Registrū D. Pauli Londinēs.
               Registrum Petriburgense
               Renatus Benedictus
               Rhenanus
               Richardus Vitus
               Rodulphus Agricola
               Rodulphus Monachus
               Rogerus Houeden
               Romanum Martyrologium
               Robertus Buckland
               Robertus Caenalis
               Robertus Salopiensis
               Senatus Brauonius
               Siluester Giraldus
               Sigebertus. Sophronius
               Speculum Fr. Carmelitarū
               
               Stephanus Lusinganius
               Symon Dunelmensis
               Theodoretus
               Thomas Walsingam
               Turgotus Episcopus
               Vincentius. Vsuardus
               Wernerus Rollewincke
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A CATALOGVE OF THOSE VVHO HAVE SVFFERED DEATH IN ENGLAND, for defence of the Catholicke Cause, synce the yeare of Christ 1535. and 27. of King HENRY the VIII. his raigne, vnto this yeare 1608.
            
            
               THE PREFACE
               
                  IN the yeare of our Lord 1530. King Henry the viij. after that he had raigned 22. yeares in great peace and Io. Sto. in Annal. hoc anno & sequē
                     tibus prosperity, famous throughout the Christian world, both for Religion, learning, and prowesse, vpon displeasure taken against the Popes Holines, about his diuorce with Queene Catherine his lawfull wife; began vnfortunately his breach with the Sea Apostolicke, forbidding by

Proclamation vpon the 19. of September, all suites to be made to the Court of Rome. &c. And so by little and little going forward in this course now begun, and being (through euill Counsell) incited first against the Clergy of England, condemning them in a Premunire (for relaxation wherof they Sand. l. 1. de Schism. Ang. were forced to giue him an hūdred thousād pounds) and then against the Pope; at last intituled himselfe Head of the Church of Englād, taking vpon wholy the gouerment of all the Ecclesiasticall state in his Dominions dissoluing and suppressing Monasteryes & other Religious places at his pleasure. And moreouer exacting an Oath, vnder payne of death, of all sortes of subiectes, against their consciences, of this his pretended Supremacy. This forsaid breach with the Sea of Rome, thus begun, and continued afterward vnder the raygne of King Henryes two Children Edward and Elizabeth, holdeth also vntill this day in our Coūtrey in their Successour K. Iames, to the great griefe of all the Christian Catholicke world. The names of those, who for refusing the said Oath, or otherwise resisting this their pretenced Supremacy, haue suffered vnder these forsaid Princes, are set downe as followeth, according to the yeares, moneths & dayes of their deathes.
            
            
               
               Vnder King Henry the VIII.
               
                  Anno Christi 1535. Henrici 8. anno 27.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              IOhn Houghton Prior of the Carthusians at London.
                           
                              Augustine Webster Prior of the Carthusians at Exham.
                           
                              Robert Laurence Prior of the Carthusians at Beuall.

                                 These were put to death Nic. Sād. lib. 1. de Schism. Ang. pa. 128. 129, 130. at Tyburne the 29. of Aprill, for denying the Kings Supremacy.
                              
                           
                           
                              Richard Reynolds Monke of S. Brigits Order of Syon.
                           
                              Iohn Hayle Priest, Vicar of Thistleworth.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Humsrey Midlemore
                           
                           
                              William Exmew
                              
                                 Charterhouse Monkes of London, suffered at Tyburne 18. Iune.
                              
                           
                           
                              Sebastian Newdigate
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Iohn Rochester
                           
                           
                              Iames Warnet
                              
                                 Carthusians, at Yorke 11. May
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Richard Bere
                           
                           
                              Thomas Greene
                           
                           
                              Iohn Dauis
                           
                           
                              Thomas Iohnson
                           
                           
                              Williā Greenwood
                              
                                 Charterhouse - Monkes died in prison in Iune & Iuly.
                              
                           
                           
                              Thomas Scriuan
                           
                           
                              Robert Salt
                           
                           
                              VValter Persons
                           
                           
                              Thomas Reading
                           
                           
                              VVilliam Horne Charterhouse Monke 4. Aug.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Iohn Fisher Card. of S. Vitalis, & Bishop of Ric. Hal. in eius vita. Staplet. de tribus Thom. Rochester, at the Tower-Hill 22. Iune.
                     
                        Syr Thomas More Knight, at the Tower-hill 6. Iuly.
                  
               
               
                  Anno Christi 1536. Henr. 8. 28.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Iohn Pasley Abbot of Whaley Sand. ib. l. 1. pag. 176. 177.
                           
                           
                              Iohn Castegate Monke

                                 at Lancaster 10. March.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        VVilliam Haddocke Monke, at Whaley 13. Mar.
                     
                        
                           N. N. Abbot of Sauley
                           
                           N. Astbebe Monke o
                                 •
                               Geruaux

                                 at Lancaster in March.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Robert Hobbes Abbot of VVoborne, togeather with the Prior of the same Monastery & a Priest, suffered at VVoborne in Bedfordshire, in March.
                     
                        Doctor Maccarell with 4. other Priests, at Tyburne 29. March.
                     
                        
                           
                              VVilliam Thrust Abbot of Fountaynes
                           
                              Adam Sodbury Abbot of Geruaux

                                 at Tyburne in Iun.
                              
                           
                           
                              William Would Prior of Birlington
                           N. N. Abbot of Riuers
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1537. Henr. 29.
                  
                     
                        Antony Brorby of the Order of S. Francis, strangled with his owne gildle, at Sand. ib. pag. 183. Boucher. de pass. Frat. Fransc. pag. 8. 13. & 17. London 19. Iuly.
                     
                        Thomas Cort Franciscan, famished to death in prison 27. Iuly.
                     
                        Thomas Belcham of the same Order, died in Newgate 3. August.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Anno 1538. Henr. 30.
                  
                     
                        IOhn Forest Frier obseruant, Confessour to Queene Katherine, in Smithfield 23. May. Bouch. ibid. & pag. 26. Sand. ibi.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Stone an Augustine friar, at Canterbury this yeare.
                     
                        Two and thirty Religious Men of the Order of S. Francis being cast into prison for denying the K. Supremacy, died there through cold, stench, & famine, in Aug. Sept. and October.
                     
                        
                           N. Crost Priest Sand l. 1. pag. 973.
                           
                           N. Collins Priest

                                 at Tyburne.
                              
                           
                           N. Holland Layman
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1539. Henr. 31.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Adrian Fortescue
                           
                           
                              Thomas Dingley
                              
                                 Knights of S. Iohns of Ierusalē, Sand. pa. 181. 194, 197. at Tower hill 8. Iul.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Griffith Clarke Priest
                           N. Mayre Monke

                                 at S. Thomas Wateringes 8. Iuly.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Iohn Tauers Doctor of diuinity
                           
                              Iohn Harris Priest

                                 30. Iuly.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Iohn Rugge
                           
                           
                              William Onion
                              
                                 Priests, at Reading, 14. Nouemb.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Hugh Faringdon Abbot of Reading, at Reading 22. Nouemb.
                     
                        
                           
                              Richard Whiting Abbot of Glastēbury
                           
                              Iohn Thorne
                           
                           
                              Roger Iames
                              
                                 Monks of Glastēbury

                                       at Glastenb. 22 Nouem.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Iohn Beck Abbot of Colchester, at Colchester 1. Decemb.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Anno 1540. Henr. 32.
                  
                     VVIlliam Peterson Sand. ib. pag. 216. 217.
                     
                     William Richardson

                           Priestes, at Calais 10. April.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Thomas Abell
                           Edward Powell

                                 Priestes, in Smithfield 30. Iuly.
                              
                           
                           Rich. Fetherstone
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Laurēce Cocke Prior of Dancaster
                           William Horne Monke
                           
                           Edmund Bromley Priest
                           
                           Giles Horne Gentleman.
                              
                                 at Tyburne 4. August.
                              
                           
                           Clement Philpot Gentleman.
                           
                           Darby Genninges Layman
                           
                           Robert Bird Layman
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1541. Henr. 33.
                  
                     
                        DAuid Genson Knight of the Rhodes. 1. Sād. pag. 180 Iuly.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1543. Henr. 35.
                  
                     
                        
                           GErman Gardener Priest
                           
                           Iohn Lark Priest 
                              Sand. pag 227.
                           
                           Iohn Ireland P
                                    〈…〉
                                 est
                              
                                 at Tyburne 7. March.
                              
                           
                           Thomas Asbey Layman
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Vnder Queene Elizabeth.
               
                  Anno 1570. Elizabethae 12. Nicol. Sander l. 7. de visib. Monarc. pag. 734. & 736.
                  
                  
                     
                        IOhn Felton Gentleman, in S. Paules Churhyard 8. August.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Anno 1571. Elizabeth. 13.
                  
                     
                        Iohn Story Doctor of the Canon-law, at Tyburne 1. Iune.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1573. Elizabeth. 15. Concert. Eccles. Ang.
                  
                  
                     
                        THomas Woodhouse Priest, at Tyburne 19. Iune.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1577. Elizab. 19.
                  
                     
                        CVthbert Mayne the first Priest of the Seminaryes, Concert. Eccles. Angl. at Launston in Cornwall 29. Nouemb.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1578. Elizab. 20. Concert. ibid.
                  
                  
                     
                        IOhn Nelson Priest, at Tyburne 3. February.
                     
                        Thomas Sherwood Gentleman 7. Febr.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1581. Elizab. 23.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Everard Hanse Priest, at Tyburne 31. Iuly. Concert. Eccles. Ang. Sand. l. 3. de schism. Angl.
                           
                           
                              Edmund Campian Priest of the Society of Iesus.
                           
                              Alexander Briant Priest of the same Society of Iesus.

                                 at Tyburne 1. Dec.
                              
                           
                           Raph Sherwyn Priest
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1582. Elizab. 24.
                  
                     
                        IOhn Pa
                              〈…〉
                           e Priest, at Chelemsford in Essex 2. April.
                     
                        
                        
                           Thomas Ford Priest.
                           
                           Iohn Shert Priest. 
                              Concert. Eccles. Angl. et Sand. vbi supra.
                              
                                 at Tyburne 28. May.
                              
                           
                           Robert Iohnson Priest.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Thomas Cottam Priest of the Society of Iesus.
                           William Filby Priest.
                              
                                 at Tiburne 30. May
                              
                           
                           Luke Kirby Priest.
                           
                           Laurence Iohnson Priest
                           
                        
                     
                     William Lacy Priest
                     
                     Richard Kirkman Priest
                        
                           at Yorke 22. August.
                        
                     
                     
                        Iames Tompson Priest, at Yorke in Nouemb.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1583. Elizab. 25.
                  
                     
                        Richard Thirkill Priest, at Yorke 29. May.
                     
                        Iohn Slade Laymā, at Winchest. 30. Oct. Concert. Eccles. Angl. et Sand. pa. 465. 466
                     
                     
                        Iohn Body Layman, at Andouer 2. Nouemb.
                     
                        William Hart Priest, at Yorke.
                     
                        Iames Laburne Gentleman, at Lancaster.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1584. Elizab. 26.
                  
                     
                        VVilliam Carter Layman, at Tyburne 11. Ian. Concert. Eccles. Ang. pa. 127. 134. 140. 143. 156. cum Sand. vbi supra.
                     
                     
                        
                           George Haddocke Priest
                           
                           Iohn Mundine Priest
                           
                           Iames Fen Priest
                              
                                 at Tyburne 12. Feb.
                              
                           
                           Thomas Emersord Priest
                           
                           Iohn Nutter Priest
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Iames Bele Priest
                           
                           Iohn Finch Layman
                              
                                 at Lancaster. 20. April.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Richard White Layman, at VVrixam in Wales 18. Octob.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Anno 1585. Elizab. 27.
                  
                     
                        
                           THomas Aufield Priest.
                           
                           Thomas VVebley Layman.
                              
                                 at Tyburne Concert. Eccles. Ang. pa. 203. Sād. pag. 485 499. 6. Iuly.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Hugh Taylour Priest
                           
                           Marmaduke Bowes Layman
                              
                                 at Yorke.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Margaret Clitherow Cittizen of Yorke, at Yorke in March.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1586. Elizab. 28.
                  
                     
                        
                           EDward Transam Priest
                           
                           Nicol. VVoodfine Priest
                              
                                 at Tyburne 21. Concert. Eccles. Ang. pa. 204. 410 Sand. pa. 499. Ianuary.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Richard Sergeant Priest
                           
                           VVilliam Tompson Priest
                              
                                 at Tyburne 20. April.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Iohn Addams Priest
                           
                           Iohn Low Priest
                              
                                 at Tyburne 8. Octob.
                              
                           
                           Robert Debdale Priest
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Robert Anderton Priest
                           
                           VVilliam Marsden Priest
                              
                                 at Tyburne.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Francis Ingleby Priest, at Yorke.
                     
                        Stephen Rousam Priest, at Glocester.
                     Iohn Finglow Priest.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1587. Elizab. 29.
                  
                     
                        MAry Queene of Scotland, at Foderinghay-Castle 8. Febr. Concert. Eccles. Ang. pa. 207.
                     
                     
                        Thomas Pilchard Priest at Dorcester in March.
                     
                        Iohn Sandes Priest, at Glocester.
                     
                        Iohn Hamley Priest, at Chard.
                     
                        Alexander Crow Priest, at Yorke.
                     
                        Robert Sutton Priest, at Stafford.
                     
                        
Edmund Sikes Priest.
                     
                     Galriel Thimbleby Priest.
                     
                     George Douglas Priest.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1588. Elizab. 30.
                  
                     
                        
                           VVlliam Deane Pr. 
                              Didacus de Yepes Episcop. Taracon. de persec. Angl. Hispani
                                    •
                                 è
                           
                           Henry VVebly P.
                              
                                 at Milēdgreene by Lōdō. 28. Au.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        VVilliam Gunter Priest, at the Theater by London. 28. August.
                     
                        
                           Robert Morton Priest
                           
                           Hugh More Gentlemā
                              
                              
                                 in Lincolnes Inne fields by Lōdō 28. Au.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Thomas Acton alias Ho
                              〈…〉
                           ord Priest at Clarkenwell in London 28. August.
                     
                        
                           Richard Clarkeson Priest
                           
                           
                              Thomas Felton lay brother of the order of the Minimes

                                 at Hounslow 28. Aug.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Richard Liegh Priest
                           
                           Hugh Morgan Priest
                           
                           Edward Shelly Esquire
                           
                           Richard Flower Laymā
                              
                              
                                 at Tyburne 30. Aug.
                              
                           
                           Robert Martyn Layman
                           
                           Iohn Rocke Layman
                           
                           Margaret VVard Gent.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Edward Iames Priest
                           
                           Raph Crochet Priest.
                              
                                 at Chichester 1. Oct.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Robert Wilcockes Priest
                           
                           Edward Campian Priest
                           
                           Christopher Buxton Priest
                              
                                 at Canterbury 1. Octob.
                              
                           
                           Robert VVidmerpoole Layman
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        VVilliam Wigges Priest, at Kingston 1. Octob.
                     
                        Iohn Robinson Priest, at Ipswich 1. Octob.
                     
                        
                        Iohn VVeldon Priest, at Milendgreene by London 5. October.
                     
                        
                           VVilliam Har
                                 •
                              ley Priest
                           
                           Richard VVilliās Priest
                              
                                 at Halliwell by London 5. Octob.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Robert Sutton Layman at Clarkenwell 5. Oct.
                     VVilliam Spenser Priest.
                     
                     Edward Burden Priest.
                     
                     Iohn Hewit Priest.
                     
                     
                        
                           Robert Ludlam Priest.
                           
                           Richard Sympson Priest
                              
                                 at Darby.
                              
                           
                           Ni
                                 〈…〉
                              las Garlicke Priest
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        William Lampley Layman at Glocester.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1589. Elizab. 31.
                  
                     
                        
                           George Nicols Priest
                           
                           Richard Yaxley Priest
                           
                           Thomas Belson Gentlemā
                              
                              
                                 at Oxford 5. Iul. Didac. de Yepes Epis. Taracon. de persec. Angl. Hispan.
                                 
                              
                           
                           Humsrey Vp-richard laymā
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Iohn Annas Priest.
                     
                     Robert Da
                           •
                        by Priest.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1590. Elizab. 32.
                  
                     
                        Christopher Bales Priest, in Fleetstreet in London 4. March.
                     
                        Alexander Blake Layman in Grayes Inne lane in London 4. March.
                     
                        Nicolas Horner Layman in Smithfield in London 4. March.
                     
                        
                           Miles Gerard Priest
                           
                           Francis Dickinson Priest
                              
                                 at Rochester 30. Aprill.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Antony Middleton Priest at Clarkenwell in London 6. May.
                     
                        
                        Edward Iohnes Priest in Fleetstreet in London 6. May.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1591. Elizab. 33.
                  
                     
                        
                           Edmund Geninges Priest
                           
                           Swithin VVelles Gent.
                              
                                 in Grayes Inne fields 10. Dec.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Eustach VVhite Priest 
                              Andr. Philop. cont. Edict. Reginae. Ang. pa. 482.
                           
                           Polidor Plasden Priest
                           
                           Brian Lacy Gentlemā.
                              
                                 at Tyburne 10. Dec.
                              
                           
                           Iohn Mason Layman.
                           
                           Sydney Hodgson Laymā
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Momfort Scot Priest
                           
                           George Bisley Priest
                              
                                 in Fleestreet 2. Iuly.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Williā Dickinson Priest
                              
                                 at Winchester 7. Iuly.
                              
                           
                           Raph Milner Layman
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Edmund Duke Priest
                           
                           Richard Holiday Priest.
                              
                                 at Durham.
                              
                           
                           Iohn Hogge Priest
                           
                           Richard Hill Priest.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        VVilliam Pikes Layman at Dorcester.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1592. Elizab. 34.
                  
                     
                        VVilliā Patteson Pr. at Tyburne 22. Ia.
                     
                        Thomas Portmore Priest in S. Paules Churchyard in London 21. Febr.
                     
                        Roger Ashton Priest, at Tyburne 23. Iune.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1593. Elizab. 35.
                  
                     
                        IAmes Burden Laymā, at Winchest. 25. Mar. Did. yepes ibi. pag. 651.
                     
                     
                        Antony Page Priest, at Yorke 30. April.
                     
                        Ioseph Lampton Priest at Newcastle 23. Iune.
                     
                        
                        William Dauis Priest, at Beumaris in Wales, in Septemb.
                     Edward Waterson Priest.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1594. Elizab. 36.
                  
                     
                        VVilliam Harington Priest, at Tyburne 18. Febr. Yepes vbi suprà pag. 633. 640. 641
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Iohn Cornelius Mohun Priest of the Society of Iesus.
                           Thomas Bosgraue Gentleman
                              
                                 at Dorcester 4. Iuly.
                              
                           
                           Patricke Samon Layman
                           
                           Iohn Carey Layman
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Iohn Ingram Priest.
                           
                           Thomas Boast Priest
                              
                                 at Newcastle.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Iames Oldbaston Priest.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1595. Elizab. 37.
                  
                     
                        RObert Southwell Priest of the Society of Iesus, at Tyburne 3. March. Did. Yepes in hist. persecut. Angl. pag. 642.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Henry Walpole Priest of the Society of Iesus

                                 at Yorke 17. Apr.
                              
                           
                           Alexander Raulins Priest
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           George Errington Gent.
                           
                           William Knight Gentleman
                           
                           William Gibson Gentleman
                              
                                 at Yorke.
                              
                           
                           Henry Abbots Layman
                           
                        
                     
                     William Freeman Priest.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1596. Elizab. 38.
                  
                     N. Auleby Priest.
                     
                     N. Thorpe Priest.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Anno 1597. Elizab. 39.
                  
                     
                        IOhn Buckley alias Iones Priest of the Order Yepes vbi supra. pag. 710. l. 5. of S. Francis, at S. Thomas waterings 12. Iuly.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1598. Elizab. 40.
                  
                     
                        
                           THomas Snow Priest
                           
                           Christopher Robinson Priest
                           
                           Richard Horner Priest
                              
                                 
                                    at Yorke.
                                 
                              
                           
                           N. Grimston Layman
                           
                           N. Britton Layman.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1600. Elizab. 42
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              CHristopher VVharton Priest, with a venerable Matrone Relatio 16 Mart. à Th. W. edit.
                              
                                 at Yorke 18. May.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Iohn Rigby, Gentleman, at S. Thomas Waterings 21. Iuly.
                     
                        
                           
                              Robert Nutter Priest
                           
                              Edward Thuinge Priest

                                 at Lancaster in Iune.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Thomas Sprot Priest
                           
                              Thomas Hunt Priest

                                 at Lincolne in Iuly.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Thomas Palaser Priest
                           
                              Iohn Norton Gentleman

                                 at Durham in Iuly.
                              
                           
                           
                              N. Talbot Gentleman.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1601. Elizab. 43.
                  
                     
                        Iohn Pibush Priest, at Tyburne 11. February.
                     
                        
                        
                           
                              Roger Filcocke Priest of the Society Relat 16. Mart. pag. 93. & 94. of Iesus.
                           
                              Marke Barkworth Priest of the Order of S. Benedict.

                                 at Tyburne 27. Feb.
                              
                           
                           
                              Anne Lyne Gentlewoman widdow
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Robert Middleton Priest.
                           
                              Thrustan Hunt Priest.

                                 at Lancaster.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1602. Elizab. 44.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              FRancis Page Priest of the Society of Iesus.
                           
                              Thomas Tichborne Priest

                                 at Tyburne 29. April.
                              
                           
                           
                              Robert Watkinson Priest
                           
                              Iames Ducket Layman
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              N. Harrison Priest
                           
                              N. Bates Gentleman

                                 at Yorke in April.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1603. Elizab. 45. & vltimo.
                  
                     
                        LAurence Richardson alias Anderton Priest at Tyburne 27. February.
                  
               
            
            
               Vnder King Iames.
               
                  Anno 1604. Iacob. Reg. 2.
                  
                     
                        LAurence Bayly Layman, at Lancaster in March.
                     
                        
                           
                              Iohn Suker Priest
                           
                              Robert Grissold Laymā
                              
                                 at Warwicke in August.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1605. Iacobi 3.
                  
                     
                        Thomas VVilborne Layman, at Yorke.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Anno 1606. Iacobi 4.
                  
                     
                        Richard Oldcorne Priest of the Society of Iesus. at Worcester. 7. Apr.
                     
                        Raph Ashley Layman at Worcester. 7. Apr.
                     
                        Henry Garnet Priest, Superiour of the Society of Iesus in England, in S. Paules Church-yard 3. May.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1607. Iacob. 5.
                  
                     
                        RObert Drury Priest, at Tyburne 26. February.
                  
               
               
                  Anno 1608. Iacob. 6.
                  
                     
                        MAtthew Flathers Priest at Yorke 21. Mar.
                     
                        George Geruis Priest of the Order of S. Benedict, at Tyburne 11. April.
                     
                        Thomas Garnet Priest of the Society of Iesus at Tyburne 23. Iune.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            CERTAINE CORRECTIONS and Additions in the late English Martyrs, which came to the Authors knowledg after the printing of the former Catalogue.
            
               Anno 1543.
               
                  Adde, Iohn Risby, and Thomas Rike.
            
            
               Anno 1585.
               Adde N. Hamelton Priest. at Yorke
               Adde Rob. Bicardicke layman at Yorke
            
            
               Anno 1586.
               
                  Adde, Richard Langley Esquire at Yorke 1. Decemb.
               
                  Eodē anno put Iohn Sands, & Stephē Rousam in Anno 1587.
            
            
               Anno 1588.
               Hugh Morgan Priest, corrige, Gentleman.
               
               
                  Ibidem, Edw. Shelley Esquire, corrige, Gentleman.
               
            
            
               Anno 1592.
               Roger Ashton Priest, corrige, Gentleman.
               
            
            
               Anno 1595.
               
                  Adde, Iohn Watkinson (aliâs VVarcoppe) layman, at Yorke.
               
                  Adde, Anno 1599. Matthew Hayes Priest, at Yorke.
            
            
               Anno 1600.
               
                  Dele illa verba, with a venerable Matron.
            
            
               Anno 1601.
               Iohn Pibush Priest, at Tyburne, corrige, at S. Thomas VVaterings.
               
            
            
               Anno 1603.
               Laurence Richardson, alias Anderton Priest, corrigesie,
               
               William Richardson Priest &c.
            
            
               Anno 1605.
               
                  Adde, William Browne layman, at Rippon.
            
            
               Anno 1606.
               
                  Richard Oldcorne, corrige, Edward Oldcorne &c.
            
            
               Yf, besides these, any other errours haue heerin escaped, either in Names or Syrnames, or in the yeares, or places of their sufferings; I humbly desire the Catholicke Reader to pardon the same, and of himselfe in charity to amend them: To whose prudent Iudgment, & Censure of HOLY CHVRCH, I submit the whole.
            
            
               I. W.
            
         
      
   