
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The boke of ſecretes of Albertus Magnus, of the vertues of Herbes, ſtones, and certayne beaſtes. ❧ Alſo, a boke of the ſame author, of the maruaylous thinges of the world: and of certaine effectes, cauſed of certaine beaſtes.
            Anno. M. D. LX.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ To the reader.
            SYth it is manifeſtlye knowen, that thys boke of Albertus Magnus, is in the Italyon, Spanyſh, Frenche, and Duche tounges, it was thought if it were trāſlated into Engliſh tounge, it woulde be receyued wt lyke good wyll and frendſhyp, as it is in thoſe partes. Wherefore vſe thou thys boke, to mitigate, and alacreate, thy heauy & troubleſome mynde, as thou haſt ben wont to do, with the boke commonly called the boke of Fortune: for beleue me, whatſoeuer is promyſed in 
                  •
               ther of thē both, thys, or that, is alonely to ye ende.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  ❧ The fyrſte boke of the vertues of certayne Herbes.
               
                  ARiſtotell, the Prince of Phyloſophers, ſayeth in manye places, that euerye ſcience is of the kynde of good thynges. But notwithſtandyng, the operation ſometyme is good ſometyme euell: as the ſcience is chaunged to a good, or to an euel ende, to whiche it worketh. Of the whiche ſayinge, two thinges be cōcluded: the one, and the firſt is, that the ſcience of magike is not euell, for by the knowledge of it, euel may be eſchued, & good folowed. The ſecōd thing is alſo concluded for aſmuche as the effecte is prayſed for the ende, and alſo the ende of ſcience is diſpraiſed, whanne it is not ordeyned

to good, or to vertue. It folo we
                     •
                  h then, that euery ſcience, or operation, is ſometime good, ſometime euill, Therfore, becauſe the ſciēce of Magike, is as a good knowledge (as it is preſuppoſed) and is ſomewhat euyll in beholding of cauſes, and natural thinges, as I haue conſidered, & perceaued in auncient aucthors: yes and I my ſelf, Alberte haue foūd the trouth in many thinges, & I ſuppoſe the truth to be in ſome parte of the boke of Chirander, & of the boke of Alchorat.
               ¶ Fyrſt therfore, I wil declare of certayne hearbes. Secondlye, of certayne ſtones. And thyrdely, of certayne beaſtes, & the vertues of them.
               
                  Elitropia
                  Marygolde.
                  Urtica
                  Nettell.
                  
                     Virga paſtoris
                  Wylde taſyl.
                  Celidonia
                  Celendyne.
                  Prouinca
                  Perwynke.
                  Mepeta
                  Calamīt or peniroyal
                  Lingua canis
                  Hondes toūge.
                  Juſquianus
                  Henbane.
                  Lilium
                  Lylye.
                  Viſcus querci
                  Miſſeltoe.
                  Centaurea
                  Centorye.
                  Saluia
                  Sauge.
                  Verbena
                  Veruin.
                  Melyſophylos
                  Smallage.
                  Roſa
                  Roſe.
                  Serpentina
                  Snakes graſſe
               
               ¶ The firſte herbe is called with the men of Chaldea, Elios with the Grekes, Matuchiol, with ye Latynes, Elitropium, with Engliſh men, Marygolde, whoſe interpretation, is of Elios, that is the Sonne, and Tropos, that is alteration, or chaunge, becauſe

it is turned according to 
                     •
                   ſunne The vertue of this herbe is maruelous: for if it be gathered, the Sunne beyng in the ſigne Leo, in Auguſt, and be wrapped in the leafe of a Laurell, or baye tree, & a wolues to the be added therto, no mā ſhalbe able to haue a word to ſpeake againſt the bearer therof, but woordes of peace. And yf any thing be ſtolen, if the bearer of the thinges before named, lay them vnder hys head in ye nyght, he ſhall ſee the thefe, & all hys cō
                  ditiōs. And moreouer, yt the forſayd herbe be put in any church, where women be, whyche haue broken Matrymonye on theyr parte, they ſhall neuer be able to go forthe of the churche, excepte it be put awaye. And thys laſt poynte hath bene proued, and is

very true.
               ¶ The ſeconde herbe is called of the men of Chaldea Roybra, of 
                     •
                   Grekes Olieribus, of the Latynes, or Frenchemen Vrtica, of Engliſh men, a nettell. He that holſteth this herbe in hys hāde, with an herbe called Mylfoyle, or yarowe, or noſeblede, is ſure from all feare, & fantaſye, or vyſion. And yf it be put with the iuyce of houſelyke, and the bearers hande be anoynted with it, and the reſidue be put in water, if he entre in ye water where fyſſhes be, they wil gather together to hys handes, and alſo ad piſcellum. And if hys hande be drawē forth, they will leape agayne to theyr owne places, where they were before.
               ¶ The thyrde herbe is named of

the Chaldeis Lorumboror, of the Grekes Allamor, of the Latines Uirga paſtoris, of Engliſh men, Dylde taſyll. Take this herbe, & tempre it with the iuyce of Mandrake, & geue it to a bytche, or to another beaſt, & it ſhall be greate with a yonge one in the owne kynde, and ſhall bringe forth the byrth in the owne kynde, of the whiche younge one, yf the gome to the be taken, & deped in meate, or drinke, euerye one that ſhall drynke therof, ſhall begin anone battayle, and whan thou woulde put it away, geue to him y• iuyce of Ualeriā, & peace ſhalbe anone amonge them, as before.
               ¶ The fourthe hearbe, is named Aquilaris, of Chaldeis: becauſe it ſprīgeth in the time, in whiche the Egles buylde their neſtes: It

is named of Grekes Ualis, of La tines Celidonia, and of Engliſhmen Celendyne. This hearbe ſpringeth in the time, in yt which the ſwallo wes, and alſo y• Egles maketh their neſtes. If any man ſhal haue this herbe, with y• hart of a molle, he ſhall ouercome all his enemies, and all matters in ſuit, & ſhall put a waie all debate. And if the before named hearbe, be put vpon the headde of a ſycke man, if he ſhould dye, he ſhal ſing anone with a loude boyce, if not, he ſhall wepe.
               ¶ The fyfte herbe is named of y• Chaldeis Iteriſi, of the Grekes, Uorax, of the Latynes Prouētalis, or Prouinſa, of Engliſh men Perwynke, whā it is heatē vnto pouder with wormes of y• earth, wrapped aboute it, and with an

herbe called Semperuina, in En glyſhe houslyke, it induceth loue betwene man and wyfe, if it bee vſed in their meates. And if it ſhalbe put too the mouthe of the beaſt, called the Bugill, he ſhall breahe anone in the middes. And this was proued of late tyme.
               If the ſayde confection be put in the fyre, it ſhalbe turned anone, vnt blue coloure.
               ¶ The ſixt herbe is named of the Chaldeis Bieith, of the Brekes Retus, of the Latines Nepeta, of Engliſhe men Calamynt, otherwyſe Penyroyal. Take this herbe and myxe it with the ſtoone, founde in the neſt of the byrd called a lapwyng, or blacke poluev, and rubbe the bealy of any beaſt, and it ſhalbe with byrth, & it ſhal haue a yong one, very blacke in the

owne kynde. And if it be put to their noſethrylles, they ſhall fall to the grounde anone as deade, but a litle ſpace after they ſhalbe healed. Alſo if the foreſayd cō
                  fectiō be put in a veſſel of bees y• bees wil neuer fle a wai, but the
                     •
                   ſhall gather together there. And if the bees bee drouned and lyke as they were dead, if they be put in the aforeſayd confection, they ſhal recouer their lyfe after a little tyme, as by y• ſpace of one hou re, for it is proporcioned to y• qua litie loſte. And for a ſure profe, if drowned fl yes bee put in warme aſſhes, thei wil recouer theyr lyfe aftev a litle ſpace.
               ¶ The ſeuenthe herbe is named of y• Chaldeis Algeil, of y• Grekes Drū, of y• Latins Lingua canis,

of Engliſh men, Hondes tounge, put thou this herbe with y• hart of a yonge frogge, & her matrice, and put them where thou wilte, and a fter a littel tyme, all y• dogges of the whole town ſhalbe gathered together: And if yu ſhalte haue the afore named herbe vnder thy formeſt toe, al the dogges ſhall kepe ſilence, & ſhal not haue power to bark. And if thou ſhalt put the aforeſayde thinge in the necke of any dogge, ſo y• he maye not touche it with his mouthe, he ſhalbe turned alwayes round about lyke a turning whele, vntill he fall vnto the grounde as dead, and this hath bene proued in our tyme.
               ¶ The eyghte herbe is named of Chaldeis Manſeſa, of y• Greekes Uentoſin, of the Latines Juſquianus,

of Engliſh men Henbane. Take thou this herbe, & mixe it Cum realgalis and Hermoda talis, and put them in the meate of a madde dogge, & he will dye anone. And if thou ſhalt put the iuyce of it with the aforeſayde thinges in a ſyluer cuppe, it ſhall be broken very ſmal. And if thou ſhalt mixe the aforeſayde thinge, with the bloude of a young hare and kepe it in y• ſkynne of a hare all y• hares will be gathered ther vntill it be remoued.
               ¶ The nynth herbe, is named of the Chaldeis Ango, of y• Greekes Amala, of the Latines Liliū, of the Engliſh men a Lyly. If thou wilt gather this herbe, the ſonne beyng in the ſigne of the Lyon, & wilt myxe it with the iuyce of y• Laurel, or baye tree, & afterward

thou ſhalt put that iuyce vnder y• dunge of cattell, a certayn tyme, it ſhalbe turned vnto wormes, of the whiche, if poulder be made, & be put about the necke of ani mā or in hys clothes, he ſhall neuer ſlepe, nor ſhal not be able to ſlepe vntyll it be put a waye. And yf yu ſhalt put the aforeſaide thing vnder the dunge of cattel, and wilt anoynte any man with the wormes bredinge thereof, he ſhalbe brought anon vnto a fenex. And yf the aforeſayd thynge be put in any veſſel, where there is comes mylke, and be couered with the ſkynne of anye cowe of one collour, all the kye ſhall looſe their mylke.
               ¶ The tenth herbe is called of y• Chaldeis Luperax, of the Grekes A
                     •
                  ifena, of the Latines Uiſcus querci,

of Engliſhe men Myſſell toe. And it groweth in trees, beynge holed through. This herbe with a certaī other herbe, which is named Martegon, that is Silphion or Laſerpitiū, as it is written in the Almaynes language, it openeth all lockes. And if the aforeſayde thinges, being put together, be put in the mouthe of anye man, yf he thynke of anye thyng, yf it ſhoulde happen, it is ſet on hys harte, yf not, it lepeth backe from his hart. If the afore ſayd thyng be hāged vp to a tree with ye wyng of a ſwallow, there the brydes ſhalbe gathered together wrihin the ſpace of fyue myles. And this laſte was proued in my tyme.
               ¶ The eleuenth herbe is named of the Chaldeis Iſiphilon, of the

Grekes Orgelon, of the Latines Centaurea, of Engliſh men Centory, which ſayth that ths herbe hath a marualous vertue, for yf it be ioyned with the bloude of a female lapwyng, or black plouer and be put with oyle in a lampe, all they that compaſſe it aboute, ſhal beleue them ſelfes to be witches, ſo that one ſhal beleue of an other, that his head is in heauen and his fete in the earth. And yf the aforefayd thing be put in the fyre whā the ſtarres ſhyne it ſhall appeare, y• the ſtarres runne one agaynſt an other, and fight. And if the aforeſayde playſter be put to the noſethrilles of any mā, he ſhall flee away ſharpely, through feare that he ſhall haue, & thys hath ben proude▪
               
               ¶ The twelft herbe is named of

the Chaldeis Colorio, or Coloricon, of the Grekes Clamor, of the Latines commonlye Saluia, of Englyſh mē Sauge. Thys herbe beyng putrified vnder dunge of cattell, in a glaſyn veſſell, bryngeth forthe a certayne worme or byrd, hauyng a tayle after the faſſhion of the byrde, called a blacke macke or owſyll, wt whoſe bloud, yf any man be touched in ye breſt, he ſhall loſe hys ſence or felynge the ſpace of .xv. dayes and more. And yf the aforeſaid Serpent be burned, & the aſſhes of it put in ye fyre, anone ſhall there be a rayne bowe, with an horrible thunder. And yf the aforeſayde aſſhes be put in a lampe, and be kyndled, it ſhall appeare yt al the houſe is ful of ſerpentes, & thys hath ben proued of men of late tyme.
               
                  ¶ The .xiii. herbe, is named of ye Chaldeis Olphanas, of ye Grekes Hiliorion, of ye Latines Verbena of the Engliſh mē Veruyn. This herbe (as witches ſay) gathered, the Sunne beyng in the ſigne of the Ram, & put with grayne or corne of pyonie of one yeare olde healeth them y• be ſicke of ye fallyng ſykenes. And if it be put in a fatte ground, after .viii. wekes wormes ſhalbe engendred, which yf they ſhall touche any man, he ſhall dye anone. And if the aforeſayd thing be put in a doue houſe or a culuer houſe, al the doues or culuers ſhalbe gathered together there. And if the poulder of them be put in ye ſunne, it ſhal appeare that the ſunne is blue. If ye poulder be put in a place where men dwell or lye betwen two louers,

anone there is made ſtryfe or malyce betwene them.
               ¶ The .xiiii. herbe is named of ye Chaldeis Celayos, of ye Greekes Caſini. of ye Latines Meliſopholos, of Engliſh men Smalage: of the which herbe Macer floridus maketh mention. This herbe gathered grene, and taſten with the iuyce of the Cypreſſe tree of one yeare, put in gruell, maketh the gruell to appere full of wormes, and maketh ye bearer to be gētle & gratious, & to vanquiſh his aduerſaries. And yf the aforeſayde herbe be boūden to an oxes neck, he wil folow the whether ſoeuer thou wilte goo.
               ¶ The .xv. herbe is named of the Chaldeis Gleriſa, of the Grekes Iſaphinus, of ye Latines Roſa, of Engliſh mē a Roſe. And it is an

herbe, whoſe floure is verye well knowell. Take the grain or corne of it, & the corne of muſterd ſeede and the foote of a Weſel, hanged vp theſe in a tree, and it will not beare fruyte after. And yf the aforeſayde thinge be put aboute a nette, fyſſhes will gather together there. And if Magaris ſhall be dead & be put in the aforeſayd commixtion halfe a daye, it ſhall recouer the lyfe, althoughe it be not forth with yet gotten.
               And yf the aforeſayde poulder be put in a lampe▪ and after be kind led, all men ſhall appeare blacke as the deuell. And yf y• aforeſayd poulder be myxed with oyle of y• Olyue tree, & with quycke brymſtone, & the houſe ano
                     •
                  nted with it, the Sunne ſhyning, it ſhal appeare all inflamed.
               
                  ¶ The .xvi. herbe is called of the Chaldeis Carturlin, of the Grekes Pentaphyllon, of the Latynes Serpentina, in Engliſh ſnakes graſſe. Thys herbe is well ynough knowen with vs. Thys herbe put in the grounde, wyth the leafe of the thre leafed graſſe engendreth read & grene ſerpentes, of which if poulder be made, and put in a burnynge lampe, there ſhall appeare aboundaūce of ſerpentes. And if it be put vnder the head of ani man, frō thēce forth he ſhall not dreame of hym ſelfe.
               
                  ¶ The maner of work
                        •
                     g all theſe aforenamed thinges, that y• effect may be good in their planets is, in their houres, and dayes.
                  
                     THere be .vii. hearbes, y• haue great vertues, after y• mynd of Alexander the Emperour, and they had theſe vertues of the influence of the planets. And therfore, euerye one of theym taketh theyr vertue from the hygher naturall powers.
                  ¶ The firſt is the herbe of y• planet Saturnus, whiche is called Affodillus, Affodilly, the iuyce of it is good agaynſt the payne of y• reynes, and legges: let them that ſuffer payne of the bladder, eat it the roote of it beinge a litle boyled. And if mē poſſeſſed with euel ſpirites, or madde men beare it, in a cleane napkyn, they be delyuered from their diſeaſe. And it ſuffere th not a deuel in y• houſe. And if chyldrē that breede theyr teeth, beare it aboute them, they

ſhall breede them without pain. And it is good that a man beare with hym a roote of it in y• night for he ſhall not feare, nor be hurt of other.
                  ¶ The ſeconde is y• herbe of the Sunne, whiche is called Poligonia, or Coraligiola. Thys herbe taketh the name of the Sanne: for it engēdreth greatly, & ſo this herbe worketh many wayes.
                  Other hath called this herbe Alchone, which is the houſe of the Sunne. Thys herbe healeth the paſſyons, and griefe of the harte and the ſto macke.
                  He that toucheth thys hearbe, hathe a vertue of hys ſygne, or Planete. If any man drinke the iuyce of it, it maketh hym to do often, the acte of generation.

And if any mā beare ye rote of it, it healeth the griefe of the eyes. And yf he beare it with him before he haue anye grief, there ſhall come to him no grief of his eyes. It helpeth alſo theym yt be vexed with the phreneſy, yf they beare it with them in theyr breſt.
                  It helpeth alſo theym▪ that are diſeaſed with an impoſtume in ye lunges, & maketh them to haue a good breath, and it auaileth alſo too the flyxe of melancholyous bloude.
                  ¶ The thyrde is the herbe of the Moone, which is called Chynoſtates. The iuyce of it purgeth the paines of the ſtomake, & bre
                        ••
                      plates, the vertue of it declareth that it is the herbe of ye Moone. The floure of this herbe purgeth great ſplenes, & healeath them, becauſe this herbe encreaſeth &

decreaſeth as the Moone. It is good agaynſt the ſickenes of the eyes, & maketh a ſharp ſight. And it is good agaynſt the bloud of ye eyes. If thou put the roote of it brayed vpon the eye, it will make thy eye merualous clere, becauſe the light of the eyes Propinquatum myſtion, is of the ſubſtance of the Moone. It is alſo good to them that haue an euell ſtomake or whiche can not diſgeſte their meat, by drinkyng the iuyce of it moreouer it is good to them that haue the ſwyne pockes.
                  ¶ The fourthe hearbe is called Arnogloſſa, plantayne. The rote of this herbe is merualous good agaynſt the payne of the headde, becauſe the ſigne of the Ramme is ſuppoſed to be the houſe of the planete Mars, which is the head of the whole worlde. It is good

alſo agaynſte euell cuſtomes of mans ſtones, and rotten & fylthy byles, becauſe his houſe is yt ſign Scorpio, becauſe a part of it holdeth Sparma, that is the ſeede, which cometh againſt the ſtones wherof all lyuyng thinges be ingendred, and fourmed. Alſo the iuyce of it is good too them that be ſycke of ye pery
                        •
                     ous flyxe, with excoriation or rayſyng of the bowels, continuall tourmentes, & ſome bloud yſſuyng forth. And it purgeth them that drinke it, frō the ſyckeneſſes of y• flyx of bloud, or emoraudes, & of the diſeaſe of the ſtomacke.
                  ¶ The fyft is the herbe of the planete mercurius, which is named Pentaphillō, in Engliſh cinquefoyle or the .v. leued herbe▪ of others Pentadactilus, of others

Sepe declinans, of certayn Calipe
                        •
                     olo. The roote of thys herbe brayed & made in a plaſter, hea
                     
                        •
                     eth woūdes & hardenes. Moreouer, it putteth away quickely ye ſwyne pockes, if the iuyce of it be drōken wt water. It healeth alſo the paſſiōs or griefes of the breſt, if the iuyce of it be drōkē. It putteth away alſo y• to the ache. And if the iuyce of it be holden in the mouth, it healeth al ye griefs of ye mouth. And if any mā beare it wt hym, it geueth wark & help. Moreouer if any man will aſke any thing of a king or prīce, it geueth aboūdāce of eloquēce, if he haue it with hym, & he ſhal optayn it yt he ſhal deſire. It is alſo good to haue ye iuyce of it, for the grief of the ſtone, & the ſyckenes whiche letteth a mā that he cā not pyſſe.
                  
                     ¶ The .vi. is the hearbe of ye planet Jupiter, & it is named Acharon, of certayn Juſquianus, Hē
                     bane. The roote of it, put vppon botches, healeth thē, and kepeth the place from an inflamation of bloud. If any man ſhall beare it before the grefe come vpon hym he ſhall neuer haue a botche.
                  The roote of it alſo is profitable agaynſt the goute in the fete whan it is brayed, and put vpon the place that ſuffereth the payn or grief. And it worketh by vertue of thoſe ſignes, whiche haue 
                        •
                     ete, and loke vpon the fete. And if the iuyce of it be dronken with hony, or with wyne & hony ſoddē together, it is profitable againſt the griefes of the lyuer, & all hys paſſiōs, becauſe Jupiter holdeth the lyuer.
                  
                     Lykewyſe▪ it is profitable to thē that woulde do often the acte of generation, and to them yt deſyre to be loued of women, it is good that they beare it with them, for it maketh the bearers pleaſaunt and delectable.
                  ¶ The .vii. is the herbe of y• planet Venus, and is called Piſteriō of ſome Hierobotane, id eſt, Herbo colūbaria & verbena, veruen.
                  ¶ The roote of this hearbe put vpon the necke, healeth ye ſwyne pockes, apoſtumes behynde ye eares, and botches of the neck, and ſuche as can not kepe theyr water,
                  It healeth alſo cuttes, & ſwellīg of the euell, or foundament, procedyng of an inflamation, which groweth in the foundamēt, and the Emauraudes. If the iuyce of

it be dronken with hony & water ſodden, it diſſolueth thoſe things whiche are in lunges or lightes. And it maketh a good breath, for it ſaueth & kepeth the lūges and the lyghtes. It is alſo of greate ſtrength in venerial paſtymes, ye is the acte of generation. If any man put it in hys houſe or vyneyarde, or in the grounde, he ſhall haue abundātly reuenues, or yerely profytes, moreouer the rote of it is good to all them whyche will plante vynyardes or trees. And infantes bearing it, ſhalbe very apte to learne, & louing lernynge, and they ſhalbe glad and ioyous. It is alſo profitable, beyng put in purgations, & it putteth abacke deuels. Yet thys is to be marked, that theſe herbes he gathered fro the .xxiii. daye of

the Moone vntyll the .xxx. daye, beginnyg the gathering of them frome the ſigne Mercurius, by the ſpace of a whole houre, and in gatherynge make mention of the paſſion or griefe, and the name of the thynge, for the whiche thou doeſt gather it, and the ſelfe herbe, notwithſtandinge, lay the herbe vppon wheate, or barleye, and vſe it afterwarde too thy nede.
               
            
            
               ¶ Here beginneth the ſecond boke of the vertues of certayne ſtones.
               BEcauſe I haue ſpokē now before of ye vertues of certayn herbes, now in thys preſent chapter, I will ſpeake of certayn ſtones, their effectes and maruaylous operations.
               
                  
                  Magnes, the lode ſtone.
                  Ophthalmus
                  Onyx.
                  Feripendamus
                  Sylonites.
                  Topazion
                  Medoria, Memphitis, lapis iuxta mēphim vrbem in Egypto.
                  Abaſton
                  Adamas, diamōd.
                  Agathes
                  Alectoria.
                  Eſmundus
                  Amariſtus.
                  Berillus
                  Celonites.
                  Corallus
                  Criſtallus.
                  Elotropia
                  Epiſtrites.
                  Calcedonius
                  Celidonius.
                  Bagates
                  Bena.
                  Iſtmos
                  Tabrices.
                  Chryſolitus
                  Gerattides.
                  Nichomai
                  Quirim.
                  Radianus
                  Luperius.
                  Vnces
                  Lazuli.
                  Smaragdus
                  Iris
                  Gallaſia
                  Galerites.
                  Draconites
                  Echites.
                  
                     Tepriſtites
                  Hyaciuthus.
                  Orithes
                  Saphyrus.
                  Saunus.
               
               
                  ☞ If thou wilt knowe whyther thy wyfe is chaſte, or no.
                  
                     ❧ Take the ſtone, which is called Magnes in Engliſh, the lode ſtone, it is of ſadde bl
                        •
                     w coloure, and it is foūde in the ſea of Inde ſometime in partes of Almaine, in the prouince, which is called Eaſt Fraunce. Laye thys ſtone vnder the head of a wyfe, & yf ſhe be chaſt, ſhe wil embrace her huſbande, if ſhe be not chaſte, ſhe wil fall anone forth of the bedde.
                  Moreouer, yf thys ſtone be put brayed, and ſcattered vpon coles, in foure corners of the houſe, they that be ſleapynge, ſhall flee the houſe, and leaue all.
                  If thou wilt be made inuiſible.
                  
                     ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Ophethalmius, and wrappe it in the leafe of the Laurell, or Baye tree, & it is called Lapis obtelmicus, whoſe colour is not named, 
                        •
                     or it is of many colours, and it is of ſuch vertu, that it blindeth the ſightes of them that ſtand about. Conſtantinus carying this in hys hande, was made inuiſyble by it.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt prouoke ſorowe, feare, terrible fantaſyes, & debate.
                  Take the ſtone, which is called Onyz, which is of black coloure. And the kynd is beſt which is ful of whyte vaynes. And it cōmeth from Inde, vnto Araby, and if it be hanged vpon the necke, or fynger, it ſtyrreth vp anone ſorowe or heauyneſſe in a man, and terroures,

and alſo debate, and this hath bene proued by men of late tyme.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt burne any mans handes without fyre.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Fet
                        •
                     pēdamus, which is of yelow colour, which if it be hanged vpō the necke of anye man, it healeth Areticū, and alſo if this ſtone be greped ſtraytly, it burneth ye hād anone, & therfore it muſt be touched lightly, and gently.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt kyndle the mynd of any man too ioyes, and make hys wytte ſharpe.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, whiche is called Sylonites, & it groweth in y• boſome of a ſnayle of Inde, called Corcuſes, and there is of dyuers kyndes of it, of whyte, read,

and purple colour. Other ſaye, that it is grene, and found in the partes of Parſia. And alſo olde Philoſophers ſaye, if it be taſted, it geueth knowledge of certayne thinges to come. If it be put vnder the tounge, ſpecially in ye firſt mone, it hath a vertue onely for an houre. Therfore beyng in the x. moone, it hath thys vertue in the fyrſt, or tēth houre. But there is mouyng of the order, becauſe, whan it is vnder the tung, if our thought be of any buſynes, whether it oughte too be or no, if it oughte to be, it is fixed ſtedfaſtlye to the hart, ſo that it may not be plucked awaye, if not, the harte leapeth abacke from it. Alſo Philoſophers haue ſayd, that it healeth Ptificos, and weake men.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ If thou wilt that ſeething water come furth anone, after thou haſt put in thy hand.
                  
                     ❧ Take the ſtone, which is called Topazion, fro the Ile Topaſis, or becauſe it ſheſheth a ſimilitude of golde. And there be twoo kyndes of it: one is vtterlye lyke golde, and thys is more precious The other kynde is of the colour of ſaffron, of bryghter colour thā golde is, and thys is more profitable. It hath ben proued in oure time, that if it be put in ſeething water▪ it maketh it to rūne ouer but if thou put thy▪ hande in it, the water is drawen out anone, and one of our brethren did thys at Paryſe. It is good alſo agaynſte Emothoicam et ſtimaticam, or lunatyke, paſſion or griefe.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ If thou wilt pluck of ye ſkynne of thyne, or an other mans hande.
                  Take the ſtone, whiche is called Medora, of the region Media in the which the people dwelling are called Medi. And there bee two kyndes of it, blacke & grene. It is ſayde of olde Philoſophers and alſo of Phyloſophers, beyng in thys tyme, if the blacke be broken, and reſolued in hote water, if any man wathe hys handes in that water, the ſkynne of his hā
                     des ſhalbe plucked of anone.
                  Philoſophers ſay alſo, that it is good agaynſte the goute, and blyndnes of the eyes▪ and it nouriſheth hurte and weake eyes.
                  ☞ If thou wilte that a man ſuffer no payne, nor be tourmented.
                  
                     Take the ſtone, whiche is called Memphitis, of ye cytye which is called Memphis, & it is a ſtone of ſuche vertue, as Aaron & Hermes ſaye: if it be broken, and mixed with water, and geuen to him to drynke, whiche ſhould be burned, or ſuffer any tormētes, that drinke induceth ſoo greate vnableneſſe too fele, that he that ſuffereth, feeleth neyther payn nor tormentynge.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt make a fyre continually vnable to be quē
                     ſhed or put out.
                  Take the ſtone, whiche is called Abaſton, & it is of the colour of yron; and there is founde very muche of it in Arabia. If that ſtoone be kyndeled or inflamed, it maye neuer bee putte oute,

or quenched, becauſe it hath the nature of the fyrſt fethers of the Salamandre, by reaſon of moyſtye fatneſſe, which nouriſſheth y• fyre, kyndled in it.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilte ouercome thy enemyes.
                  
                     ❧ Take the ſtone, whiche is called Adamas, in Engliſh ſpeache, a Diamonde, and it is of ſhyning colour, & very harde, in ſo muche that it can not be broken, but by the bloud of a gote, & it groweth in Arabia, or in Cypres. And if it be bounden to the lefte ſide, it is good agaynſt enemies, madnes, wyld beaſtes, venomouſe beaſtes and cruell men, and agaynſt chydyng & brawlynge▪ & agaynſt venyme, and inuaſton of fantaſyes, and ſome call it Diamas.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ If thou wilt eſchew all peri
                        ••
                      and all terrible thinges, & haue a ſtronge harte.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Agathes, & it is blacke, and hath whyte vaynes. There is another of the ſame kynde, lyke to whyte colour. And the thyrde groweth in a certayn Ile, hauynge blacke vaynes, & that maketh too ouercome peryls, & geue ſtrength to y• hart. & maketh a man mightye, pleaſaunte, delectable, & helpeth agaynſt aduerſities.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou deſire to optayne any thing from any man.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Alectoria, & it is a ſtone of a cock, & it is whyte as the Chriſtal, and it is drawen out of the cockes gyſar, or mawe, after that he hathe ben gelded more th ā four yeares

and it is of y• greatnes of a beane It maketh the bealy pleaſaunte and ſtedfaſte, and put vnder the tunge, it quencheth thyrſte. And thys laſte hathe bene proued in oure tyme, and I perceyued it quickely.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt ouercome beaſtes and interprete, or expounde all dreames and prophe cye of thynges to come.
                  Take the ſtone, whiche is called Eſmundus or Aſmadus, it is of diuers colours, it putteth out all poyſon, and maketh a man to ouercome hys aduerſaries, & geueth Propheſieng, and the interpretation of all dreames, & maketh a man to vnderſtande darke queſtions, harde to be vnderſtād or aſſoyled.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ If thou wilt haue good vnder ſtanding of thynges that may be felte, and that thou maye not be made dronked.
                  Take the ſtone, whithe is called Amariſtus, and it is of purple colour, and the beſte is founde in Inde, and it is good agaynſt drū
                     kennes, and geueth good vnderſtandynge in thynges that maye be vnderſtande.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt ouercom thy enemyes, and ſlee debate.
                  Take the ſtone, whiche is called Berillus, it is of pale coloure and may be ſene through as water, bear it about with thee, and thou ſhalt ouercome all debate, & ſhalte dryue a waye thy enemies and it maketh thy enemye meke. It cauſeth a manne too be well manuered, as Aaron ſayethe, it

geueth alſo good vnderſtādinge.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt foreiudge, or coniecture of thynges to come.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, whiche is called Celonites, it is of purple, & diuerſe other colours, & it is foūde in the head of the ſnayle. If any man will beare thys ſtone vnder hys tunge, he ſhal foreiudge, and propheci of thinges to come. But notwithſtanding, it hath no vertue, but ſhynynge, Prima cūfuerit accenſa, et creſcens monoytes in vltima deſcendente, ſoo meaneth Aaron, in the boke of vertues of herbes, and ſtones.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt pacifie tempeſtes and go ouer fluddes.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Corallus, Corall, & ſome be read and ſome whyte▪ And it hath ben

proueth that it ſtemmeth anone bloude, and putteth away the foliſhnes of hym that beareth it, & geueth wyſedom. And this hath ben proued of certayn mē in our tyme. And it is good agaynſt tempeſtes, and perils of fluddes.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt kendle fyre.
                  ¶ Take the Chriſtal ſtone, & put it nygh vnder the cirkle of ye Sū
                     ne, that is to ſai, againſt ye ſunne and put it nygh any thing yt may be burned, & incontinētly, ye heat of the Sunne ſhyning, will ſet it a fyre. And if it be dronke with hony, it encreſeth mylke.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt that ye Sunne appeare of bloudy colour.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, whiche is called Elitropia. It is grene like to the precious ſtone called the Emeraude. And it is ſprynkled wyth

bloudy droppes. The necromancers call it Gemma Babylonica, the precious ſtone of Babylō, by the propre name. But if it be anoynted with the iuyce of an her be of the ſame name, and be put in a veſſelful of water, it maketh the Sunne to ſeme of bloudy colour: as if the Eclypſe were ſene. The cauſ of this is, for it maketh al the water to bubble vp vnto a little cloude, which makyng the ayre thycke: letteth the Sūne to be ſene, but as it were read, in a thicke color, a little after: ye cloud goeth away, by droppyng doune lyke dew, as it were by droppes of rayne. Thys alſo borne about maketh a mā of good fame, hole: and of longe lyfe.
                  It is ſayd of old Phyloſophers: that a man an ointed wt an herbe

of thys name, as we haue ſayde before: excelleth with vertue, & Elitropia is found oftētymes in Cypres and Inde.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt make ſething water too be colde, whiche ſtandeth vpon the fyre.
                  Take the ſtone, whych is called Epibretes, which put in water agaynſt the eye of the Sūne, putteth forth fyery beames of ye Sūne. And it is ſayd of olde, and new Philoſophers, if it be put in ſeethyng water, the bublyng vp, or ſeethyng will ſone ceaſe, and a litle after, it will waxe colde▪ and it is a ſhynynge and ruddye ſtoone.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt eſchewe illuſions and fantaſies & ouercome all cauſes or matters.
                  
                     ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Calcedonius, & it is pale, brown of coloure, & ſomewhat darke, yf thys be perced, & hanged about ye necke, with ye ſtone which is called Sinerip, it is good againſt al fantaſtical illuſions, & it maketh to ouercome all cauſes, or matters in ſuyte, & kepeth thy bodye agaynſt thy aduerſaries.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt be acceptable, and pleaſaunte.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Celidonius, & of it there is ſome blacke, & ſome ſome what read, & it is drawen out of the bealye of ſwallowes. If that whiche is ſomewhat read, be wrapped in a lynnen cloth, or in a calues ſkyn, and borne vnder ye left arme hole it is good agaynſt madneſſe, and olde ſyckeneſſes & diſeaſes, & the

ſleping, or forgetfull ſicknes, and Contra epidimiam, whiche is a ſcabbe that runneth thorough y• hole bodye.
                  Euax ſayth, that thys ſtone maketh a man eloquent, acceptable and pleaſaunt. The blacke ſtone is good agaynſt wylde beaſtes, & wrathe, & bringeth the buſynes begonne to an ende. And if it be wrapped in the leaues of Celydō, it is ſaid that it maketh the ſight dull. And they ſhould be drawen out in the moneth of Auguſt, and twoo ſtones are founde oftentymes in one ſwallowe.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilte be victorious agaynſt thy aduerſaries.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Bagates, & it is of diuerſe colors The auncient phyloſophers ſay that it hathe bene proued in the

prince Alcides, which how longe he dyd beare it, he had alwayes victory: and it is a ſtoone of dyuerſe coloures, lyke the ſkynne of a kydde.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt know before any thyng to come.
                  Take the ſtone, which is called Bena, which is lyke a beaſtes to the, and put it vnder thy tung. And as Aaron and the old Phyloſophers ſayth, how longe thou wilt holde it ſo alwayes coniecturing, thou ſhalt prophecy thinges to come, and thou ſhalte not erre in any wyſe for iudgyng.
                  ¶ If thou wilt that thy garmēte be vnable to be burned.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Hiſtmos, which as Iſidorus ſayeth, is lyke to ſaffron. And it is founde in a parte of Spayne.

Thys ſtone bloweth like a payre of bellowes, by reaſon of y• wyndineſſe in it, it is found nygh the Gades of Hercules, that is twoo Iles, by the further partes of Spayn beyond Garnade, and yf thys ſtone be ſet in a garment, it can be burned in no wyſe, but it ſhyneth lyke fyre.
                  And ſome men ſay: that y• whyte Carbunkle ſtone, is thys kynde.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt haue fauour and honour.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, whiche is called Tabrices, and it is lyke too the Chryſtall ſtoone. The aunciente Phyloſophers, as Euax, and Aaron, ſaye of it, that it geueth eloquence, fauoure and honoure, and it is ſayde moreouer, that it healeth euery dropſye.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ If thou wilt dryue away fantaſies and foliſhnes.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Chryſolitus, and it is of the ſame vertue with Attemicus, as Aarō & Euax ſay, in the boke of the natures of herbes, & ſtones: this ſtone ſet in golde, & borne, dryueth away foliſhnes, & expelleth fantaſies. It is affyrmed to geue wyſedome, and it is good againſt feare.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt iudge the opynions and thoughtes of others.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Geratides, & it is of black colour let one holde it in his mouthe, it maketh hym that beareth it mery and in ſauour, & well eſtemed with all men.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt haue victory and amitie.
                  
                     ¶ Take the ſtone, whiche is called Nichomai, & it is theſame yt is called Alabaſter, and it is of a kynde of Marble, & it is whyte, and ſhynynge. And oyntmentes are made of it to the buryenge of the dead.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt that a man ſleapyng tel to y• what he hath done.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, whiche is called Duirim, this ſtone is founde in the neſte of the lap wynke or blacke plouer.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou woulde optayne anye thinge of any man.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Radianus, & it is blacke, ſhyning through, which whan the heade of a Cocke is geuen to Emotes, or Pyſmeres to eate, it is founde a longe tyme after, in the head of the Cocke. And theſame ſtone is

alſo called Conatides.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou woulde make, that nether dogges, nor hunters maye hurt any beaſt, which they hūte.
                  
                     ❧ Put before them the ſtoone, which is called Luperius, and it will runne ſoone to the ſtoone. Thys ſtone is found in Lybia, & all beaſtes runne to it, as to their defender. It letteth that neyther dogges, nor hunters maye hurt them.
               
               
                  ☞ If thou wilt burne any mās hande without fyre.
                  
                     ❧ Take the ſtone, which is called Unces, which we called before Principē apti, whiche is fyre, & it is as fyre. If any mā ſtrayn hard thys ſtone, it burneth ſoone hys hande, lyke as it ware burned wt a materiall fyre, whiche is a meruaylous thynge.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ If thou wilt cure melancoly, or a feuer quartaine, in any mā.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Lapis lazuli. It is like to the colour of the heauen, and there is within it little bodyes of golde. And it is ſure and proued, that it cureth melācholye, and y• feuer quartayne.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wolde make any m
                        ••
                      witte ſharpe and quicke, and augmente hys ryches, and alſo prophecy thynges to come.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Smaragdus, in Engliſh ſp
                        •
                     ache an Emeraude. And 
                        ••••
                     s very cleare, ſhynynge throughe and playne, but it that is yerowe is better.
                  It is taken out of the neſtes of grypes or gryſtons, it doth bothe comforte and ſaue, and beynge

borne, it maketh a man to vnderſtande well, and geueth to hym a good memory, augmēteth the ryches of hym that beareth it, & yf any man ſhall holde it vnder hys tung, he ſhall prophecy anone.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt make a rayne bowe to appeare.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Iris, & it is whyte lyke the Criſtall, four ſquare or hauinge hornes. If thys ſtone be put in the beame of the Sunne, by turning backe it maketh a rayne bowe ſoone to appere in the walle.
               
               
                  ¶ If y• wilt make a ſtone, whych maye neuer be made hote.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone which is called Gallaſia it hath ye figure of hayl▪ & the colour and hardneſſe of the Dyamonde, If this ſtone be put in a very great fyre, it will neuer

be hote▪ And the cauſe is, for it hath the holes ſo ſtrat together, that the heate may not enter in the body of the ſtone. Alſo Aaron & Euax ſay, that this ſtone borne mitigateth, wrathe, lecherye and other hote paſſions.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt knowe whether thy wyfe lyeth with anye other marryed man, or no.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone called Galeritis whiche is the ſame that is called Catabres, & it is foūde in Lybia & Brytannia, the moſt noble yle of the worlde, wherin is conteyned both countreis, Englande & Scotland. It is of double colour blacke, & of the colour of Saffrō, & it is founde gray coloured, turnynge to paleneſſe. It healeth y• dropſey, & it byndeth the bealyes that haue a laſke. And Auicēna

ſayth, that if thys ſtone be brokē and waſſhed, or be geuē to a woman to be waſſhed, if ſhe be not a vyrgyn, ſhe wil pyſſe ſoone, if ſhe be a birgyn, ſhe will not pyſſe.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilte ouercome thy enemyes.
                  
                     ❧ Take the ſtone, which is called 
                        •
                     raconites, frō the Dragons head, and yf the ſtone be drawen out from hym alyue, it is good agaynſte all poyſons, and he that beareth it in hys lefte arme, ſhal ouercome all hys enemyes.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt ingēder loue betwene any two.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, whiche is called Echites, & it is called of ſome Aquileus, becauſe the Egles put theſe in their neſtes. It is of purple color, and it is found nygh ye bankes of the Ocean ſea, & ſometyme

in Perſia, and it cōteyneth alwayes an other ſtoone in it, whiche ſoundeth in it, whan it is named. It is ſayde of aunciēt Philoſophers, that thys ſtoone hāged vp in the left ſhoulder, getteth loue betwene the huſbande and hys wyfe. It is profitable to women great with chylde, it letteth vntymely byrthe, it mitigateth the peryll of makyng a feard & it is ſayd to be good to thē that hath the fallyng ſyckenes. And as the mē of Chaldea ſaye, if poyſon be in thy meat
                        •
                     , if the aforeſayd ſtone be put in, it letteth y• that meate maye be ſwallowed doune. And if it be taken out, the meat is ſone ſwallowed doune, & I did ſee that thys laſt was examyned ſenſiblye of one of oure brethren.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ If thou wilt make a mā ſure.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone which is called Tepiſtites. It is founde in ye ſea it is ſhyninge & ruddy. And it is ſayde in the boke of Alchorath, yt if it be borne before the harte, it maketh a man ſure, & refraineth & mitigateth all ſeditions, & diſcordes. It is ſayd alſo, that it mitigateth the flyes, with lōg hynder legges, which bourneth corn with touching of it, & deuoureth ye reſidew, ſoules, cloudes, hayle, and ſuch as haue power of ye fruites of the earth. And it hath ben proued of philophers of lat time and of certayn of oure brethren, that it being put againſt ye beam of the ſunne putteth furth fiery beames. Alſo yf this ſtone be put in ſeething water, the ſeethinge will ſoone ceaſe, and the water

wilbe colde a litle after.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt that ſtraungers walke ſure and ſafe.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Hyacinthus, in Engliſh a Jacinct, it is of many colours. The grene is beſt, & it hath reade vaynes, & ſhould be ſet in ſyluer, and it is ſaid in certain lectures, that ther is two kyndes of it, of ye water, & of ye Saphyre. The Jacinct of ye water, is yelow, whyte The iacinct of ye Saphyrs, is very ſhyning yelowe, hauing no watriſhneſſe, & this is better, & it is written of thys, in lecturs of philoſophers, that it beyng borne on the fynger, or necke, maketh ſtraungers ſure, & acceptable, to theyr gheſtes. And it prouoketh ſleape, for the coldneſſe of it, & y• Jacinct of Saphyre hath properly thys.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ If thou wilt be ſaued from diuers chaūces and peſtilēt bittes.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called Orithes, of whiche there be .iii. kindes, one black, an other grene and the thyrde, of the which, one parte is roughe, and the other playn, and the colour of it is like the colour of plate of yron, but y• grene hath whyte ſpottes. Thys ſtone borne, preſerueth from dyuerſe chaunces, and perilles of death.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt make peace.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, which is called a Saphyre, whiche commeth frō the Eaſte vnto Inde, & it that is of yelowe coloure is beſt, whyche is not verye brighte, it maketh peace and concorde, it maketh ye myndepure and deuote toward God, it ſtrengtheneth the mynde

in good thynges, & maketh a mā to cole from inwarde heate.
               
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt cure a vyrgyn.
                  ¶ Take the ſtone, whiche is called Saunus, frō the Ile Sauna It doth make firme or cōſolidate the mynd of the bearer of it. And beynge bounde to the hande of a woman, trauayling with chydel it letteth the byrth, and kepeth it in bealye. Therefore it is forbidden in ſuche a buſynes, that this ſtone touche a woman.
               
               
                  ¶ Thou ſhalte fynde many other lyke thynges: in the boke of Mines, of Aaron and Euar.
                  
                     ❧ The manner of doynge theſe thinges, conſiſteth in this, that ye bearer for a good effecte, be clears from all pollution, or defylynge of the bodye.
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ Explicit.
                  ISidorus ſemeth to ſaye, ye Licania hath in ye heade 
                        〈◊〉
                      a ſtone of moſt noble vertue, & is of whyte colour, whych brayed, geuen to them that haue the ſtrangulion, to drinke, it louſeth perfectly the vryne▪ & ſhortly healeth, it putteth awai the feuer quartayne. Alſo it taketh awaye a whyte ſpot or perle in the eye. Alſo yf a woman with chylde, beare it on her ſhe ſhall not looſe her byrth. Alſo the fleſhe of them ſodden, and eaten, is good to thē that haue an exulceratiō, or ſore in the lunges, with a conſumption of all the body, and ſpitting of bloude.
                  Alſo the poulder of the beaſtes, with the rynde, or barke of trees

with ſome greynes of pepper, is profitable againſt the Emerodes and growinge out of fleſh about the buttockes. Lykewyſe they beynge rawe, brayed with ryndes or barkes of trees, breake rype impoſtumes.
               
            
            
               ¶ The thyrde boke of Albertus Magnus, of the vertues of certayn beaſtes.
               
                  FOraſmuche as it hath ben ſpoken in the boke before, of certayne effectes, cauſed by the vertue of certayne ſtones, and of their maruelous vertue or operation: nowe we will ſpeake in thys Chapter of certayne effectes, cauſed of certayn beaſtes.
                  
                     
                     Aquila
                     An Eagle
                     Caſſo
                      
                     Bubo
                     A ſhricke owle
                     Hircus
                     A gote bucke
                     Camelus
                     A camell
                     Lepus
                     An hare
                     Expetiolus
                      
                     Leo
                     A lyon
                     Foca
                     A purpays
                     Anguilla
                     An eele
                     Muſtela
                     A weſel
                     Upupa
                     A lapwīg, or black plouer
                     Pellicanus
                     A pellicane
                     Cornus
                     A crowe
                     Miluus
                     A kyte or gleyde.
                     Turtur
                     A turtell
                     Talpa
                     A molle
                     Merula
                     A blacke macke, or owſel
                  
                  ¶ Aquila, the Eagle is a byrde knowen ynough of men of Chaldea, it is called Vorax, and of the

Grekes Rimbicus. Aarō & Euax ſaye, that it hathe a meruaylous nature or vertu. For if the brain of it be turned into poulder, & be myxed with the iuyce of the hem locke, they that eat of it, ſhal take themſelfes by the hear, and they ſhall not leaue the holde, as long as they beare, that they haue receyued. The cauſe of thys effecte is, for that brayne is verye colde, in ſo muche that it engendreth a fantaſticall vertue, ſhuttinge the powers by ſmoke.
                  ☞ Caſſo is a beaſte knowen well ynoughe, it is called Rapa, of the Chaldeis, and of the Grekes Orgalo. Aaron ſayeth of this. If the feete of it be borne of any man, he ſhall neuer be vexed, but he ſhall deſyre alwayes

to go for the. Alſo he that beareth the feete of it, ſhal alwayes ouercome, and ſhalbe feared of hys enemyes. And he ſayde that hys ryght eye, wrapped in a wolues ſkynne, maketh a man pleaſaūt, acceptable and gentle. And yf meat be made of the aforeſayde thinges, or poulder geuen to any man in meat, the geuer ſhalbe greatly loued of hym that receyueth it. Thys laſt was proued in oure tyme.
                  ¶ Bubo, a ſhricke owle, is a byrd well ynough knowen, whiche is called Magis of the Chaldeis, & Hyſopus of the Greekes. There be meruaylous vertues of thys fowle, for yf the hart and righte foote of it, be putte vpon a man ſleapyng, he ſhall ſay anone to y• whatſoeuer thou ſhalte aſke of

hym. And thys hath ben proued a late tyme of our brethren. And yf any man put thys vnder hys arme hole, no dogge will barke at hym, but kepe ſilence. And yf theſe thinges aforeſayde, ioyned together with a wynge of it, he hanged vp to a tree, byrdes wyll gather together to that tree.
                  ¶ Hircus, ye gote bucke is a beaſt well ynough knowne, it is called of the Chaldeis Erbichi, of y• Ere kes Maſſai. If the bloud of it be taken warme with vineger, and the iuyce of fenyll, & ſodden together with a glaſſe, it maketh the glaſſe ſoft as dowe, & it maye be caſte agaynſt a walle, and not be broken. And if the aforeſayd confection be put in a veſſell, & the face of any man be anoynted wt it, meruailous & horrible things

ſhall appere, and it ſhall ſeme to 
                        〈◊〉
                      that he muſt dye. And if the aforeſayde thing be put in y• fyre and there be there any man that hath the fallinge ſycknes, by put tyng to the lode ſtone, he falleth anone to the grounde as dead, & if the water of eeles bee geuen to hym to drynke, he ſhalbe cured anone.
                  ¶ Camelus, the Camel is a beaſt knowen well ynough. It is called of the Chaldeis Ciboi, of the Grekes Iphim. If the bloude of it be put into the ſkyn of y• beaſt called Stellio, & then ſet on any mās head, which is lyke a lyſard, hauing on his backe ſpottes like ſtetres, it ſhall ſeme that he is a gyant, & that hys head is in heauen. And thys is ſayd in the boke of Alchorath, of Mercury, And yf

a lantern anointed with y• bloud of it, be lyghtenned, it ſhall 
                        〈◊〉
                      that all men ſtandynge aboute haue Camelles headdes, ſo that there be no outward light of an other candeil.
                  ¶ Lepus, the hare is a beaſt wel ynough knowen, of the Chaldeis it is called Ueterellū, and of the Grekes Onolloſa, the vertue of it is ſhewed to be merualous, for Euax and Aaron ſayd that y•, fete of it ioyned with a ſtone or with the head of a blacke owſell, moueth a man to hardines, ſo that he feare not death.
                  And if it be bounden to hys lefte arme, he may go whether he wil and he ſhall returne ſaufe withoute peryll. And yf it be geuen to a dogge to eate, with the hart of a Meſell, fro thens, forth

he ſhall not crye oute, althoughe he ſhould be kylled.
                  ¶ Experiolus, is a beaſte welly. nough knowen, yf the cloue of it be burned & conſolidated, & be gyuen in meat to any horſe, he will not eate for y• ſpace of thre dayes. And yf the aforeſayde thinge be put with a littell turpentyme it ſhalbe cleare, & ſecondly it ſhalbe mayde as a cloude & bloud, and if it be caſten a litle in water, an horrible thunder ſhalbe made.
                  ¶ Leo, a Lyon is a beaſte well ynough knowen, of the Chaldeis called Balamus, of the Greekes Beruth. If thonges of lether be made of the ſkynne of hym, & a man gyrded with theym, he ſhall not feare hys enemies. And yf any man will eate of the fleſh of hym, & will drynke of hys water

for thre dayes, he ſhall be cured from the feuer quartaine. And if any parte of hys eyes be put vnder a mans arme hole & borne, al beaſtes ſhall flee away, bowynge doune their hade vnto their low belyes.
                  ¶ Foca, purpays is a fyſh well ynough knowen, of the Chaldeis it is called Daulaubur, of y• greciās Labor, this fyſh is of diuers nature. If the tung of it be takē, and be put with a litle of y• harte of it in water, for a ſuerty fyſhes will gather there together. And yf thou wilte beare it vnder thy arme hole, no man ſhalbe able to haue victorye againſte the, thou ſhalt haue a gentle & pleaſaunte iudge.
                  ¶ Auguilla, an eele, it is a fyſſhe ſufficiently knowē. The vertues

of it are meruaylous, as Euar & Aaron ſaye, for if it dye for fault of water, the harte remaynynge hole, and ſtrong vyneger to takē and it be myxed to the bloude of the fowle, called in Latine Uultur, which ſome call in Engliſh a Grype, and ſome a rauyn, and be put vnder dūge in any place, thei ſhall all how many ſoeuer they be, recouer their lyfe, as they had before. And if the worme of thys eele be drawen out, and put in y• aforeſayd confection, the ſpace of one moneth, the worme ſhalbe chaunged into a very blacke eele of whiche, if any man ſhall eate, he ſhall dye.
                  ¶ Muſtela, the Weſell is a beaſt ſufficiently knowen. If the hart of thys beaſt be eatē yet quaking it meketh a man to know thinges

to come, and yf anye dogge eate of the harte wyth the eyes and tūge of it, he ſhall ſoone loſe hys voyce.
                  ¶ Upupa, y• Lapwynke or blacke plouer, is a byrd ſufficiently knowen, of the Chaldeis it is called Boridicta, of the Grekes I ſon, y• eyes of it born, make a mā groſſe or great. And if the eyes of it be borne before a mās breaſt, all his enemies ſhalbe pacefied. And yf thou ſhalt haue the heade of it in thy purſe, thou canſt not be deceiued of any merchaunt. Thys hath ben proued this daye of our brethren.
                  ¶ Pellicianus, the Pellicane is a byrd ſufficiently knowen, it is called of the Chaldeis Uoltri, & of the Grekes Iphalari. The vertue of it is meruaylous. If

yonge byrdes be kylled and their harte not be broken, & if a parte of her bloud be taken and be put warme in the mouth of the yōge byrdes, they wil receyue ſoone agayn lyfe as before. If it be hanged vp to the necke of any byrde, it ſhall flye alwayes, vntyll it fal dead. And the right fote of it vnder an hote thyng, after thre monethes ſhalbe engendred quycke, and ſhall moue it ſelfe of the humoure and heate, which ye byrde hath. And Hermes in the boke of Alchorath, & Plinius doth witneſſe thys.
                  ¶ Coruus, called of ſome a rauē, and of others a crow, the vertue of thys fowle is meruaylous, as Euax and Aaron reherſe. If her egges be ſodden, & be put agayne in the neſt, the rauen goeth ſone

to the read ſea, in a certayne Ile where Aldoricus or Alodrius is buryed, and ſhe bryngeth a ſtone where with ſhe toucheth her egges, and the egges be ſoone rawe as they ware before. It is a meruaylous thynge to ſtyrre vp ſodden egges. If thys ſtoone be put in a rynge, & the leaf of the laurel tree put vnder it, & a man beyng bounden in chaynes, or a doore ſhutte, be toucheth therwith, he that is boundē ſhall ſone be lowſed, and the doore ſhalbe opened. And yf this ſtone be put in a mās mouth, it geueth too hym vnderſtanding of all byrdes. The ſtone is of Inde, becauſe it is foūde in Inde, after certayn wyſe men, & ſometyme in the read ſea. It is of diuerſe colours, & it maketh a man to forgete all wrathe, as we

haue ſaid aboue in the ſame ſtone ¶ Miluus, a Kyte or gleyde is a byrde ſufficiently knowen, of the Chaldeis it is called Byſicus, of the Grekes Melos. If the heade of it be taken, and borne before a mans breaſt, it geueth to h
                        •
                      loue and fauoure of all men & womē. If it be hanged too the necke of an henne, ſhe will neuer ceaſe to runne, vntyll it be putte awaye. And yf a cockes combe be anoynted with the bloud of it, he will not crowe frome thens forthe. There is a certayn ſtone founde in the knees of thys byrde, if it be loked craftely, whiche if it be put in the meat of two enemies, they ſhalbe made frendes, and there ſhalbe made verye good peace amonge them.
                  ¶ Turtur, a Turtel is a byrd wel

ynough knowen, it is called Mulon of the Chaldeis, of the Greekes Pilax. If ye hart of thys foule be borne in a wolues ſkynne, he that beareth it, ſhall neuer haue an appetyte to committe lechery from thence forth. If the harte of it be burned, and be put aboue ye egges of any fowle, there can neuer yong byrdes be engendred of them from thenceforth. And if ye feete of thys fowle be hanged to a tree, it ſhal not beare fruite frō thenceforth. And yf an hearye place, and an horſe bee anoynted wyth the bloudde of it, and with water where in a Molle was ſodden, the blacke heares wyll fall of.
                  ¶ Talpa, a molle is a beaſt well ynough knowen. The vertue of thys beaſt is meruaylous, as it

is rehearſed of Phyloſophers. If the fore of it be wrapped in ye leaf of a Laurell tree, & be put in the mouth of an horſe, he wil flee for feare. And if it be put in the neſte of any fowle, there ſhal neuer come forth yong byrdes of theſe egges. And if thou wilt dryue awai molles, put it in a pot, & quycke brymſtone kyndled, all the other molles ſhal come together there. And the water of that decoction maketh a blacke horſe whyte.
                  ¶ Merula, a blacke macke or ow sell, is a fowle well ynough knowen, and the vertue of it is mernaylous. For if the fethers of the righte wynge of it be hanged vp in the myddes of an houſe, with a read leafe, which was neuer occupyed, no man ſhalbe able too ſ
                        •
                     epe in that houſe, vntyll it be

put awaye. And yf the harte of it be put vnder the heade of a man ſlepyng, & he be inquired, he will ſaye all that he hath done wyth an hye voyce.
                  ¶ The maner of doyng all theſe beforeſayd things, that the effect may be good & profitable is that it be doone vnder a fauourable planet, as Jupiter and Venus, & thys is in their dayes & houres. If any mā therfore will do theſe thynges truely, withoute doubt he ſhall fynde truth, & very great effect or vertue, in the before ſaid thynges as I haue proued, & ſene oftentymes together with oure brethren in oure tyme. Therfore let hym conſider here, which ſhal fynde plentye of the beforeſayde thinges, that he poſſeſſeth a lordſhip and vertues. For if they be

done in their contraries, as a good effect in a maliciouſe ſigne, hys vertue and effecte ſhoulde be letted for his contrarie, & ſo good and true thinges ſhould be diſpiſed. We ſee very many to be deceiued, in ſure & true things, which if they hadde knowen, and kepte the qualities of ſignes or tymes they ſhould haue obteyned their will and effecte, in the aforeſayd thynges.
                  ¶ Iſidorus ſemeth to ſaye, that the aſſhes of a great frogge, born at a womans gyrdle, reſtraineth greatly the commynge of a womans naturall purgation,
                  ¶ And in a probatio, yf it be boſt den too an hennes necke, there ſhall come forth no bloude of her or of an other beaſt.
                  ¶ Alſo if it be tempered with water,

& the heade or an other place be anoynted with it, heare wyll no more growe there.
                  ¶ If anye man beare a dogges hart on his left ſyde, all yt dogges ſhall holde their peace, and not barke at hym.
                  ¶ If any man will bynd yt right eye of an Wolfe on his right ſleue neyther men nor dogges maye hurte hym.
                  
                     ❧ Here are ended ſome ſecretes of Albertus Magnus of Colone vpon natures, vertues, and effectes of certayne herbes, ſtones and beaſtes, and here foloweth in what hour euery planet hath hys dominion.
               
               
                  
                  ANd that al thynges which hath ben ſayd before, and alſo ſhalbe ſayd after, may be applyed more eaſely, to the effectes of their deſire, whiche haue not 
                        ••
                     nning of the ſterres. Fyrſt thou ſhalt note, that an houre is takē two wayes, that is equall & vnequall. The equall houre is the houre of the dyall or clock, which is always equall. The vnequall houre is conſidered, after that ye dayes be langer or ſhorter. For ye Aſtrologie
                        •
                     s conſider alwayes the tyme, in the whiche ye Sūne ſtandeth vpon hys halfe ſphere, and they call it the day or ye bow of the daye, and by the contrarie the might. They diuide that tyme whych they cal the day, in. xii equall partes, which be the houres of the ſame dai, & whatſoeuer

is ſayde of the day, thou muſt vnderſtand cōtrariwyſe of ye nyght. And that thou mayſt vnderſtāde more clerely, let vs put the caſe, the Sunne cometh oute frō hys halfe ſphere, at .viii. of the dyall▪ we haue vnto the goynge doune of the Sunne .xvii. houres of the dyall, which we maye multiplye by .lx. as there be .lx. minutes of euery houre of the dyal, & we ſhal haue nyne hundreth, & thre ſcore minutes, whiche we may deuyde by .xii. as there be .xii. houres of the day, applying to euery houre hys portion, & we haue .lxxx. minutes in an hour. Therfore euery houre of a daye ſhal haue. lxxx minutes, which ſhall conteyn .i. houre & one third of an houre of the dyall. And in all that tyme y• dominion of the planete of that

houre ſhalbe cōſidered, as the table beneth written ſhall ſhewe. Euery houre of hys nighte ſhall not haue but .xl. minutes, which thou ſhalt vnderſtande lykewiſe of others, according to the riſing of the Sunne vpon the ground, becauſe that houre which is in ye myddes betwene nyght and day, which is called the dauning of ye daye is not called the daye, but the daye is properlye vnderſtande, whan the Sunne may be ſene.
                  ¶ Therefore thou wyllynge too conſyder the dominion of euerye Planet, for in euery houre, euery Planete hathe hys dominion, thou ſhalte conſider the houres themſelfes, after the way aboue written, and ſo thou maye come to the ende of thy purpoſe. Alſo

the begynning of the daye is conſidered from one of the clocke of the day, goyng before after noone. So let the Sondaye be diuided into two equall partes, and it is of .xii. houres, diuide it into two, then the halfe daye ſhalbe .xviii. and ye fyrſt houre folowing ſhalbe the beginninge of Mondaye.
                  ¶ Wherfore, thou ſhalt conſider that Sonday hath his ſygne vnder the Sunne.
                  Mondaye hath hys ſigne vnder the Moone.
                  Tueſdaye hathe hys ſigne vnder Mars.
                  Wedniſday hath his ſigne vnder Mercurius.
                  Thurſdaye hath his ſigne vnder Jupiter.
                  Fryday hath his ſigne vnder Venus.
                  
                     Saturday hath his ſigne vnder Saturnus.
                  ¶ It is too be noted that euerye true acte muſt be done vnder his planete. And it is better, if it be done in the propre daye of yt planete, & in hys owne proprie hour as for an example.
                  Vnder Saturnus, lyfe, building doctrine, mutation.
                  Vnder Jupiter, houor, thing deſired, ryches, apparel.
                  Vnder Mars, warre, pryſon, matrimony, enemy.
                  Vnder the Sūne, hope, lucre, for tune, he yre.
                  Vnder Venus, frende or feloweſhyp, way, louer, ſtraunger.
                  Vnder Mercury, loſſe, det, feare.
                  Vnder the Mone, polayſe, dream marchaundyſe, thefte.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of the houres of the dayes and nyghtes.
                  
                     ❧ And fyrſt of the houres of Sō daye, in hys fyrſt hour, the Sūne in the ſeconde Venus, in y• thyrd Mercurius, in the fourth y• Mone, in the fyfte Saturnus, in the vi, Jupiter, in the .vii. Mars, in ye viii. the Sūne, in the .ix. Venus, in the .x. Mercurius, in the .xi. the Moone, in the .xii. Saturnus.
                  ¶ But in the fyrſte houre of the nyghte Jupiter, in the ſeconde Mars, in the thirde the Sunne, in the fourth Venus, in the fifte Mercurius, in the .vi. ye Moone, in the .vii. Saturnus, in the. viii Jupiter, in the .ix. Mars, in the x. the Sunne, in the .xi. Venus, in the .xii. Mercurius.
                  ¶ In the firſt houre of Monday

the moone, in the ſecond Saturnus, in the thyrde Jupiter, in the fourth Mars: in the fyft ye Sūne in the .vi. Venus: in the .vii. mercurius, in the .viii. the moone, in the .ix. Saturnus, in the .x. Jupiter, in the .xi. mars, in the .xii. the Sunne.
                  ¶ But in the firſt houre of Mondayes night Venus, in ye ſeconde mercurius, in the thyrde y• mone, in the fourthe Saturnus, in the fifte Jupiter, in the .vi. Mars, in the .vii. the Sunne: in the .viii. Venus: in the .ix. Mercurius: in the .x. the Moone: in the .xi. Saturnus: in the .xii. Jupiter.
                  ¶ In the fyrſt houre of Tueſday Mars, in the ſecond the Sunne, in the thirde Venus, in the .iiii. Mercurius, in the fift the mone in the .vi. Saturnus, in the .vii.

Jupiter, in the .viii. Mars, in y• ix. the Sunne, in the .x. Venus, in the .xi. Mercurius, in the .xii. the Moone.
                  ¶ But of Tueſdayes nyghte in the fyrſte houre Saturnus, in the ſeconde Jupiter: in the thyrde Mars, in y• .iiii. the Sūne: in the fyfte Venus: in the ſy
                        •
                     te Mercurius: in the ſeuenthe the Mone: in the .viii. Saturnus, in in the .ix. Jupiter: in the tenthe Mars: in the .xi. the Sunne, in the, xii. Venus.
                  ¶ Of the Wedniſday, in his firſt houre Mercurius, in the ſeconde the Moone, in the thyrde Saturnus, in the fourthe Jupiter, in fift Mars, in the ſixt the Sunne in the ſeuenthe Venus, in the eyghte Mercurius, in the nynth the Moone: in the .x. Saturnus

in the .xi. Jupiter, inye .xii. Mars.
                  ¶ But on Wedniſday at nyghte, in the fyrſte houre the Sunne, in the ſeconde Venus, in ye .iii. Mercurius, in the .iiii. the Moone, in the .v. Saturnus, in the .vi. Jupiter, in the .vii. Mars, in the .viii. the Moone, in the .ix. Venus, in the .x. Mercurius, in the .xi. the Moone, in the .xii. Saturnus.
                  ¶ On Thurſdai in the fyrſt hour Jupite, in the ſecond Mars, in y• iii. the Sunne, in the .iiii. Venus in the .v. Mercurius, in the .vi. ye Mone, in the .vii. Saturnus, in the .viii. Jupiter, in ye .ix. Mars, in the .x. the Sūne, in the .xi. Venus, in the, xii. Mercurius.
                  ¶ But on Thurſday nyght in ye fyrſt houre the Moone, in ye ſecōd Saturnus, in the. iii, Jupiter: in the .iiii. Mars: in ye
                     ▪ v. the Sūne:

in the .vi. Venus: in the .vii. Mercurius: in the .viii. the Moone: in the .ix. Saturnus: in ye .x. Jupiter: in the .xi. Mars: in the .xii. the Sunne.
                  ¶ On Fryday at one of the clock Venus: at .ii. Mercurius: at .iii. the Moone: at .iiii. Saturnus: at .v. Jupiter: at .vi. mars: at .vii. the Sunne: at .viii. Venus: at. ix Mercurius: at .x. the Moone: at xi. Saturnus: at .xii. Jupiter.
                  ¶ But on Frydayes night at one of the clocke Mars: at .ii. ye Sūne at .iii. Venus: at .iiii. mercurius at .v. the Moone: at .vi. Saturnus: at .vii. iupiter: at .viii. mars at .ix. the Sunne: at .x. Venus: at. xi, Mercurius: at twelfe the Moone.
                  ¶ On Saterday at one of ye clock Saturnus: at, ii. Jupiter: at .iii.

Mars: at .iiii. the Sunne, at .v. Venus: at .vi. Mercurius at .vii. the Moone: at .viii. Saturnus, at .ix. Jupiter: at .i. Mars, at .xi. the Sunne: at .xii. Venus:
                  ¶ But on Saturdayes night at one of the clocke Mercurius, at ii. the moone, at thre Saturnus at .iiii. Jupiter, at. v, mars. at. vi the Sunne, at .vii. Venus, at viii Mercurius, at .ix. the Moone, at .x. Saturnus, at .xi. Jupiter, at .xii. Mars.
                  ¶ And not that Jupiter and Venus be good, Saturnus & Mars, euell, but the Sunne and the Moone in a meane, and Mercurius is good with good and euell wt euell. (*)
               
            
         
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            ¶ Here beginneth the boke of ye meruayles of the world, ſet forth by Albertus Magnus.
            
               AFter it was knowē of Phyloſophers, that all kyndes of thinges moue and inclyne to them ſelfe, becauſe an actiue and rationable vertue is in them, whiche they guyde, and moue aſwell to them ſelfes as to others, as fyre moueth to fyre, & water to water.
            ¶ Alſo Auicenna ſayde, when a thyng ſtādeth longe in ſalte, it is ſalte, & if any thynge ſtande in a ſtynkynge place, it is made ſtynkynge. And yf anye thynge ſtandeth with a bold man, it is made bolde, yf it ſtande with a fearefull man, it is made fearfull.

And if a beaſt companieth wt mē, it is made tractable & famyliar. And generally, it is verefied of them by reaſons, and dyuerſe experience, that euery nature moneth to hys kynde, and their vere fyenge, is knowen in the firſte qualities, and lykewyſe in the ſeconde and the ſame chaunceth in the thyrde. And there is nothing in all diſpoſitiōs, which moueth to it ſelf, according to his whole power. And this was the rote, & the ſeconde begynning of ye workes of ſecretes, and tourne thou not a way the eyes of thy mynde.
            ¶ After that thys was graffed in the myndes of the Philoſophers and they founde the diſpoſition of naturall thynges. For they knew ſurely that greate colde is graffed in ſome, in ſome greate boldenes,

ſhulde not deny any meruaylous thing although he hath no reaſon, but he ought to proue by experience, for the cauſe of meruailous thinges are hidde, and of ſo diuerſe cauſes goyng befor, that mans vnderſtandyng after Plato, maye not aprehende them.
            Therfore the lode ſtone draweth yron to it, and a certayne other ſtone draweth glaſſe. So meruaylous thinges are declared of phyloſophers to be in thinges by experience, whyche no man ought to denye. And that is not proued after the faſhion of philoſophers whych founde that, for the phyloſophers ſaith, that the palme is a tree, and it hath the male and the female, therfore whan the female is nygh the male, thou ſeeſt that the female, bowe

doune to the male, and the leafe & braunches of it are made ſofte, and bowe doune to the male.
            ¶ Therefore whan they ſee that, they bynde ropes fro the male to the female, Reddit ergo erecta, ſuper ſeipſam quaſi adepta ſit Maſculo per continuationem 
                  •
               umis Virtutem maſculi. Not withſtā
               dinge many of the auncient aucthors, hath ſhewed meruaylous thynges, receyued now of the cō
               mon people, and takē for a truth. Therfore I ſhal ſhewe to the certayn thynges, that thou mayſte ſtabliſh thy mynde vpon them, & to knowe it for a certayn truthe, which reaſon can not ſtabliſh by feling, becauſe the foreſaid helpe in them. And therfore it is, that the ſonne of Meſſias ſayde in the boke of the beaſtes. It a woman

great with chylde, put on the apparell of a man, & a man put it on after, before he waſſhe it, if he haue the feuer quartayne, it wil departe from hym.
            ¶ And it is ſayde in the boke of beaſtes, that the Lybarde 
                  ••
               eeth ye pryuy membres of a man, and in an other place it is ſayde 
                  •
               t Carneum, yf an olde man be buried in a doue or culuer houſe, or be put where doues or culuers inhabite or reſte, there they are multiplyed, vntill it be full of them.
            ¶ And in the boke De cyriaca of Galene, it is ſayde that the Serpent which is called Regulus in Latin, a cokatryce in Engliſhe, is ſome what whyte, vpō whoſe head there be thre hayres, & whā any mā ſeeth them he dieth ſone And whan any mā or any other

lyuing thing heareth his whiſte lynge, he dyeth. And euery beaſte that eateth▪ of it beinge deade, dieth alſo. And ariſtotel ſayde, where there is ſommer .vi. Monethes and lykewiſe winter, there is a floud in the which adders are founde, whoſe property is, that they neuer ſe them ſelues but they dye, but whan they be dead, they hurt not. And ariſtotele put craftly in the mind of Alexander, that he ſhoulde take a greate glaſſe, and walke wyth it towarde them, & whan they dyd beholde them ſelues in the glaſſe they dyed▪ This ſayng of Ariſtotel was not beleued of ſome men For Auicenna ſayd agaynſt Ariſtotel, yf any man dyd ſee it, he dyed, wherefore there is no truthe in his ſpeache. And they ſayde, if

anye man wolde take of the mylke of a woman, gyuing ſouke to her owne doughter of two yere olde, and let it be put in a glaſen beſſel, or hanged vp in a doue or culuer houſe where they goe in and forth, doues will abyde & be multiplyed there, vntyll they bee innumerable. And thei ſaid, whā the mouth of a deade man is put vpon hym whiche complayneth of hys beallye, hys beally is healed.
            ¶ And Alexander ſayd, whā anything is taken out of the nauyl
                  •
                of an infant, which cometh forth if it be cut, and be put vnder the ſtone, of a rynge of ſyluer or gold than the paſſion or grief of the 
                  •
               o like cometh not in any wyſe too hym that beareth it.
            ¶ And Galen ſaith, whā ye leafes

of Sorell be eaten, they louſe the beally. And whan the ſede of it is dronken, it louſeth the beally. And it is ſayde, that the roote of Sorell hanged vppon hym that hath the ſwyn pockes, it helpeth hym.
            ¶ And Philoſophers ſaye, whan thou wilt that a beaſt returne to hys lodging, anoint his forehead with Sepeſquilla, and it wil returne.
            ¶ And Ariſtotel ſayd in the boke of ye beaſtes. If any mā put wrought wax vpon the hornes of cowes calfe, it wil goo with hym wherſoeuer he wil wtout labour And if any man anointe the horne of kye with waxe and oile or pitche ye payne of their fete goeth away.
            ¶ And if any ſhall anoynte ye tunges

of, oxē with any talowe, they neither taſte nor eate meate, but thei ſhal die for hūger, except it be wyped away wt ſalte & vyneger.
            ¶ And if any man anoynte ye nether partes of a cocke with oyle, he nether wil, nor may treade an henne.
            ¶ if thou deſire that a cocke 
                  •
               rowe not, anoynte his head & fore heade with oyle.
            ¶ It is ſaid in ye boke of Archige nis quando cam illa, of ye hare is hanged vpon him that ſuffereth the colike, it profiteth hym.
            ¶ And Ariſtotel ſayd ye Emeraudes goeth away frō hym, whiche ſitteth vpō the ſkynne of a Lyō.
            ¶ And if the dunge of an hare be broken vnto poulder and caſte abrode vpon a place of Emotes or Piſmeres, than the Piſmeres

leaue there place.
            ¶ Phyloſophers ſayd, if the head of a goote be hanged vppon hym which ſuffreth ſwyne pockes, he is healed by it. If thou wylt that a woman be not viciate nor deſyre men, take the priue member of a wolf, and the heares which do grow on the chekes or eye bright of him, and the heares whiche be vnder his berde, and burn it all, & geue it to her in a dryncke whē ſhe knoweth not, and ſhe ſhall deſyre no other man. And they ſaid, whan a wom ādeſyreth not her huſbande, then let her houſbande take a lytle of the talowe of a bucke gote, meane betwene lytle and great, and let hym anoynte his priuye member with it, and do the acte of generacion ſhe ſhal loue hym and ſhal not do the

acte of generation afterwarde wyth anye
            ¶ And they ſayd yt whē the ſnail is poyſened, it eateth the herbe called organy, and is healed, and therfore thei know that the herbe called organny, hath lyen vnder poyſon. Alſo it is ſayd when the weſel is poynſoned of a ſerpent it eateth rewe, & they know by this, that rewe is contrarye to the vemyne of ſerpentes.
            ¶ And a mouſe put vnder the prickynge of ſcorpyons, delyuereth a man bycauſe ſhe is contrarye and feareth not hym.
            ¶ And philoſophers haue inuented, that if anye womā is barrayne whā ther is put to her a thīg that maketh a woman barrain, the woman is not barayne, but fruteful, and contrariwyſe.
            
               ¶ And it is ſayde that when a ſponge is caſte in wyne mixed wt water and after drawen forthe & ſtrayned and wrynged, the water commeth ſorth of it, & the wyne remayneth, yf it be not mixed, nothynge commeth forth.
            ¶ Taberencis ſayd, yf a ſtone be hanged vppon a ſponge, on the necke of a chylde, whiche cougheth with a vehement or great cough, hys cough is mitigated & reſtrained. And whā it is put on the heade of an aſſe, or in to hys foundamente, Scarabeus, that is a flye with a blacke ſhelle, y• breadeth in coweſhardes and is blacke, called a bitel, cutteth him and he turneth, vntyll it be drawen from hym.
            ¶ It is ſayde alſo, that yf anye ſtone be bounden to the tayle of

an aſſe, he wil not bray nor rore.
            ¶ If the hayres of an aſſe be taken, whiche are nyghe hys priuy membre, and be geuē to any mā, brokē in with any kynd of wyne in a dryncke, he beginneth anone to fart. Like wyſe yf any man taketh the egges of Pyſmeres and breaketh them, and caſteth them into water, and geue thē to any man in a drincke, he ceaſeth not anone to farte, they do lyke wyſe with wyne.
            ¶ And it is ſayde, yf thou wilte make a ryng of a rodde of a freſh myrte tree, & put it on thy rynge fynger, it mitigateth or extineteth the impoſtume vnder the arme holes.
            ¶ In the boke of Ariſtotel, it is ſayde that the roote of whyte henbane, whan it is hanged vpō
               
a man ſuffring the colyke, it is profytable to him. And whā, ſalte Peter is put in a veſſel, and by neger vpō it, it wyl boyl or ſeeth mightely without fyre.
            ¶ It is ſayd alſo in the boke of hermes, whan leeke ſede is caſtē vpon vineger, the eigrenes or ſowreneſſe of it goeth away
            ¶ Belhinus ſaide, whan thou takeſt the white of an egge, & alume & anoynteſt a clothe with it, and waſheſt it of wyth water of the ſea: being drye, it letteth the dyre to burne.
            ¶ An other ſayde, whā redde Arſenicum, and alume are taken, & broken, and confected, or made with the iuyce of the herbe called houſlyke, and the galle of a bull, and a man anoyteth hys handes wyth it, and after taketh hote

quyckened. And whan thou buryeſt the flye called a bytel amōg roſes, it dyeth, if thou burye it in dunge, it quyckeneth.
            ¶ And philoſphers ſayde that whan the fethers of Eagles be put with y• fethers of other fowles, they burne and mortefye thē for as he ouercometh in hys lyfe all byrds, & hath rule ouer them ſo y• fethers of Eagles are deadly to all fethers.
            ¶ And Phyloſophers ſay, yf the ſkynne of a ſhepe be put in anye place with the ſkynne of Adib, it gnaweth and conſumeth it. And he that putteth on him clothe of the wolle of a ſhepe whiche hath eaten Adib, itchyng ceaſeth not from hym, vntyll he put it of.
            ¶ And yf thou parfume an houſe or place with the lunges or lightes

of an Aſſe, thou clengeſt it frō euery Serpente and Scorpion. And of thys Philoſophers know that it is good agaynſt poyſon.
            ¶ Tabariences ſayth: yf the tūg of the Lapwynge or blacke plouer be hanged vpon a walle Obliuionem reddit eum memorē et alienationes.
            ¶ And it is ſayde in the booke of Cleopatra. If a woman haue no delectation with her huſbāde take the marro we of a wolfe, of hys lefte foote, and beare it, and ſhe will loue no manne but him. And it is ſayde, whanne the lefte hyppe or haunche of a male oſtriche is taken and boyled, or ſeethed with oyle, and after the begynnynge or grounde of hayres are anoynted with it, they grow neuer agayne.
            
               ¶ Architas ſayd, yf the hart of a ſerpent be taken, whan he liueth and be hāged vpon a man, being ſycke of the feuer quartayne, it plucketh it vtterly awaye. And ye Adders ſkynne, whan it is ſtrayt bounded vpon the ankle of a woman, it haiſteth the byrth, but after the byrth, it muſt be remoued away anone.
            ¶ The tethe of all ſerpētes, whā thou pluckeſt them furthe by the rootes, as longe as the ſerpente lyueth, yf they be hanged vpon a man, ſycke of the feuer quartain they take awaye the feuer quartayne from hym, and yf the Serpent be hāged vpon a roth aking it profiteth. And yf a ſerpēt mete with a woman wyth chylde, ſhe bryngeth furth her chylde before it be perfecte. And yf it meete

with her when ſhe trauayleth of chylde, it haſteth her byrthe.
            ¶ And they ſai, if thou wilt take the eye tothe of the beaſte called Crocodilus in Latine, in engliſh a Crocodile out of ye vppermore palaſe of the lefte ſide of his mouth, and hange it on a mā being ſicke of ye feuers, it healeth hym, and the feuers will not returne agayne to hym. And they haue ſayde, that the Lyon is afrayde of a white cocke. And again that he feareth the fyre. And he that is anoynted with the talowe of the reynes of the talowe of y• rey nes of the Lyon, feareth not too go amonge beaſtes, & all beaſtes are afrayed of the Lyon. And he that anoynteth hys bodye with hares dunge, wolfes be farayde of hym.
            
               ¶ Et ſi teritur atſenicum citrinum, and be myxed with mylke if a flye fall vpon it, it dyeth not. ¶ If thou wilt take y• right fote of a ſnayll, and hange it vpō the right fote of a diſeaſed mā wyth the gout, it profiteth it: like wiſe if thou hange vp the lefte fote of a ſnayll to thy lefte fote, diſeaſed with the goute. And ſo the hāde of it is profitable to the hande & the fynger, to the fynger.
            And yf a fyre be kendled before a man yt is broſten of grene woode of fygge trees, his ſtoones will make a noyſe or bounſinge.
            ¶ And it is ſayde in the booke of hermes, whan bothe the eyes of the Ber
                  •
                bee bounden in lynen cloth, vppon Siniſtrum adiutorium, they put awaye the feuer quartayne. And it is ſayde, if the

wolfe ſe a man and the mā ſe not hym, the man is aſtonyed & feareth, and is hoorſe. And therfore if anye man beareth the eye of a wolfe, it helpeth to victorye, too boldenes, vanquyſhing and fear of hys aduerſary.
            And it is ſayde, if a ryng be made of the whyte houfes of an Aſſe, & he that hath the falling ſyckenes putteth it on, ſuffreth not the fallyng ſyckenes.
            ¶ And they ſayde, whan y• wylte that flyes come not nyghe thy houſe, than put Condicim et oppium, in white lyme, and after make thy houſe whyte with it, thanne flyes ſhall in no wyſe enter.
            ¶ Whan thou wilt that thy wife or wenche, ſhew to the al that ſhe hath done, take the hart of a doue

and the head of a frogge, and dry them both, and braye them vnto poulder, and laye them vpon the breaſt of her ſleping, and ſhe ſhall ſhewe to y• all that ſhe hath done, but whan ſhe ſhall wake, wype it awaye from her breaſt, that it be not lyfted vp.
            ¶ And they ſaye, yf any man put a Diamonde vnder the heade of a woman ſleapinge, ſhe manifeſteth, if ſhe be an aduoutrer, for if it be ſo, ſhe leapeth backe out of y• bedde afrayde, and yf not, ſhe embraceth her huſband with great loue.
            ¶ And they ſay, that an Aſſe ſkyn whan it is hanged vpon chyldrē, it letteth them to be afrayde.
            ¶ Architas ſayth, yf the waxe of the left eare of a dogge be take n, and be hanged vppon men ſycke

in the feuers that come by cours or fyttes, it is verye profitable, and ſpecially to the feuer quartayne.
            ¶ And Phyloſophers ſaye, that ſome kynde or ſingulare, whiche neuer had ſickeneſſe, is profitable to euery ſickenes, and he that had neuer payn, helpeth and healeth a man from it.
            ¶ And whan the houſe is perfumed with y• lefte houfe of a mule, flyes remayne not in it.
            ¶ And yf the harte, eye or brayne of a lap wynge or blacke plouer, be hanged vpon a mans necke, it is profitable agaynſte forgetfulnes, and ſharpeth mās vnderſtandynge.
            ¶ If a womā maye not conceyue take an heartes horne, turned into poulder, & let it be myxed with

a cowes gall, let a woman kepe it about her, and let her do y• acte of generation, and ſhe ſhall conceyue anone.
            ¶ A groſſe and ſtyffe hayre of a mares tayll, put vppon a doore ſuffereth not zauzales to enter.
            ¶ The tothe of a fole or colte of one yeare olde, put in the necke of a chylde, maketh hys tethe to breede without payne.
            ¶ The tothe of a mare put vpon the head of a man, being madde, deliuereth hym anone from hys furye.
            ¶ If a woman may not conceiue let a mares mylke be geuē to her, not knowing, let her do the acte of generation in that houre, and ſhe ſhall conceyue anone.
            ¶ The houfe of an horſe perfumed in a houſe, dryueth awaye

myſe. Theſame chaunceth alſo by the houfe of a Mule.
            ¶ That all the hote water come furth of a caldrō. Take or blache, that is Terra franciſca, wt pitch caſte it in water, and it ſhal come forth all. That▪fyre may come forth of water, take the ſhel of an egge and put in it quycke brymſtone & lyme, & ſhyt the hole & put it into water and it will kendle. ¶ And it is ſayd, if the herbe Cā
               phere, be put vpō water, it is kēd led and burneth in the water.
            ¶ That thou maye take byrdes with thy handes, take any corne very well ſteped in the dregges of wyne and in the iuyce of hēlocke and caſte it too the byrdes, euery byrde that taſteth of it, is made droncken, and looſeth her ſtrength.
            
               ¶ And they ſay, yf any man be anoynted with y• mylke of an Aſſe, all the flyeſe of the houſe wil gather to hym.
            ¶ To write letters or bils, which be not readde but in the nyghte, take the gall of a ſnayle or mylk of a ſo we, and put it too the fyre, or with water of a worme ſhynyng late.
            ¶ If ye myngell together many whites of hēnes egges, a moneth after they are made glaſſe, & hard as a ſtoone, and of thys beynge after thys faſſhion is mayde a Sophiſticall precious ſtone, called Topaſius, yf it bee conioyned before wyth Saffron or read earthe.
            ¶ Like wiſe, if the fome which is found about the ſtones of a hart, or horſe, or aſſe, beynge weery,

be myxed with wyne, and ye wyne be geuen to any man to drynke, he ſhall abhorre wyne for a mooneth.
            ¶ And yf any manne ſhall haue many eeles in a wyne veſſell, and they be ſuffered to dye in it, if any man drynke of it, he ſhal abhorre wyne for a yeare, and by chaūce euermore.
            ¶ And it is ſayde, yf a rope be taken, with whyche a theefe is or hath ben hanged vp with, and a litle chaffe, which a whyrle wind lifted vp in the ayre, and let them be put in a potte, and ſet among other pottes, that pot ſhal breake all the other pottes.
            ¶ Alſo take thou a litle of the aforeſayd rope, and put it on the inſtrument, with which y• breade is put in the ouen, whan he that

ſhoulde put it in the ouen, ſhould put it in, he ſhall not be able too put it in, but it ſhall leape out.
            
               
                  ❧ That men maye ſeme without heades.
               TAke an Adders ſkynne and Auri pigmētum, and greke pitche of Reuponticum, and the waxe of new bees, and the fat or greace of an Aſſe, and breake thē al, and put them in a dul ſething potte full of water, and make it to ſethe at a ſlowe fyre, and after let it waxe colde, and make a taper, and euery man that ſhall ſee light of it, ſhall ſeme headleſſe.
               ¶ That men maye ſeme to haue the viſage or countenaunce of a dogge. Take the fatte out of the eare of a dogge, anoynte with it a litle newe ſylke, put it in a new

lampe of greene glaſſe, and put ye lampe amonge men, & they ſhall ſee the vyſage of a dogge.
               ¶ That men maye ſeme to haue thre headdes.
               ¶ Take of the hayr of a dead aſſe, and make a rope, & drye it, & take the mary of the principall bone of hys ryght ſhoulder, and myxe it with virgyns waxe, & anoynte the corde, and put it vpon ye thraſ ſholdes of the houſe, they yt come into the houſe ſhall ſeme to haue thre headdes, and they that be in the houſe ſhall ſeme Aſſes to thē that enter in.
               ¶ If thou wilt that a mans head ſeme an Aſſe head.
               ¶ Take vp of the couering of an Aſſe & anoynte y• mā on his head.
               ¶ If thou wilt that a chicken, or other thing leape in the dyſhe.
               
                  ¶ Take quycke ſyluer and y• poul der of Calamite, and put it in a bottel of glaſſe wel ſpotted, & put it with in a hote thing. For ſeynge quycke ſiluer is hote, it moueth it ſelfe, & maketh it to leape or daunce.
               ¶ If thou wilt ſe that other mē can not.
               ¶ Take of the gall of a male cat, and the fat of an henne al whyte and myxe theym together, and anoynt thy eyes, and thou ſhalt ſe it that others can not ſee.
            
            
               ¶ If thou wilte vnderſtande the voyces of byrdes.
               ¶ Aſſociate with the two felows in the .xxviii. daye of October, & go in to a certayne woode wyth dogges as too hunte, and carye home wyth that beaſte, whyche

thou ſhalt fynd firſt, and prepare it with the harte of a Foxe, and thou ſhalt vnderſtand anone the voyce of byrdes or beaſtes. And if thou wilte that any other lykewiſe vnderſtande, kyſſe hym, and he ſhall vnderſtande.
            
            
               ¶ If thou wilt louſe bondes.
               
                  ❧ Go into the woode, and loke where ye Pye hath her neſt with her byrdes, and whan thou ſhalt be there, clymme vp the tree, and bynde about the hole of it wherſoeuer thou wilt. For whan ſhe ſeeth the, ſhe goeth for a certayn herbe, whiche ſhe will put to the binding, and it is broken anone, and that herbe falleth to ye groūd vpō the cloth, which thou ſhould haue put vnder the tree, and be y• preſent, and take it.
               ¶ In the neſt of the lap wyng or blacke

vnder the earth within, al which be in the lodgene, ſhall ſeme as thei ware great men in the ſhape of horſes and Elephantes, and it is a very meruaylous thynge.
               ¶ An other perfuming, which whā thou makeſt, thou ſeeſt outwardly grene men, and men of many ſhapes and infinite meruayles, whiche are not diſcerned for their multitude.
               ¶ Take Timar, that is vermilion, and the ſtoone Lazulus and Peneroyall of the moūtains and beate it all to poulder, and ſyfte it, myxe it with the fat of a Dolphyn fyſhe, horſe or Elephāt make graynes or cornes after ye faſſhion of ryſe and drye them in a ſhado we, perfume in it whan thou wilt and it ſhalbe don, that is ſayde.
               
                  ¶ A perfumynge too ſee in oure ſ
                     •
                  eape what thing is to come of good and euell.
               ¶ Take the bloude of an Aſſe congeled, and the fatte Lupi cerini, and a ſwete incēſe or gumme called Storax and alſo Storax, & alſo ſtyrax, gather it altogether by equall weyghtes, and let thē be mixed, and graynes or cornes be made therof, and let the houſe be perfumed with thē, than thou ſhalt ſe hym in thy ſleape, yt ſhall ſhewe to the all thynges.
               ¶ A maner of makyng a matche of a candell, or cādel weke, which whan thou ſhalt kendle, yu ſhalte ſee men, in what ſhape ſoeuer thou wilt.
               ¶ Take the eyes of an ſhriche owle, the eyes of a fyſhe, which is called Affures, and the eyes of a

fyſhe, whiche is called Libinitis, and the galle of wolfes, breake theym with thy handes, & myxe them together, and put them in a veſſell of glaſſe, than whan thou wilt warke it, take ye fatte of any beaſt thou wilt, that this may be made in the ſhape of it, melte it, and myxe it perfitely with that medicine, and anoynte ye matche or candel weke, whatſoeuer thou wilt wt it. After kēdle it in ye middes of the houſe, and the mē ſhall ſeme in the ſhape of that beaſte, whoſe fatte thou did take.
               ¶ An other matche of a candell or a candell weke, that men may appere in the ſhape of aungels.
               ¶ Take the eyes of a fyſhe, & the eyes of Filoe, that is of a breaker of bones, and breake them wt thy handes, and make them ſoft,

and put them in a veſſell of glaſſe vii. dayes After put ſome oyle in them, and lyghten it in a greene lampe, and put it before menne, whiche be in the houſe, they ſhal ſee them ſelfes in the ſhape of aū
                  gels by the lyght of the fyre.
               ¶ An other matche or weke of a candell, makyng men to appeare with blacke faces.
               ¶ Take a black lampe, and pour in it oyle of the elder or alder tree or quycke ſyluer, and poure in that oyle or quycke ſiluer a parte of the bloude of them that bee in lettynge bloude, and put in that bloudde oyle of the elder or alder tree (ſome ſayth of the bur tree) or quycke ſyluer.
               ¶ A meruaylous lāpe, in whiche appeareth a thynge of terrible quantite, hauyng in the hande a

rodde and afrayeth a man.
               ¶ Take a grene frogge, & ſtryke of the headde of it vpon a grene clothe, make it wette with ye oyle of burtree or elder tree, and put in the weke and lyghten it in the grene lampe, than ſhalt thou ſee a blacke man ſtanding, betwene whoſe handes there ſhalbe a lāp and a meruaylous thyng.
               ¶ An other weke which whan it is kendled, & water is poured on it, waxeth ſtrong, and whan the oyle is put in, it is put out.
               ¶ Take lyme whiche water hath not touched and putte it with an weight, equal to it of waxe & the halfe of it of the oyle of baulm & Napta citrina, with equall to it of brymſtone, and make a weke of it, & drop doune lyke dewe vpō the water and it ſhalbe kendled,

and droppe doune oyle vppon it, and it ſhalbe put out.
               ¶ In other weke, which whan it is kēdled, all thinges ſeme white and of ſyluer.
               ¶ Take a Lyzarde, and cut away the tayle of it, and take that which commeth out, for it is like quycke ſyluer. After take a weke and make it wette with oyle, & put it in a new lampe and kendle it, and y• houſe ſhall ſeme bright and white, or gylted with ſtluer.
               ¶ A meruaylous operation of a lampe, whiche yf anye man ſhall holde, he ceaſeth not to farte, vntyll he ſhall leaue it.
               ¶ Take the bloude of a ſnayl, drye it vp in a linen cloth, & make of it a weke, and lyghten it in a lampe, geue it to any man thou wilt, & ſaye lighten thys, he ſhall

not ceaſe to farte, vntyll he let it departe, and it is a meruaylous thynge.
               ¶ A weke which whan it is lightened, women ceaſe not to daūce and be gladde and too playe as they ware madde for great ioye.
               ¶ Take the bloude of an hare and the bloude of a certayn fo wl which is called Solon, & is lyke a turtell doue, and of the bloude of the turtell male, equale to the halfe of it. Than put in it a weke, and lighten it in the myddes of the houſe, in whiche are ſyngers and wenches, and a meruaylous thynge ſhalbe proued.
               ¶ If thou wilte make that lyce maye appeare runninge abrode in a mans bedde that he mai not ſleape, than caſt in hys bedde the weyghte of one or halfe vnce of

Alcakengi, and if thou ſhall take pilos aſturis, therof ſhalbe made a weke, which whan it is lightened, euery ſicke man ſeeth other by the vehemencye of the ſyckeneſſe, and mynyſhinge or extenuation.
               ¶ Whan thou wilte that yu ſeme al inflamed, or ſet on fyre frō thy head vnto thy fete & not be hurt.
               ¶ Take white great malowes or holy hocke, myxe them with the whyte of egges, after anoint thy body with it, and let it be vntil it be dryed vp, and after anoint the with alume, and afterward caſte on it ſmal brymſtone beatē vnto poulder, for the fyre is inflamed on it, & hurteth not, and yf thou make vpon the palme of thy hāde thou ſhalt be able to holde y• fyre without hurt.
               
                  ¶ If thou wilt that a thinge be caſten in the fyre and not burne.
               ¶ Take one parte of glew of fiſh & an egual quantitie to it of alume, let it be perfitely myxed, & let vyneger be poured vpon it, lette whatſoeuer thinge that wilte be confected with it, caſt it in y• fyre, anoynt it with this anoyntemēt it ſhal not be burned.
               ¶ If thou wilt make a contrary, that is any image or other thing and whan it is put in the water it is kendled, and yf thou ſhalte drawe it out, it ſhal be put out or quenched.
               ¶ Take lyme not quenched, and mixe it perfitely with a litle wax and the oyle of Seſanum, & napta, that is whyte earth and brimſtoone, and make of it an ymage, whanne thou ſhalte put it in

water, the fyre ſhalbe kendled.
               ¶ If thou wilt make that whan thou openeſt thy handes vpon a lampe, the light of it is put out, and whan thou cloſeſt them vpō it, it kēdled, and it ceaſeth not to do that.
               ¶ Take a ſpice, which is called Spuma, after bray it, and after make it with water of Cāphere, and anoynte thy handes with it, after open them in the mouth of the lampe, the lyghte of it ſhalbe put out, and cloſe thē, & it ſhalbe kendled agayne.
               ¶ If thou wilt ſee a thing drowned, or ſe depe in the wa
                     ••
                  r in the nyghte, and that it ſhall not bee more hyd to the than in the daye and readde bookes in a darcke night.
               ¶ Anoynte thy face with the bloude
               
            
         
      
   