
      
         
            
            A true Medium of the monies payable from 1613. to the yeare 1618. by the Maſters and owners of diuers Ships comming and going forth to ſundry Ports in this Land, and other places beyond the Seas for the Lights at Winterton. According to an Order from the Lords of the Councell to the Officers of the Exchequor and Cuſtomhouſe, and their Certificate vpon the ſame. As followeth. Viz.
            
            
               
                  
                     From Newcaſtle and other parts beyond the Seas Northward to London.
                      766. l. 04. s. 09. d. ¼.
                  
                     To Yarmouth.
                      062. l. 08. s. 05. d. ½.
                  
                     To Ipſwich.
                      036. l. 19. s. 10. d. ¾.
                  
                     To Sandwich.
                      034. l. 09. s. 11. d. ½.
                  
                     To Chicheſter.
                      004. l. 16. s. 03. d. ½.
                  
                     To Southampton.
                      002. l. 05. s. 01. d.
                  
                     To Poole.
                      000. l. 00. s. 09. d.
                  
                     To Plimmouth.
                      000. l. 02. s. 02. d. ½.
                  
                     To Exeter and Dartmouth.
                      000. l. 12. s. 02. d. ½.
                  
                     From Newcaſtle for Coales beyond the Seas. 032. l. 15. s. 06. d.
                  
                     From Newcaſtle for Tonnage from the parts beyond the Seas. 026. l. 10. s. 00. d.
                  
                     From Lynne for Tonnage from the parts beyond the Seas. 001. l. 05. s. 03. d.
                  
                     Ships from Hull to the parts beyond the Seas at fiue ſhillings the Ship. 009. l. 05. s. 00. d.
                  
                     Ships from Boſton to the parts beyond the Seas at fiue ſhillings the Ship. 000. l. 10. s. 00. d.
                  
                     
                        Totall.
                      978. l. 05. s. 03. d. ½
               
            
            The true Medium of the Monies payable in the Port of London, for the yeares 1619. and 1620. that the Patentees haue enioyed their Graunt, amounteth to the ſumme of ſeauen hundred and foureteene pounds thirteene ſhillings and two pence, which is leſſe then the Medium aboue written in the Port of London, by one and fifty pounds eleuen ſhillings ſeauen pence, by reaſon of the reſtraint of building with Timber. The Dutchmen forbearing to bring in Timber as formerly they were accuſtomed.
            THe Medium aboue written of the value of a penny per Tunne of all ſhipping lyable to the payment of the allowance of Winterton Lights, was certified by the Bookes of the Farmours of the Kings Cuſtomes, by the Officers of the Cuſtome houſe of London, and by the remembrancers Deputy of the Exchequor, who were appointed by my Lord Zouch, my Lord of Falkland, the Maſter of the Rolls, and Sir Edward Coke, to make ſearch for the ſame, According to an Order giuen by the Lords of the Councell.
            
               
                  
                     THe Annuall charge for maintainance of theſe Lighthouſes for Coales, Candles, and Seruants wages that continually attend them. As appeareth by the atteſtation of Maſter Edward Owner, one of the Burgeſſes of this Honorable Court of Parliament doth amount to 230. l. 00. s. 00. d.
                  
                     The Officers of the Cuſtome houſes haue two ſhillings in the pound, and in ſome places three ſhillings for their paines in collection and keeping bookes of account. 094. l. 00. s. 00. d.
                  
                     The King hath a Rent of 006. l. 13. s. 04. d.
                  
                     The Tenants of the ground haue a Rent of 004. l. 00. s. 00. d.
                  
                     What the charge of the reparations and remouing the Lighthouſes will be, it is vncertaine, yet in one yeare the Patentee paid for helping the wooden Tower, the glaſſe windowes, the new Cradle of Iron, which euery two yeares at leaſt muſt be made new. 011. l. 16. s. 06. d.
                  
                     All which in toto will exceede
 350. l. 00. s. 00. d.
               
            
            THe Patent is grounded in point of Law vpon the Certificate of Maſter Serieant Crew, Maſter Atturny Generall, and Sir Henry Yeluerton.
            
            It is grounded in the point of conueniencie vpon the returne of a Commiſſion vnder the great Seale of England, directed for the tryall thereof, where the Aldermen, Burgeſſes, Maſters of Shipping, Fiſhermen of great Yarmouth and Winterton were examined vpon Oath, And the neceſſity thereof certified in the high Court of Chauncery, As may appeare by the Copie of the Commiſſion, Examination, Certificate, and returne vnder the Officer his hand of that Court.
            It is grounded in point of charge vpon the halfe of the voluntary Contributions graunted to Sir Edward Howard for one Light-houſe at Dongeonneſſe, although there be three Light-houſes at Winterton, and that the Patentee is tyed to ſet vp all other Light-houſes within the compaſſe of foure miles, which heereafter (by the alteration of Channels and Sands) may be found neceſſary.
            Moreouer, a great number of the ſame Maſters haue ſet their hands voluntarily to giue the ſame allowance of a penny vpon the Tunne for a Light-houſe at Kelſey in the Riuer of Humber, as appeareth by Certificate.
            The Scottiſh-men doe all willingly pay a penny vpon the Tun, as may appeare by Certificate vnder more then threeſcore Maſters hands.
            The party who is expreſly imployed by the Coaſt Townes to proſecute the buſineſſe againſt the Patentee, hath confeſſed that the Shipping trading to Newcaſtle, doe make a voyage in a yeare more then euer they did before, and that by the benefit of the Lights, whereby it will clearely appeare, that the profit made by this voyage, will ſurmount the charge payd in a whole yeare.
            In like manner, the ſame party with diuers others haue moſt willingly offered a halfe penny vpon the Tunne, if the Patentee would condiſcend: he ſaid further, that hee and all the reſt of the Maſters would be ſutors to the Court of Parliament, that no man liuing ſhould haue the performance of the ſeruice except the Patentee, in regard that there could be no exceptions taken againſt the ſame.
            The voluntary contribution for Caſter and Stamport Lights, is more then twice as much as ſixe pence in the twenty Chaldron, which if they doe take onely from ſuch Shipping as haue vſe of the Lights at Winterton, as the Patentee doth, will not exceede 128. pounds a yeare, out of which deducting 60. pounds for the intereſt of 600. pounds imployed for their Tower, It will follow by conſequent that they muſt entertaine the Lights at Winterton (beſides the loſſe of their ſtocke) for 68. pounds a yeare, and the Patentees will abide any indifferent tryall whatſoeuer, that the Lights at Winterton, by an vnauoydable charge (if the preſeruation of the Shipping, Goods, and liues of men, be to be preferred to a dangerous frugality in that kinde by pinching the ſeruice) will exceede 230. pounds a yeare in Coales, Candles, and Seruants wages, beſides other charge which cannot be eſchewed. The which appeareth euidently by this example.
            The Lights at Caſter and Stamport erected by Thomas Buſſell, and now kept by the Maſters of the Trinity-houſe, with one Candle oftentimes, and at moſt two of ſixe in the pound, there hath within this laſt yeare falne out fiue Shipwracks, whereof three was in the night time, and diuers other Wracks, ſince they had the keeping thereof. Whereas in Thomas Buſſell and Graue Villet their time, there was no loſſe at all neither at Dongeonneſſe, nor at Wintertonneſſe, whilſt priuate men haue had the care thereof. And it ſhall be ſufficiently proued if need be, that at Dongeoneſſe and at Wintertonneſſe, there haue periſhed aboue one hundred Ships ſince the date of the Statute 8. Eliz. which (if this power be proper to that Corporation) ſhould be laid to their charge, as by whoſe careleſneſſe and neglect all theſe wofull loſſes haue happened, and which by all appearance would neuer haue beene preuented by them if Thomas Buſſell had not beene an humble ſutor to the King for Caſter and Stamport Lights. Sir Edw. Howard for Dongeonneſſe, and the Patentees for Wintertonneſſe Lights.
            The Maſters of Shipping that repine at the payment of this penny, whereby their Shipping▪ Goods and liues are preſerued, beſides the gaine they make by the voyage more in a yeare, Doe 
                  〈◊〉
                for meaſuring their Coales vpon the ſhore at London eight pence vpon the London Chaldron. The difference of which ſeruices it may be conſidered by this Honourable Court.
            There hath beene no exceptions taken againſt the proſecution of the buſineſſe before it paſt the great Seale: execution of the Patent after it was paſt, nor in the truſt repoſed in the Patentee.
            By all which Arguments aboue written, and their voluntary Contributions graunted to others for ſeruice leſſe important and leſſe chargeable, it would appeare that they ayme rather at the Patentee then the penny, and that this vnſeaſonable offer of ſixe pence vpon euery twenty Chaldron: (Beſides, that it is impoſſible, and that a Statute can hardly tye any man to giue vnder hand what he pleaſeth) is but a fraudulent Compact betwixt the Maſters of the Trinity houſe, and the Maſters of Shipping, who to wreſt the authority from the King, and to defeate the Patent, will offer to maintaine them for nothing at all, when in the meane time it will be as eaſie a matter to the Maſters of the Trinity-houſe, after they haue gotten ſole power in their hands to improue their voluntary Contributions by the ſuperintendency they haue of Sea-faring men, being for the moſt part yonger brothers of their Corporation, as to extort from the Strangers vnder colour of Pilottage, fiue, ſixe, ſeauen and eight pounds euery voyage made. Notwithſtanding, that they are limitted by their Charter, to take onely two ſhillings of twenty, one of tenne, and eight pence out of a noble of the Pilots wages. As alſo to take eight pence a foote as the Ship draweth deepe: Beſides Boyage, Beaconage, and Anchorage, payable by both Subiect and Stranger.
            Wherefore the benefit redounding to the Common-wealth by many degrees exceeding the charge, beſides the ſafety of mens liues, the debt of the Patentee which hath beene occaſioned by the performance of this ſeruice, being ſo heauy vpon him and his ſuerties: The charge that he is at yearely in the execution of it being ſo great, and the profit in regard of the vncertaine charge not anſwerable vnto the common opinion, and it appeareth that the Patentee hath performed the truſt repoſed in him better then the Maſters of the Trinity-houſe, who not onely in this particular, but in euery thing elſe haue neglected the truſt repoſed in them, He is an humble ſutor vnto this Honourable Aſſembly, that they may not Monopolize all vnto themſelues, but that the Patentee may enioy the benefit graunted vnto him by his Maieſtie.
         
      
   