
      
         
            
            
            A LETETR VVRITTEN BY CAPtaine EDVVARD WINNE, to the Right Honourable, Sir George Caluert, Knight, his Maiesties Principall Secretary: From Feryland in Newfoundland, the 26. of August. 1621.
            
            Imprinted MDCXXI.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HOnourable, Sir George Caluert, Knight, his Maiesties principall Secretary.
            
               May it please your Honour,
            
            Vpon the 26. day of Iune, betweene 12. and 1. in the morning we did set saile & departed from Plimmoth, and vpon the 4. day of August, (Gods name be praised for it) we safely arriued at Feryland. There happened nothing in our ouer-bound passage worthy your Honours leasure of reading. Our passage was somewhat tedious, the

which hapned by meanes of much Westerly winds, and not without some foule weather.
            The first land we made was that to the Westward of Cape de Raze, and the wind at North-east, by reason whereof our ariuall aforesaid was prolonged by the space of two dayes, in the interim of which time wee trauersed to and againe, to make good that which might mainetaine that outwardnesse towards our wished Harbour. Hauing the happines of a cleere skie al about, & both Coast and Continent without any Rayne, Fogge or Hazines, they being in these parts the

common attendants of Easterly winds. By this commodity I had the full view of the Coast betweene (as wee supposed) Cape Saint Maries, Cape de Raze, and Cape Ballard, and as farre as Renouze, and as we hold alongst the same, I saw (in my meane iudgmēt) the beautifullest Coast and the pleasantest Sea Cant that euer mine eyes beheld, for that spacious tract. It is a very Champion Country without any Hill, appearing either within Land, or vpon the Coast, representing it selfe vnto me like a pleasant Medow, and the Seabanke all along of an equall height, and that so indifferent,

that out of a floating Boat one may easily throw a quoit vpon the leuell shore. Of the fertility of the soyle I can say nothing onely that it is very probable that much or most part thereof may proue very good with the help of mans industry, seeming to be void of woods, and the endowments of Harbours and Roades for Shipping, Trepassey excepted.
            
               Renouze is a place of great fishing, and about a league to the Northward of the same is the Harbour of Fermoze, thence to Agnafort, another league, from thence to Feryland about a mile, & to Cape Broyle another, including

               Capling Bay between both, being ignorant as yet of that to the Northward of the same. But from Renoze to Cape Broyle, for Woods and pleasant Harbours they are most pleasant to behold, the Sea Cant whereof being vneuen and hilly, yet not extreme, but of height indifferent, the Inland more enclining towards a Champion, and by generall consent here, Feryland is as pleasant and as profitable a Harbour as any in the Land. It is endowed with about 100. acres of pasture land, and as much more of that which is wooddie: all which lying to the Sea-boord of the beach, which

seuers it so from the Maine, that it is almost an Iland. There is likewise about 200. acres more, lying close to the Harbour, the which (with some labour) may be made good pasture land.
            The Sea coast to the Northward of Renouze, is most capable and fittest for Wood-land as now it is, but (most destroyed) from the bottome of the Harbours, and so inwards, for arable and (most) pasture.
            Both Sea and Land heere swarme (as it were) with benefits and blessings of God for mans vse and reliefe.
            The Land here is (without doubt) very fertile, for I haue

since my arriuall seene Wheate, Barly and Rye, growing here full eared & kerned, the which had beene accidentally shed out of Salt Mats among Stones & Grasse. Therefore ground of better choise, well manured and fitly prepared, will doubtlesse bring forth plentifull increase, and wherefore there is no iust doubt to be made: for in reason where there is a Summer, there will be a Haruest.
            Besides there are many other inuitements, which (as it were) becken vnto your Honors perseuerance. First the commodity of the Salt, which for vent and making here may fitly and

necessarily bee vndertaken. Secondly Hempe and Flaxe for cordage, and thred for necessary vses, as also for Nets and Lines for fishing, Tarre, Yron and Timber in some measure, and places to be had for boords and building, & also for Masts, and yards for Shipping. So likewise Hops will grow heere a profitable Marchandize. Also here are two fishing seasons, the the former for dry fish, and the latter for Cor-fish: wherewith (together with the traine of the whole) many Ships are imploied to the Market & otherwise.
            My want of leasure causeth me to omit many things, which

otherwise I might haue enlarged, this my seruice of writing.
            By the consent and aduise of some of the masters of this Harbour, I am become an humble suter vnto your Honour for the redresse of such abuses, the which (except a speedy redresse may be had) wil ouerthrow the whole.
            1. And first that Stones or Ballast may not from henceforth be cast into the Harbour, and the Beaches preserued. 2. Secondly, that no man neither burne nor pull downe Stages, Flakes, nor any part thereof. 3. Thirdly that the rinding of Trees may be prohibited, but

only such as shall bee felled for necessary vses and needefull behoofes. Fourthly, that all such Woods and Timber-trees so felled, may bee cut close to to the ground. 5. Lastly, that no man may bee wronged in their Boats and traine-fats, or in any thing else whatsoeuer. And therefore if this by your Honors fauour and procurement may be had, a prosperous & flourishing time will follow, and all things here will goe on well hereafter, the which God grant: And for the which, the said Masters humbly pray that large penalties may (therin be specified, and first to be proclaimed

in Englund. Thus referring all vnto your Honors wisdome and full consideration. Our busines, or rather your Honors now goeth forward apace; the frame is in hand, and almost ready for the rearing; the seller is already diged; al things by Gods grace and blessed assistance shall be performed with al care & diligence, whereof your Honour may be pleased to rest assured, as by the successe of my carefulnesse it shall plainely appeare.
            The 5. persons and prouision from aboord the Beniamin, are safely ariued here the 17. of August, but not without some danger, for I was enforced to send

for them in two shallops of fishing Botes from the Iles of Speare, 4. leagues from this place.
            The place whereon I haue made choise to plant and build vpon, is according to the Letter A in this superficiall draught here inclosed, it being the fittest the warmest, and most commodious of all about the Harbour. And as soone as the house and fortification is fitted and finished, I shall (God willing) prepare and fence in a proportion of seede ground, and a Garden close by the house. It may please your Honour not to send any Cattle the next yeere, because I cannot prouid fodder

for them so soone, before there bee some quantity of Corne growing, but it may please your Honour to send some Goates, a few tame Conies for breede, as also Pigs, Geese, Ducks and Hens. I haue some Hens already: some Spades from London were necessary, if of the best making, also some good Pickaxes, yron Croes, and a Smith, and also such as can brew and bake.
            Meale and Malt would bee sent rather then otherwise, being both better cheap, & of lesse waste, yet referring all to your Honors pleasure therein, humbly praying you would be pleased

to proceed with all cheerefulnes, nothing doubting of a good and profitable succsse, for here are are great hopes, and a large Territory for to imploy and receiue many needy people in a blessed and a profitable doing, euen who may liue heere both wealthily and happily.
            And withall it may likewise please your Honour, that after one yeere more we shall be able to subsist of our selues by our owne industry, with Master Iennings his helpe and furtherance, and that with his profit and content.
            I doubt not but that within the compasse of a small time to

make your Honour a sauer.
            If your Honor please, you may defer the sending of a salt Pan one yeere more. Brigs and Owen hath bin touched with the Scuruie, but are now well recouered but all the rest of vs are in perfect health, I thanke God for it.
            One Master Yawe, Master of a Ship of Barnstable (whose owner is called Master Strange) hee did spare mee halfe his Stage; the which did stand me in great steede to put my prouision in at the first landing of them. Master Luxen, a Master of another Ship of Barnstable, hee shewed me much courtesie, & bestowed on me a Hen and 10. Chickens.

Master Richard Martin, Master of the Blessing of Dartmouth, he gaue me a couple of yong Pullets, kind entertainement, and many good turnes. Master Michael Waltham, Master of a Ship of Weimouth, hee went in person to the Ile of Speare, in a Boate of his owne, to helpe to fetch our men and prouision from aboord the Beniamin, hee hath besides done mee many good Offices, and hath sent mee many presents of Fresh-fish, and his Mate bestowed on mee a good Hen.
            My happinesse of preuayling hetherto hath beene such, that all the Masters as well as the

common sort throughout this Harbour haue vsed me kindly, and to say truely, I haue not discerned so much as a sowre aspect vpon mee amongst them all.
            I haue not beene (and please your Honour) wanting in any thing, which by faire perswasions might produce a good liking of your Honours proceedings: insomuch that (I am perswaded) diuers wil stay with me another yeere. Therefore I humbly pray your Honour to entreate Master Iennings to send me 3. Peeces of Ordnance, a full Saker, a Minion, & a lesser Peece for our defence, a Drumme,

and a Ship Ancient.
            And thus with my humble duty remembred, I most humbly cease to trouble your Honour any further for this time, resting
            
               
                  Your Honors most humble and faithfull seruant,
Edward Winne.
               
                  Feryland, 
                  the 26. of August. 1621.
               
            
         
         
            
            ANOTHER LETTER of the 28. of August, from the said Captaine Winne, vnto Master Secretary Caluert.
            
            
               MAy it please your Honour,
            
            Vpon the 26. of this present I deliuered vnto one Master Henry Zeny, Master of a Ship of Milbrooke, neere Plimmoth, a Packet directed to Master Iennings, wherein my Letters to your Hononr were enclosed: the Coppies whereof I haue likewise here inclosed, and haue sent the same by one Master Busse, Master of the

               Prosperous a Ship of Bristol, humbly praying your Honour, that I may be furnished with all necessary Tooles and prouision of Victuals the next yeare, and if your Honour may, with about the number of twenty persons more, whereof a Surgeon, and a learned and a religious Minister: that then your Honour may be pleased by Gods assistance, not to doubt of a good and a profitable successe in euery respect, and a flourishing plantation, women would bee necessary heere for many respects. Some two miles from this Harbour, direct West, there is a pleasant Champion fit for the Farme, which I trust with your Honours leaue, to set forward another yeere. And thus with my

humble duty remembred and recommended vnto your Honour and my good Lady, beseeching the Almighty to blesse you and yours, and so I rest.
            
               
                  Your Honors most humble faith full and obedient seruant,
Edward Winne.
               
                  From Ferryland, 
                     the 28. of August 1621.
                  
               
            
         
      
   