
      
         
            
            
            ABVSES
STRIPT,
AND
WHIPT.
OR
SATIRICAL ESSAYES.
            By GEORGE WYTHER.
Diuided into two Bookes

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               Dispise not this what ere I seeme in showe,
               A foole to purpose speaks sometime you know.
            
            
            AT LONDON,
Printed by G. ELD, for FRANCIS
BVRTON, and are to be solde at his shop
in Pauls Church-yard, at the signe of
the Green-Dragon. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            To him-selfe, G. W. wisheth
all hapinesse.
            
               THou (euen my selfe) whome
next God, my Prince, and
Country I am most engaged
vnto; It is not vnlikelie,
but some will wonder,
why, contrary to the
worlds custome, I haue
made choyse of thy Patronage for this
booke, rather then the protection of such
whose mightinesse might seeme better able
to defend it; especially considering such a
Gigantick troupe of aduersaries haue banded
themselues against the Truth, that one
of them Goliah-like dares raile vpon a whole
hoast of Israel. It may be (I say) some will
wonder, and some scoffe at mee for it; for
which cause (though to answer them with
sic volo had been sufficient: yet to shew I will
not like our Great ones stand so much vpon

my authority as to make my VVill my Reason)
I heere let you know why, and for what
causes I haue done it; the first is this: I
could not amongst all men finde any man,
in my opinion, so fitting for this purpose,
but either my Worke was vnworthy, or too
worthie his Patronage. Secondly, it is
said; Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit:
and I doubting my free speech would hardly
make a Diapason, pleasing to the eare of
a common Mecaenas, thought it best to hold
my tong, or speake to my selfe, whose disposition
I am better acquainted with.
Thirdly, seeing I know but what men appeare,
and not what they are; I had rather
indure the Kites tyranny, then with Aesops
Doues make the Sparrow-hauke my Champion.
Fourthly, if I haue spoken Truth it is able
to defend it selfe; if not, who-ere be my
Patron, it is I must answere for it. Fiftly, for
asmuch as I know my owne minde best; I
purpose, if need be, to become my own Aduocate.
Sixtly, for my owne sake I first made
it, and therefore certaine I am I my selfe
haue most right vnto it. But seauently, and
lastly (which is indeed the principal Reason) I

haue made this Dedication to thee, poore
world-despised Selfe; euen to put thee in
minde, (seeing thou hast here boldly begun
to bid defiance to the Flesh, and vpon iust
causes quarrelled with the World) that thou
take heed to thine owne words, and not
through basenes of minde or vntowardnes
of Fortune (to thy euerlasting disgrace)
faintly giue ouer so noble a Combate; If euer
aduersitie (as tis like enough) oppresse thee,
yet remember thy owne sayings, and in despight
of outward Destinies haue a care to
keepe an vndeiected heart still free for Vertue.
Or on the contrary, if euer (as tis vnlikely)
vnexpected Prosperity bee cast vpon
thee, then look to thy selfe, take to thee this
poore booke of thine, wherein thou shalt
see the dangers of it, and be, perhaps, thereby
staid from many a perilous enterprise,
which that estate might else driue thee
into. Reade it, weekely, daily, yea and
howerly toe: what though it bee thine
owne? thou knowest mans nature to
bee so vncertaine, and prone to forgetfulnesse,
euen in the best things, that thou
canst not haue too many Memorandums.
               
The wisest fall, and therefore euery day was
Philip desirous to bee remembred that hee
was a Man; thou thinkest I know, still to remaine
what thou art, I desire in some things
thou maist, but vnlesse thou labour it with
diligent watchfulnesse ouer affection, it is at
least much to be doubted, if not altogether
to bee despaired of; thou hast seene many
by an alteration in their estate beene so metamorphosed,
as if they were not the same
men, nor of that Nation.
            
            Nay remember it, thou thy selfe, and that
but vpon a bare hope, or imagination of
some preferment, hast bin puffed vp and exalted
aboue measure: consider now then
how much more thou hadst beene so and
what had become of thee if God had not
by dashing those hopes called thee to thy
selfe againe? Alas! if hee had answered thy
ambitious expectations to thy desire, thou
hadst bin by this time past recouerie and
not thought of this; but delighted in villany,
bin ouer-mastered by passion, rusht into
all vanity and presumption; yet neuer felt any
danger, till it were too late to preuent it▪
Thou hast oft wisht thou hadst bin borne to

the like means that others are, which might
it haue beene so, now thou seest thou
shouldst hardly, or neuer, haue come to the
knowledge of those things, that are now
showne thee. Tis true, thou hast lamented
to be crost in thy preferments, but thou
seest since that it might haue been thy vndoing
if it had not beene so, and maist perswade
thy selfe, whether it be now or neuer,
it will be to thy good. For tell me, hast thou
not often felt, euen when thou wert busiest
to preuent them; fond loue, ambition, reuenge,
couetousnesse and such like Passions
then to inuade thee? Hast thou perceiued
it I say? How much more then would
they haue beene ready to assaile thee, when
quite forgetting them, thou hadst wholly
addicted thy self to the things of this world?
Let mee aduise my deare-selfe then, to make
vse of this thine owne worke, it will be better
to thee then all the world: for this good
it may do thee, and to this end I made both

                  •
               t and the Dedication thereof to thee, that if
euer hereafter the temptations of the world,
the flesh & the diuel, or any occasion should
make thee to forget this mind that thou art

now in: or so blind thy vnderstanding
thou shouldst not perceiue thy owne and
the Worlds follies as thou now dost; That
if thou shouldst be in that miserable state as
many are, to haue no feeling of thy danger:
that if thou shouldst bee wofully flattered
and haue no friend that dares, or loues
thee so well to put thee in mind of thy
transgressions.
            Then I haue ordained this to shew
thee what once thou wert, to touch thee
againe with the feeling of thy miseries,
and to bee vnto thee that true Friend,
which, free from all faigned inuention,
shal plainely tell thee, what perhaps should
else haue neuer beene brought againe to
thy remembrance. Looke then that for
thy owne sake thou respect this, how euer
to others it may seeme a trifle. Bee
carefull of thy actions, for seeing thou
knowest the dangerous Passions wherevnto
Man is subiect, hast showne his vanities,
layed open his Weakenesse, and sharpely
taxed his Presumptions: If now thou
shouldest wilfully runne thy selfe into
the same euilles, the vvorld would vpraid
                  •
               
               
thee, this Booke, yea thy Conscience accuse
thee, God and good-men hate thee, thy
fault be more odious and in-excusable, thy
iudgement more seuere, and which is worst,
thy punishment most intollerable; I say
seeke therefore (if for no other cause) so to
carry thy selfe, that at least thou maist
haue a good conscience before God, for
Si Deus tecum quis contrate, but if now hauing
made the World thine enemie, exposed
thy selfe to the malice thereof, and hauing
so many Legions of foes without thee,
thou shouldest also, by thy negligence,
suffer the inuincible fortresse of a sound
Conscience to be crazed within thee, the Di
                  
                     •
                  ell,
that is alway watching such aduantages,
would quickly possesse it with an vnmercifull
troupe of Horrors, Feares, and
Desperations, that without Gods miraculous
assistance thou wouldest grow wholly past
either comfort or recouery.
            For all the World cannot defend thee against
thy Conscience, but that beeing with
hee, thou maist preuaile against all the
World. Beware then, doe not like the Zibe
                  
                     •
                  hum
yeeld a perfume to sweeten others

and be thy selfe a stinking vermine, but
let this thy owne worke bee first confirmed
by thy life and conuersation, yea let it be a
President to thy selfe, for, Tan
                     •
                  i erit aliis
quanti tibi fuerit, but if not, I say if the
World mis-esteeme either it or thee, yet doe
not thou therefore esteeme the lesse either
of thy booke or of thy selfe, but rather let
them know
            That thou hast learned, still thy care, shalbe,
            A rush for him, that cares a straw for thee.
            But now, though for these and diuers oother
Reasons, I haue to thee my Owne-selfe
committed the protection, and made the
Dedication of this booke, yet my meaning
is not that thou shouldst keepe it wholly to
thine owne vse; But rather seeing it is honourable
to giue, (though none will giue
thee any thing) I haue bestowne this o
                  •
               
thee, that if thou canst in this corrupted
age, finde any, whom desert, and thy loue
may make so deare vnto thee, or whom
                  •
               
thou art perswaded will gratifie, or but
thinke well of thy honest endeauours, thou
maist bee liberall to them both of these
thy labours and expences. But this I coniure

thee to; be they neuer so great yet flatter
not, or if he be a man whom thou knowest
the World speakes any way iustly ill of;
either tell him his fault, or leaue him wholly
out of thy Catalogue: But because I begin
to grow tedious to my owne-selfe, and since
I shall haue Opportunity enough to consider
with thee what is further needfull without
an Epistle, with my prayers for my
Prince, my Country, my friends, and my

                  
                     •
                  wne prosperitie, without any leaue taking,
or Commendations of my Selfe; I
heartily wish my owne
Soule to fare-well.
            
               Thy Princes, thy Countries, thy
friends, and thine i. thine
owne whilst Reason masters
Affection.
GEO. WITHER.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               REaders; I speake to you that
haue vnderstanding; when
these first fruits of my conuerted
Muses, shall come to
your iudicious censures, Do
not look for Spencers, or Daniels
wel composed numbers;
or the deep conceits of now florishing Iohnson;
no; say tis honest plain matter, & there's as much
as I look for. If I haue seem'd to err in any thing
suppose me not so obstinate, or wel conceited of my
own opinions, but that I may be perswaded by any
that shal produce stronger reasons to the contrary.
If any thing may seeme to haue a doubtfull
interpretation, assure your selues the honestest
meaning in it is mine, and although some may
think I haue not so wel ioyned things together as
I might haue done, I know whē you haue considered
the nature of the Subiect, & the diuersity of
things therin hādled, you wil accept my good wil
& let my yeeres be an excuse for that & al other
ignorant ouer-sights whatsoeuer. Some no doubt

will mistake my plainnes, in that I haue so bluntly
spoken what I haue obserued, without any Poeticall
additions or fained Allegories, I am sorry
I haue not pleased them therein, but should
haue been more sorry if I had displeased my selfe
in doing otherwise; for I know if I had wrapt vp
vy meaning, in dark riddles, I should haue been
more applauded and lesse vnderstood, which I
nothing desire. I neither feare nor shame to
speake the Trurh, and therefore haue nakedly
thrust it forth without a couering. To what
end were it, if I (as some do) had appareld my
mind in darke Parables, that few or none
might haue vnderstood mee? I should doe better
to be silent; but if it be more in request I may
hereafter be obscure enough, yet in this tis not
my meaning, for indeed, if I knew how, my desire
is to be so plaine, that the bluntest Iobernole
might vnderstand mee. Our Grand-villaines
care not for a secret ierk; well wee may
shew an honest wit in couertly nipping them; but
either 'tis in vaine cause they perceiue it not, or
else ridiculous, seeing they only vnderstand it
who will but either malice or flout vs for our labors.
Many may dislike the harshnes of the Verse
but you know, although it be not stately, yet it we

enough befits the matter, and whereas I may seem
blame-worthy in mixing Diuinity with Humanity:
yet when you haue found my generall ayme;
considered with what reuerent respect I haue done
it, and what commendable authorities I may haue
for it, I nothing misdoubt your approbation. Those
things which concerne my selfe, may seeme childish,
nothing pleasing, but you must consider I had
a care to please my selfe aswel as others; and if the
World blame mee as to sawcy with her, 'tis for
want of manners, but her owne fault, that would
allow mee no better education. To bee briefe, if I
haue any way offended I am so well perswaded you
wil mildly conster my errors and infirmities, that
I rest wholly, and onely on your sound and incorrupted
Iudgements.
            
            *But*
            
               Readers; I meane you that are no more but Readers;
I make no question if this book come to your
spelling, it will haue many halting verses, and
disioynted sentenses: for I haue had experience
of your insufficiencie: yet haue I striu'd to bee
for your sakes I tell you (because I would if it were
possible bee vnderstood) as plaine (as they
say) as a pack-saddle, and now the doubt is then
fooles will ride me. If they doe certainly, I shall

be rough & vneasie for their tendernes. Though
you vnderstand them not yet because you see this
wants some fine Phrases & flourishes, as you find
other mens writings stuft withal, perhaps you
wil iudge me vnlearned. Wel; and right enough.
Yet you will be counted but saucy Coblers to go
beyond your Lasts. And if that be a fault did not
the subiect and your ignorances, require me to be
in that sort faulty? I could with ease haue amended
it, for it cost me (I protest) more labour to obserue
this plainenesse then if I had more Poetically
trim'd ii, but for feare if I speake much, I
confound your Memories, I will say no more but
this, Read and welcome, but Censure not,
for your iudgement is weake and I vtterly
renounce it.
            
               
                  Valete
George Wither.
            
         
         
            
            
               To Time. EPIGR. 1.
               
                  NOw swift-deuouring, bald and ill fac't Time,
                  
                  Dost not thou blush to see thy selfe vncloak't?
                  Oh that I knew but how to laugh in Rime?
                  
                  Faith I would do it though thou wisht me choakt.
                  Did'st thou but see how thy faire antique shape,
                  Is now transformed to a shapelesse hew:
                  
                  How like thou look'st to some Barbarian Ape,
                  
                  Could'st thou I say with me thine owne selfe view
                  Thou wouldst be Metamorphosed anew,
                  Run quite away, and either all amend,
                  Or wish thy selfe and all things at an end.
               
               
                  And yet dispaire not Time, though thou art ill;
                  The worst that euer yet was knowne to be,
                  Tis not ordain'd thou shouldst remaine so still,
                  For I my selfe this age do hope to see:
                  The gloriou'st work that euer Time brought forth,
                  The master-peece, and the most noble act;
                  In the respect of which 'twere nothing worth
                  If all the braue deeds done were but one fact,
                  
                     Romes fall I meane; I heard it when it crack't.
                  Yea from my Cradle I did still surmize;
                  I should see Babell tumble Bethell rise,
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 2.
               I Heare theres some aske how I dare so plaine
               Tax the Abuses that I now see raigne,
               I muse as much they dare say ill vnto it,
               Or dare but aske, but how I dare to doe it.
            
            
               To the Stranger 3.
               THou that wert so vnhappy first, to breath,
               Without the compasse of Great Brittans powe
                     •
                  
               
               And blest againe that fate did thee bequeath,
               The knowledge of so rich a tongue as our.
               If vnderstanding thou dost hap to read,
               This booke wherein thou seest my nations sham
                     •
                  
               
               Yet do not thou against my Country plead,
               For thine thou know'st doth merit as much blame
               Our faults are many, this indeed is true;
               But were they moe, we were no worse then you.
            
            
               To the Satyro-mastix. 4.
               
                  OH Lord Sir y'are deceiu'd I'me none of tho
                        ••
                     
                  
                  That write in Anger, or malicious spleene,
                  I haue not taken pepper in the Nose,
                  Nor a base forger of false libels beene,
                  Such ones there be indeed, such I haue seene;
               
               
                  
                  I enuy no man for his greatnes I,
                  Nor seeke I any honest mans disgrace;
                  I ioy in euery ones prosperity,
                  Ile not the credit of a dogge deface,
                  My Aduersaery shall not prooue the case.
               
               
                  Then stand back sirrah Whip-Iack with your scourge,
                  Do not incense my Satyr for thy life:
                  Hee's patient enough vnlesse thou vrge,
                  Contentions are now a dayes to rife,
                  And he is very backward vnto strife,
               
               
                  But notwithstanding heere he lets thee see,
                  As long as there is cause and reason why:
                  In spight of all that foes to Satyrs be:
                  He shall, if I list taxe iniquitie,
                  It is a matter of necessity.
               
               
                  What? you would faine haue all the great ones freed,
                  They must not for their vices be controld,
                  Beware; that were a saucines indeed;
                  But if the Great-ones to offend be bold,
                  I see no reason but they should be told.
               
               
                  Yea and they shall; their faults most hurtfull be,
                  And though I will not put them to that shame,
                  I no iniustice in the matter see,
                  If they were taxed by their proper name,
                  For no sinne can on earth haue her full blame.
                  Then Scourge of Satyrs hold thy whip from mine,
                  Or I will make my rod lash thee and thine.
               
            
            
               
               To the gald Reader.
               EPIG. 8.
               SIr, he thats night-gald or hath cornes on's toes,
               May blame the Shoomaker and curse his shooes
               But those that are acquainted with the fault,
               Can tell the reason wherefore he doth halt;
               So thou maist think (perhaps) these Satyrs sting thee
               Where only thy owne guiltines doth wring thee.
               For if thou wert from these diseases free,
               Thou wouldst be quiet as some others be.
               But tis well known a ticklish beast hath tricks
               
               And the old Prouerb saith a gold la 
                        •
                     e kicks.
               
               But I'le aduise thee, if thou feele it smart,
               Be rule by me and play not the fooles part,
               Keep't to thy selfe, and there are none shall know,
               Whether that thou art toucht therein or no,
               Thou seest thou neither art markt out nor na'md;
               And therefore onely to thy selfe art sham'd;
               Now if thou stir at best thou shalt but make
               The Country of thy faults more knowledge take.
               And (as indeed it iustly may) diuine,
               The worst faults that I write against are thine,
               Then since to be reprooued seemes a curse,
               And to be mooued makes the matter worse,
               Either for to amend thy life haue care,
               O
                     •
                   like a Pack! orse and an Asse stil beare.
            
            
               
               To the Impartiall Author.
               
                  CEorge, I did euer thinke thy faithfull breast,
               Conteind a mind beyond the common sort,
               Thy very looke and honest heart exprest,
               And seem'd an aw-full mildnes to import:
               Poets may vaunt of smooth and lofty straines,
               Thine with thy subiect fitly do agree;
               But then thy Muse a better praise obtaines,
               For whilst the greatest but time-pleasers be,
               Thou vnappald and freely speak'st the truth:
               Not any one for feare or lucre sparing:
               A vertue rare in age, more rare in youth;
               Another Cato, but I think more daring;
               Wel maist thou speed in these tempestuous times,
               Thou soone begin'st to make the world thy foe
               Yet I so wel do like thy honest rimes;
               That I could wish al Poets would write so;
               For thou the way of truth so rightly tend'st,
               I hold them double prais'd whom thou commendst
               Thy deare friend, TH. C.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               The Contents of the first
BOOKE.
               The Occasion.
               The Introduction,
               Of Man
               Offond Loue. Satyr 1
               Of Lust. 2
               Of Hate. 3
               Of Enuy. 4
               Of Reuenge. 5
               Of Choller. 6
               Of Iealousie, 7
               Of Couetousnes. 8
               Of Ambition. 9
               Of Feare. 10
               Of Despaire. 11
               Of Hope. 12
               Of Compassion. 13
               Of Cruelty. 14
               Of Ioy. 15
               Of Sorrow. 16
               The Conclusion of the first Booke.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND
BOOKE.
               Of Vanity. Satyr. 1
               Of Inconstancy 2
               Of Weaknes. 3
               Of Presumption 4
               The Scourge
               Epigramms to the King, &c. and to certaine noble Personages
and friends, to whom the Author gaue any
of his Bookes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               THE OCCASION.
               Of this worke.
               VVHen nimble Time, that all things ouer-runs;
               Made me forsake my tops and elderne guns
               Reaching those yeares in which the schoole boyes bragge
               In leauing off the bottle and the bagg:
               The very spring before I grew so old,
               That I had amost thrice fiue winters told,
               Noting my other fellow-pupils hast,
               That to our English Athens flockt so fast:
               Least others for a truant should suspect me,
               That had the selfe-same Tutor to direct me
               And in a manner counting it a shame,
               To vndergoe so long a Schoole-boyes name,
               Thither went I; for (though Ile not compare)
               With any of them that my fellowes were;
               Yet then (Ile speake it to my Teachers praise)
               I was vnfurnisht of no needfull layes;
               Nor any whit for Grammar rules to seeke,
               In Lillies Latine, nor in Camdens Greeke.
               
                  
But so well grounded that another day,
               I could not with our idle students say
               For an excuse I was ill enter'd; no:
               There are too-many know it was not so;
               And therefore since I came no wiser thence,
               I must confesse it was my negligence,
               Yet daily longing to behold and see,
               The places where the sacred Sisters be;
               I was so happy to that Foard I came,
               Of which an Oxe, they say, beares halfe the name:
               It is the spring of knowledge that imparts,
               A thousand seuerall Sciences, and Arts,
               A Christall fount, whose water is by ods,
               Far sweeter then the Nectar of the Gods:
               
               Or for to giue't a title that befits,
               It is the very Nurcery of wits;
               There once arriued, cause my wits were raw,
               I fell to wondring at each thing I saw
               And for my learning made a monthes vacation,
               In nothing of the places scituation:
               The Palaces and Temples that were due
               Vnto the wife Mineruaes hallowed crew;
               Their cloisters, walkes, and groues all which suruei'd,
               And in my new admittance well apaid;
               I did (as other idle Freshmen doe)
               Long for to see the Bell of Osney to:
               But yet, indeed (may not I grieue to tell?)
               I neuer dranke at Aristotles Well.
               
               And that perhaps may be the reason why,
               I know so little in Philosophy.
               
                  
Yet old Sir Harry Bath was not forgot,
               In the remembrance of whose wondrous shot,
               The Forrest by (beleeue it they that will)
               Retaines the surname of shot-ouer still:
               Then hauing seene enough, and therewithall,
               Got some experience at the Tennisball,
               
               My Tutor (telling me I was not sent,
               There to be idle, but with an intent,
               For to encrease my knowledge), cald me in,
               And with his graue instructions did begin
               To teach: And by his good perswasions sought,
               To bring me to a loue of what he taught:
               Then after that he gan for to impart,
               The hidden secrets of the Logick Art;
               In steed of grammer rules he taught me than,
               Old Scotus, Seton, and new Keckerman.
               He shew'd me which the Predicables be,
               As Genus, Species, and th' other three,
               So hauing said enough of their contents,
               Handles in order the ten Praedicaments,
               
               
                  Then Post praedicaments: with Priorum,
               Perhermenias and posteriorum:
               He with the Topicks opens; and descries
               
                  Elenchi, full of subtile falacies:
               These to vnfold (indecd) he tooke some paine,
               But to my dull capacity in vaine:
               For all he spake was to as little passe,
               As in old time vnto the vulger was
               Their Latine seruice, which they vnderstood
               Aswel as did a horse to do them good,
               
                  
And I his meaning did as neere coniecture,
               As if he had beene reading Hebrew lecture;
               
               
                  His Infinites, Indiuiduit
                     •
                  es,
               Contrari's, and Subcontrarieti's,
               Diuisions: Subdiuisions, and a crew
               
               Of tearmes and wordes such as I neuer knew;
               My shallow vnderstanding so confounded,
               That I was grauel'd like a ship that's grounded;
               And in despaire the mistery to gaine,
               Neglecting all tooke neither heed nor paine,
               Yea, I remaind in that amazed plight,
               Till Cinthia sixe times lost her borrowed light,
               But then ashamd to find my selfe still mute,
               And other little Dandiprats dispute,
               That could distinguish vppon Rationale,
               
               Yet scarcely heard of Ver
                        •
                     um Personale;
               
               And could by heart (like Parots) in the Schooles,
               Stād pratling, those me thought were pretty fooles,
               And therefore in some hope to profit so,
               That I like them (at least) might make a show:
               I reacht my bookes that I had cast about,
               (To see if I could pick the meaning out)
               And prying on them with some diligence,
               At length I felt my dull intelligence
               Begin to open; and perceiued more,
               In halfe an houre then halfe a yeare before,
               And which is strange the thinges I had forgot,
               And till that very day remembred not,
               Since first my Tutor read them; those did then,
               Returne into my memory agen,
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  o that with which I had so much to do,
               A weeke made easie, yea and pleasing too.
               But then with that not thoroughly content,
               
                  
                     •
                  practis'd to maintaine an Argument,
               
               And hauing waded thorough Sophistrie,
               
               
                  
                     •
                  ell vnto reading of Philosophy;
               
               And thinking there the Ethicks not enough,
               
                  
                     •
                   also had a longing for to know,
               
                  The cause of snow, haile, thunder, frost, and raine,
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     he lightenings, meteors, and what here 'twere vaine
               For me to speake of; since I shall but show-it,
               
                  
                     •
                  o those that better then my selfe do know-it.
               Then from the causes of thinges naturall,
               
                  
                     •
                  went to matters Metaphisical:
               
               Of which when I a little newes could tell,
               
                  
                     •
                   (as the rest did) vnto wrangling fell.
               And as the fashion was for to disgrace her,
               When I oppos'd the truth I could out-face her,
               
                  
                     •
                  ut now ensues the worst, I getting foot,
               
                  
                     •
                  nd well digesting Learnings bitter Root:
               
                  
                     •
                  eady to tast the fruit; and when I thought
               
                  
                     •
                  hould a Calling in that place haue sought,
               
                  
                     •
                  ound I was for other ends ordain'd,
               
                  
                     •
                  ea to forsake this course I was constrain'd:
               
                  
                     •
                  or fortune that full many a boone hath lost me,
               
                  
                     •
                  hus in the reaping my contentment, crost me.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     u sir (quoth she) that I must make my slaue,
               
                  
                     •
                  or whom in store a thousand plagues I haue,
               
                  
                     •
                  ome home, I pray, and learne to hold the plough,
               
                  
                     •
                  or you haue read Philosophy enough.
               
                  
If wrangling in the schooles be such a sport,
               Go to those Ploydens in the Inns of Court,
               
               For aske your parish-neighbors they can tell,
               Those fellowes do maintaine contention well;
               For Art in numbers you no coile need keep,
               A little skill shall serue to tell your sheepe:
               Seeke not the Stars thy euils should relate,
               Least when thou know them, thou grow desperate;
               And let alone Geometry, tis vaine,
               Ile find you worke enough to marre your braine;
               Or would you study Musique? else 'twere pitty,
               And yet it needs not, you shall find Ile fit ye:
               Ile teach you how to frame a song, and will
               Prouide you cares to be the subiect stil:
               This, Fortune or my Fate, did seem to tel me,
               And such a chance, indeed, ere long befell me,
               For ere my yeares would suffer me to be,
               Admitted for to take the lowest degree;
               By Fates appointment (that no stay can brook)
               The Paradise of England I forsooke,
               And seing I was forc't to leaue those mountaines,
               
               Fine groues, faire walks, & sweet delightful fountains
               And since it might not vnto me be granted,
               To keepe those places where the Muses hanted,
               I home returned somwhat discontent,
               And to our Bentworth beechy shadowes went:
               Bewailing these my first endeauors lost,
               And so to be by angy fortune crost,
               Who though she dayly do much mischiefe to me,
               Can neuer whilst I liue a greater do me;
               
                  
And yet in that, ere she procur'd her will,
               I learnt enough to scorne a Fortune still:
               Yea vse hath made her enuy seeme so vaine,
               That I am almost proud in her disdaine:
               But being back returnd, as I haue said,
               Hauing a little in the Country stai'd,
               I there espi'de (as I had long suspected)
               I (vndeseru'd) of some was ill affected,
               And that by those tis thought my friends had been,
               But though they kept ther mallice long vnseene,
               And made faire showes as if they sought my good;
               Yet they the same of all men most with-stood,
               For, (seeming kind) they often did perswade
               My friends, to learne me some Mechannick trade,
               Vrging expence (perhaps) and telling how,
               That Learning is but little made of now;
               When twas through mallice, cause they feard that I
               Might come to vnderstand my state thereby,
               Exceed their knowledge, and attaine to do,
               My selfe more good, then they could wish me to:
               For that, a worse, or some such scuruy end,
               This selfe-conceited crew did euer bend
               Their spitefull heads, by secret meanes to crosse
               My wisht desire, and to procure my losse:
               But hauing noted this their hollownesse,
               And finding that meere Country businesse,
               Was not my Calling; to auoyd their spight,
               (Which at that season was not showne outright)
               I to the City often did resort,
               To see if either that place, or the Court,
               
               
                  
Would yeeld preferment; but in vaine I sought,
               Ill fortune still my hopes confusion wrought.
               Which though for an ill signe some vnderstood,
               Yet I presum'd vppon some future good.
               For though I scarce am wisht so well of some,
               I hope I haue a happy time to come:
               Which, when I haue most need of comfort, shall
               Send me true Ioy to make amends for all;
               But say it be not whilst I draw this ayre,
               I haue a heart (I hope) shall nere dispaire;
               Because there is a God, with whom I trust,
               My soule shall triumph, when my bodie's dust;
               But when I found that my endeauours still,
               Fell out as they would haue't that wisht me ill,
               And when I saw the world was growne so coy,
               To deeme me then to young for to employ:
               And that her greatnes thought she did not want me
               Or found no Calling bad enough to grant me,
               (And hauing scapt a thrall which Ile not touch,
               Here in this place, for feare I haue too much
               Spoke on't elsewhere;) I say well weighing this,
               Together what a foule reproch it is,
               To be still idle: and because I spide
               How glad they would be that my state enuide
               To find me so although the world doth scorne
               T' allow me action, as if I were borne
               Before my time; yet for to let them see
               In spight of fortune Ile employed be;
               Casting Preferments too much care aside
               And leauing that to God for to prouide;
               
                  
The times abuses I obseru'd and then
               In generall the state and tricks of men,
               Wherein although my labour were not seene,
               Yet (trust me) the discouery hath been,
               My great content: and I haue for my paine,
               Although no outward, yet an inward gaine.
               Of which because I can with all my heart,
               Allow my Country-men to haue a part,
               And cause I thinke it may do some a pleasure,
               On opportunity Ile now take seisure,
               And summon vp my Muse to make relation,
               I may b' imploid ere long, now's my Vacation.
               
            
            
               AN INTRODVCTION.
               
                  COme then Inuention, and call Iudgement in,
               
               
                  Knowledge, and Reason, fie where haue you bin?
               Goe whistle off my Muse that wanton plaies,
               With Epigrams, Loue-Sonnets, Roundelaies,
               And such like trifling game; Bid her come on,
               I haue found brauer prey to seaze vppon.
               
                  
                     •
                  ome new inspiring prayer warmes my heart,
               And addes fresh courage vnto euery part:
               New blood hath fild vp all my loue-dri'd veines,
               
               
                  
                     •
                   sacred Fury hath possest my braines.
               And something too there is that swels my breast,
               
                  
                     •
                  il that be vtter'd I expect no rest;
               
                  
For full with matter like a Sibill Nun,
               
               I shall grow furious till this taske be done.
               Then rouse thee Muse each little Hobby plies,
               At Scarabes and painted Butterflies:
               
               Leaue thou such trash, it is not now for vs,
               To flye for pleasure; weele in earnest trusse,
               But thou lookst dull; vnfit for lofty things,
               Thy wanton flight I feare hath tir' de thy wings,
               Least therefore thou should'st faint, forsake th
                     •
                  efist,
               And turne thy selfe into a Satyrist;
               
               Not of the roughest, nor the mildestsort,
               Be most in earnest, but sometimes in sport,
               What e're thou find to speake be not affrayd,
               And for assistance craue Iehouahs ayd.
               Vse all thy art, for why, thou must vnfold,
               The strangest Nature that was euer told:
               At ripping vp whereof some smart will be,
               Yet goe thou foreward still, who dares touch thee?
               Diue if thou canst, til thou the bottome sound,
               Yet not too farre least thou thy selfe confound;
               Mistake me not, I meane not thou shouldst goe,
               To search th' earths center what lies hid below,
               Or vndermine it for ritch Mineralls
               
               Thou shalt not haue to do with Vegetalls,
               
               Strange natures haue both Stones, Trees, Herbes, and Plants,
               
               Which let him speake of that a Subiect wants,
               There is an Herb indeeed whose vertues such,
               It in the pasture only with a touch,
               Vnshooes the new-shod steed: within the North,
               The Scottish Iles cald Oreades brings forth
               
                  
Trees, (or else writers faine it) from whose seeds,
               A certaine kind of water-foule proceeds.
               The Loadstone also drawes the steele vnto it,
               Yet hath not ginne or instrument to doe it,
               Rare properties you see, but neither these
               Nor what lies hidden in the vast wide Seas
               
               Meane I to speake off; I no knowledge haue,
               What Monsters play with Neptunes boistrous waue,
               Nor quality of birds, nor beasts I found;
               For why their natures may be quickly found,
               Indeed we may by little inquisition,
               Find out the bruitish creatures true condition,
               As for example we for certaine know,
               The Elephant much loue to man wil show.
               The Tygers, Woolues, and Lyons we do find,
               Are rauenous, fierce and cruell euen by kind,
               We know at caryon we shal find the crowes,
               And that the roost-cock whē tis mid night knowes:
               By a few dayes experience we may see,
               Whether the mastife, curst or gentle be;
               And many other natures we find out,
               Of which we haue no cause at all to doubt,
               But theres another Creature called Man,
               
               Note him who wil, and tel me if he can,
               What his condition is; obserue his deeds,
               His speach, his rayment. yea and how hee feedes
               Try him a month, a yeare, an age, and when
               You haue so tride him; say, what is he then?
               Retaines he either vnto Praester Iohn,
               
               Or else vnto the whore of Babilon:
               
               
                  
If that you know not which of them to grant,
               Is he a Brownist or a Protestant?
               
               If in an Age you cannot find out wheither
               Are you so much as sure that he is either?
               Is his heart proud or humble? know you where
               Or when, he hates, or loues, or standes in feare?
               
               Or who can say (in Conscience I think none)
               That this mans words, and deeds, & thoughts are one?
               Where shall you him so well resolued find,
               That wants a wandring and a wauering mind?
               Nay he of whom you haue most triall, when
               You see him dying, will you trust him then?
               Perhaps you may; yet questionlesse he leaues you,
               A mind misdoubting still that he deceiues you.
               And no great wonder; for hees such an else,
               That euer is vncertaine of himselfe.
               He is not semper idem in his will,
               Nor stands on this or that opinion still,
               But varies; he both will and wil not too,
               Yea euen the thing he thinkes and sweares to doe
               He many times omits. Now God forgiue him,
               I wonder how another should beleeue him.
               But this same diuers and inconstant creature,
               
               That so contrary is in his owne nature,
               'Tis him my new-inspired Muse here tries,
               Whilst he is liuing to Anotomize:
               
               Tis his abuses and condition,
               (Although it be beyond all definition)
               I labour to discouer: But aswell
               I may againe dragge Cerberus from hell:
               
                  
                  Alcydes toyles were much, yet this is more,
               Yea if his twise-sixe, had beene twise sixe-score.
               
               It is so infinite for to vnfold,
               Although that I did speake til I were old,
               Yet should I leaue vnnam'd I'me sure ee'n than,
               Many a humor I haue seene in Man.
               
               And yet I must needes say in him there be,
               A thousand times more trickes then I can see.
               Tis wonderfull, and my immagination
               Is almost ouerwhelm'd with admiration;
               
               Indeed it is, so deep's mans heart; but yet,
               
                  Since either want of yeares, or want of wit,
               
                  Or lack of worke, or lack of all, hath brought me,
               
               To be more heedful, then a number thought me;
               Since it some time and study too hath cost me,
               And many a humor of mine owne hath lost me.
               Since it hurts none, and since perhaps some may,
               Be benefitted by 't another day,
               Although it be a taske that's not alone,
               Too huge for to be done by any one,
               But more then al the world can well dispatch,
               Yet looke what my weake memory could catch,
               Ile heer relate and nothing of it spare,
               Saue things vnfit, and such as neeedlesse are.
               Now some will say twere fit I held my tongue,
               For such a taske as this I am too young:
               He ne're had dealings in the world with men,
               How can he speak of their conditions then?
               He cannot they conclude: strong reasons why,
               Know none how market goes but such as buy?
               
                  
We see it happens that a shifting Knaue,
               
               A sly deceitfull Connicatching slaue,
               Playing at Cards with some vnskilfull gull,
               Whose purse is lin'd with Crownes and penniful,
               May put a nimble feat for to deceiue;
               Which though a cunning gamester nere perceiue,
               He peraduenture may the same descry,
               That is no player but a stander by:
               So I aloofe may view, without suspition,
               Mens idle humours and their weake condition:
               Plainer perhaps then many that haue seene,
               More daies & on th' earths stage haue Actors been.
               And tis no maruaile, for employment takes them,
               Quite from themselues, and so dim-sighted makes them
               They cannot see the fooleries they doe,
               Nor what ill passions they are subiect to:
               Then who er'e carpe, the course I haue begunne,
               In spight of them I wil (God helping) runne:
               And least th' exordium hath too tedious bin,
               My Obseruations loe I now begin.
            
            
               
               OF MAN.
               MOunted aloft on Contemplations wings,
               
               And noting with my selfe the state of things,
               I plainely did perceiue as on a stage,
               The confus'd actions of this present age,
               I view'd the World, and I saw my fill,
               Because, that all I saw therein was ill.
               I weigh'd it well and found it was the Scoene,
               
               Of Villany, of Lust, and all vncleane
               And loath'd corruption. Seeing which my Mind,
               
               (That by some inspiration ganne to find
               The place was not in fault for this) search't on,
               To find the cause of this confusion.
               And noting euery Creature, there I found,
               That only Man was the chiefe spring and ground
               
               Of all this vproare; Yea I soone did see,
               He there was all in all, and none but he;
               Then being also willing for to know,
               What thing man was, I did begin to grow
               Yet more inquisitiue. An old Record
               
               At last I hapt vpon which did afford
               Much sacred light. It shewed Man was a Creature,
               
               First made by God, Iust, and vpright by nature,
               In his owne Likenesse. That he was compounded
               Of soule and body: That this last was founded
               
                  
Of earth: The first infus'd by inspiration,
               And that the finall cause of his creation,
               Was to set forth the glory of his maker,
               And with him to be made a ioynt-partaker
               
                  Of enldes happines. Growne much amazd,
               To read this of him for a time I paus'd,
               And finding now in man no marke or signe,
               That ere he was a Creature so deuine,
               I knew not what to thinke, vnlesse the same,
               Meant any other Creature of that name:
               But prying further on I there found out,
               The resolution of my present doubt,
               I saw the cause of's fall: How with free-will
               He fell from his first goodnes vnto ill:
               
               I saw how he from happines did slide,
               Through disobedience and vnthankfull pride:
               Yea and I found, how by that cursed fall,
               He was bereaued and quite stript of all
               That so adornd him; his first holinesse,
               
               Was chang'd to a corrupted filthinesse
               
               Then he began to draw a paineful breath,
               
               And was a slaue, made captiue vnto Death;
               
               His body was expos'd to labour, sweate,
               And much disquieting: He got his meat
               With sorrow, care, and many perturbations,
               And then his soule grew subiect vnto Passions
               
               And strange distemperatures. More-ouer he,
               So perfect miserable grew to be,
               That if he had not a Re-generation;
               
               Nothing was left him but meere desperation.
               
               
                  
Hauing seene this, I made no question than,
               But this was spoken of the Creature Man
               
               Which I sought after: Serching further yet,
               On some Ap
                        •
                     criphall Records I hit,
               The workes of wise Philosophers; from whence,
               I haue receiued more intelligence
               Concerning him, for there they do vnfold,
               Each part about his body, and haue told
               Secrets of Nature very rare to finde,
               Besides they haue considered of the Mind:
               
               The vnderstanding part, and do relate
               The Nature of his soule, and her estate:
               Deepe misteries indeed: But cause that I
               Cannot diue into that Philosophy,
               
               So farre as these. And since I shall but tell,
               Those things which no men can explane so well
               As they themselues, I leaue you to their bookes,
               In which he that with good aduisement lookes,
               Shal find it largely handled: As for me,
               I meane to speake but what I know and see
               By tri'd experience, which perhaps may giue,
               (Although I haue but now begun to liue)
               Some profitable notes. First I avow,
               What euer Man hath beene, that he is now,
               A Reasonable liuing Creature: who
               Consisteth of a soule and body toe.
               His Bodye's flesh and blood, subiect to sinning,
               Corrupting euen in his first beginning,
               And ful of al vncleannesse: Then his soule,
               Is a pure lasting substance yet made foule
               
                  
Through th' others filthines: much supprest
               By diuers hurtful passions which molest
               And hinder hir proceedings; yea hee's this,
               
               A Creature that exceeding wretched is,
               And that he may be sure no fault to want,
               Vaine, Fickle, Weake, and wondrous Arogazt.
               And though his nature heretofore were pure,
               Now nothing is more fading or vnsure.
               But Ile omit at this time to relate,
               The curses Iu'e obseru'd in's outward state,
               For though the body, that before the fall
               Susteind no sorrow, were it ner'e so small:
               Doth now feele hunger, with heat, thirst and cold,
               A feeble birth, defects in being old,
               With thousands more; and though each gaspe of breath,
               In misery he draw vntil his death.
               Yet al this outward change which I do find,
               Is nothing when I do behold the mind:
               For there (as I haue said) abused passion,
               
               Keepes Vmpire, and hath got predomination.
               
               
                  Vertues depos'd thence, and Vice rule obtaines;
               Yea Vice from Vice there by succession raignes:
               Thrusting out those that Vertues presence grac't
               And in their steeds these hurtful monsters plac't
               Fond Loue, and Lust, Ambition, Emnity,
               
                  Foolish Compassion, Ioy and Iealousie:
               Feare, Hope, Despaire, and Sadnesse, with the Vic
                     •
                  
               
               Cal'd Hate, Reuenge, and greedy Auarice,
               
               
                  Choller and Cruelty: which I perceiud,
               To be the only causes man's bereau'd
               
                  
Of quietnesse and rest. And these I found
               To be the principall, and only ground
               Of all pernitious mischeefes that do rage,
               Or haue disturbed him in any age,
               And therefore I do heere entend to show,
               Ere I goe farther, what ill humors flow
               From these fore-named; yea I will declare,
               To what abuses most men subiect are
               Throgh any of them: For when as I tooke view,
               Although I saw not all, I found a few;
               And for because I wil not order breake,
               I will assunder of each passion speake.
            
            
               
               
               OF THE PASSION.
OF LOVE.
               SATYR. 1.
               FIrst Loue; the same I heere the first do call,
               Because that passion is most Natural;
               
               And of it selfe could not be discommended,
               Wert not with many a foule abuse attended,
               Or so much out of measure, as we see,
               By those in whom it raignes it oft wil be:
               For looke wher't growes into extremity,
               It soone becometh Vertues Laethargy,
               
               Makes them set light by reasons sound direction,
               And beares them headlong by vntam'd affection.
               
                  C
                        •
                     unsels in vain, cause when this fit doth take them
               
                  Reason and vnderstanding doth forsake them;
               It makes them some-time merry, some-time sad,
               
               
                  Vntam'd men mild, and many a mild man mad:
               
               To fooles it wisdome giues, and makes the witty
               To shew thēselues most fooles (the more's the pitty)
               Some it makes purblind, that they do not know,
               The Snow white Cygnet from the cole-black Crow;
               
               
                  
That one to gold compares his Mistris hayre,
               
               When 'tis like foxe-fur and doth think shee's faire,
               Though she in beauty be not far before,
               The Swart West-Indian, or the tawny Moore.
               
               Oh those faire Star-like eyes of thine, one saies:
               
               When to my thinking she hath look't nine wayes;
               
                  And that sweet breath; when I thinke (out vppon't)
               'Twould blast a flower if she breathed on't,
               Another hauing got a dainty peece,
               (Prouder then Iason with his golden fleece)
               Commends her vertues that hath iust as many,
               As a shee-baud that neuer yet had any.
               Yet sweares shee's chast and takes her for no more,
               VVhen all her neighbours knowes she is a—
               Another he growes carelesse of his health,
               Neglects his credit and consumes his wealth,
               Hath found a pretty peat, procur'd her fauor,
               And sweares that he in spight of all, wil haue her;
               Wel let him take her since they are contented,
               But such rash-matches are the soon'st repented.
               Then there is one who hauing found a peere,
               In all thinges worthy to be counted deere;
               VVanting both Art and heart his mind to breake,
               Sits sighing (wo is me) and wil not speake.
               All company he hates, is oft alone,
               Growes Melancholly, weepes, respecteth none;
               And in dispaire seekes out a way to dye,
               VVhen he might liue and find a remedy.
               But how now; wast not you (saies one) that late
               So humbly beg'd a boone at beauties gate?
               
                  
Was it not you that to a female Saint
               Indited your Aretophels complaint,
               With many doleful Sonnets, wa'st not you?
               Sure twas saies he: but then how comes it now
               You carpe at loue thus in a Satyrs vaine?
               Take heed you fall not in her handes againe,
               Sure if you doe, you shal in open court,
               Be forc't to sing a Palinodia for't.
               What are your braines dry, or yourblood growne cold?
               Or are you on a sodaine waxen old?
               To flout at loue, which men of greatest wit,
               Alow in youth as naturall and fit.
               What reason haue you for't els? what pretence
               Haue you for to excuse this vild offence?
               To him I answer that indeed een'e I
               Was lately subiect to this malady:
               Lik't what I now dislike; employ'd good times
               In the composing of such idle Rimes
               
               As are obiected: From my heart I sent
               Full many a heauy sigh, and oft-times spent
               Vnmanly teares. I haue, I must confesse,
               Thought if my Loue smil'd that no happinesse
               Might equalize it, and her frowne much worse,
               (O God forgiue me) then the Churches curse,
               I did (as some do) not much matter make,
               To hazard soule and body for her sake,
               Hauing no hope sometime I did despaire,
               Sometime too much built castles in the ayre,
               In many a foolish humor I haue beene,
               As wel as others; looke where I haue seene
               
                  
Her (whom I lou'd) to walke, when she was gone,
               Thither I often haue repair'd alone:
               As if I thought the places did containe,
               Something to ease me (oh exceeding vaine:)
               Yet what if I haue beene thus idly bent,
               Shal be now asham'd for to repent?
               Moreouer I was in my child-hood than,
               And am scarse yet reputed for a Man.
               
               And therefore neither cold, nor old, nor dry;
               Nor cloi'd with any foule disease am I,
               'Tis no such cause that made me change my mind,
               But my affection that before was blind,
               Rash and vnruly, now begins to find
               That it had run a large and fruitlesse race,
               And therevpon hath giuen Reason place.
               So that by Reason, what no Reason might
               Perswade me from before; I haue out-right,
               Iustly forsaken; for because I see
               'Twas vaine, absurd, and naught but foolery,
               Yet for all this looke where I lou'd of late,
               I haue not turnd it in a spleene to hate:
               No, for 'twas first her Vertue and her Wit,
               
               Taught me to see how much I wanted it;
               Then as for Loue, I do alow it stil,
               I neuer did dislik't nor neuer will;
               So it be vertuous, and contain'd within,
               The bounds of Reason; but when 'twill begin,
               To run at random and her limits breake;
               I must, because I cannot chuse but speake.
               But I forget my selfe, wherefore am I
               
                  
So tedious in my owne Apologie?
               
               It needed not at all, Ile on againe,
               And shew what kind of Louers yet remaine:
               One sort I find yet of this louing crew,
               Whose quality I thinke is knowne to few:
               These seeke by all the meanes they can to gaine
               Each Virgins liking: Sometime not in vaine,
               They do obtaine their wish, but when tis got,
               Sorry they are and wish they had it not.
               For peraduenture they haue plac't their Loue,
               
               So as it cannot, nor it must not mooue
               And yet if they should faile for to procure it,
               'Twould greeue thē so they hardly woould endure it.
               Yea though in shew (at least) they haue said nay,
               Their Loues with like affection to repay,
               If they perceiu't abate, as it will doe,
               Both this and that, doth make them sorry too.
               But he that is with such a humor led,
               I may be bold to terme a watle-head.
               More-ouer men in placing their affection,
               Haue feu'rall humors for to giue direction.
               Some like the Faire, but there's not all the grace,
               She may be faire, and haue a squemish face,
               Some like the wanton, some the modest eyes,
               The pace, or gesture some's affection ties.
               A smile wins one, anothers lookes mooues pitty,
               The next commends the lasse that's bold and witty.
               
               Againe some loue where they no cause can find,
               But onely this; the wench they see is kind.
               
               Yea one doth thinke her faire (another loathes)
               
                  
Because she seemes so in her gaudy clothes.
               More sorts there are; but sure I am, not many
               That for bare Vertue haue affected any.
               
                  Wealth many matches makes; but most can prooue
               Though it breeds liking, yet it winnes not loue.
               
               Then to obtaine his Mistres, one man tries,
               How he can stretch his wits to Poetize:
               
               His Pass
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     
                   to relate his skill he proues,
               But in this blockish age it little moues;
               Nor doe I wonder much true meaning failes,
               And wit so little in this case auailes,
               Since dunces can haue sannets fram'd & send them,
               As their inuentions, when some others pen'd them.
               Another seekes by Valour to obtaine,
               His wished prize, but now that trial's vaine;
               The third brings wealth, and if he doe not speed,
               The womans worth the suing for indeed.
               Then he that's neither valorous nor wise,
               Comes ruffling in, with shamelesse brags and lies,
               Making a stately, proud, vaine-glorious show,
               Of much good matter, when tis nothing so.
               In steed of lands, to which he ne're was heyre,
               He tels her tales of Castles in the ayre,
               For martiall matters, he relates of fraies,
               Where many drew their swords & ran their waies.
               His Poetry is such as he can cull,
               From plaies he heard at Curtaine or at Bull,
               
               And yet is fine coy Mistres-Marry-Muffe,
               
               The soonest taken with such broken stuffe.
               Another shallow braine hath no deuise,
               
                  
But prates of some strange casts he had at dice,
               Brags of his play, yea sure it doth befall,
               He vaunts oft-times of that which marreth all;
               But some I note (now fie on such a man)
               That make themselues as like them as they can,
               Thereby to winne their loues; they faine their pace;
               Order their lookes, and striue to set their face
               To looke demure: Some wooe by nods, and lookes,
               Some by their sighes, and others by their bookes;
               Some haue a nature must not be denaide,
               And will grow furious if they be delaide:
               Others againe haue such a fancy got,
               If they soone speed then they esteeme them not.
               When women woo, some men do most affect them,
               And some againe for wantons doe suspect them:
               Besides, we see that fooles themselues they make,
               What toyes they count of for their wenches sake;
               One for some certaine months, or weekes, or daies,
               VVeares in his hat a branch of wither'd bayes.
               Or sweares for to employ his vtmost power,
               For to preserue some stale-neglected flowre:
               He weares such colours as for Louers be,
               Drinks vowed healths vpon his bared knee:
               Sue's mainly for a shoo-string, or doth craue her,
               To grant him but a busk-point for a fauour:
               And then to note (as I haue seene) an Asse
               That by her window, whom he loues, must passe,
               With what a fained pace, the Woodcock stalks;
               How skuruely he sleareth as he walks:
               And if he ride, how he rebounds and trots,
               
                  
As if his horse were troubled with the bots;
               'Twould make one swell with laughing: In a day
               He makes more errands then he needs that way,
               Bearing himselfe as if he still espide him,
               When as perhaps she flouts, or lookes beside him:
               Nay should I tell you all the Vanitie,
               
               I haue obserued in this maladie,
               I should shame Louers, but Ile now be husht,
               For had I said more I my selfe had blusht:
               Yet know; although this passion I haue tyde
               To loue of women, it concludes beside
               All whatsoeuer kinde of loues there be,
               Vnlesse they keep the minde from trouble free,
               And yeeld to reason: but of such-like louers,
               
               My Muse hereafter other feates discouers.
            
            
               OF DESIRE OR LVST.
               SATYR. 2.
               
                  LVstfull desire, (although twere rather fit.
               To some bruite creature to attribute it)
               Shall in mans heart retaine the second place;
               Because it shrouds her vile deformed face
               Vnder Loues vizard, and assumes that name,
               Hiding her owne fault with the others blame:
               Tis a base passion, from the which doth flow
               Many base humours; tis the ouerthrow
               
                  
Of all in whom it enters; 'tis an euill,
               Worse then to be possessed with a diuell:
               This 'tis that oft hath caused publike strife,
               And priuate discord; this makes man and wife
               Grow each to other cold in their affection,
               And to the very marrow sends infection;
               And as Phisicians say, it makes the face
               Looke wan, pale, yellow, and doth much deface
               The beauty of it; and as for the fight
               It either dums it or bereaues it quight;
               It dries the body, and from thence doth sprout
               Griefes of the stomack, leprosie and gout,
               
               With other such; beside it doth decay
               Not life alone, but also takes away,
               Both memory and vnderstanding toe;
               So Doctors that haue tride it, say t'will doe.
               And which way comes that foule disease to vs
               We call the French, so vile and odious:
               Ist not by Lust? Breed not such-like desires,
               Children begotten by vncertaine Syres?
               Strange Generations, beds so oft defilde;
               That many a father scarcely knowes his childe?
               Or, is't not hence this common Prouerbe growes,
               Tis a wise child that his oane father knowes?
               Doth it not others reputations foyle?
               And them e'ne of their dearest Iewels spoyle?
               Yes, yes; and hence a thousand other crimes
               Doe daily spring, and yet in these our times
               Tis highly made of: yea tis lust doth weare
               The richest garments, and hath curiou'st fare;
               
                  
The softest beds it hath for to repose,
               With sweet perfumes, but sure there's need of those.
               Drawne in a coach it visits now and then
               Some neere acquaintance, mongst the Noblemen;
               Yet doth it not the Court alone frequent,
               But is ith' Cittie as much resident:
               Where when it walkes the street it doth imploy,
               Either a Prentice, or a roaring-boy
               
               To vsher it along, and few disdaine it,
               But those vnable for to entertaine it.
               'Twere much to note the paine that some indure,
               And cost that they'le be at for to procure
               Their beastly wils: There's many spend their stocks
               
                  In ruffes, gownes, kirtles, peti-coats, and smocks,
               For which one's paid with that shal make him craul,
               (If he be friended) to some Hospitall.
               
               Another's quitted for his wel-spent stuffe,
               By some grim Sergeant with a Counter-buffe:
               
               The last it brings, if still that course he followes,
               First to the Gaole, and so forth to the Gallowes.
               
               And what haue you obserued to haue bin
               The vsuall associats of this sinne?
               
               
                  But filthy speeches, bold fac't impudence.
               Vnseemely actions, ryot, negligence,
               And such as these; yea to procure their lust
               It makes them into any mischiefs thrust,
               How hatefull or apparent ere they be,
               Or put in practise any villanie.
               Moreouer, where it enters once, the minde,
               Cannot true rest, nor any quiet finde.
               
                  
We see it also makes them for to craue,
               Not what is best, but what they long to haue,
               Yea, Lust hath many mischiefes that ensue it,
               Which most men see, but few the lesse eschew it:
               Men rather now, as if t'were no offence,
               Are growne to such a shamelesse impudence,
               They vaunt and bragge of their lasciuious facts,
               No lesse then some, of braue Heroick acts.
               And not a few of this same humor be,
               That would be term'd the foes of chastitie.
               
               By whom if I see ill, Ile sure conceale it,
               For they themselues will to their shames reueale it:
               There's others who disliking so to vaunt,
               VVill, si non castè, tamen cautè grant,
               For that's their Motto, they make modest showes,
               But what they doe in secret, man nere knowes:
               Some make a Baud of their diuine profession,
               
                  Like Shauelings in Auricular-confession.
               Th' other are bad, and sure of God accurst,
               But of all others, these I deeme the worst.
               There's other Gallants would desire but this,
               VVithout suspition for to talke and kisse:
               For other pleasures they do neuer craue them,
               Nay if they might, they sweare they will not haue them
               So mean, perhaps: but time brings alteration,
               And a faire woman is a shrewd temptation:
               Then many make their fained loue to be
               A cloake to couer their immodestie:
               These will protest and vow, and sweare their life
               Consists in hauing whom they wooe, to wife,
               
                  
Yet if the villaines can their lust fulfill,
               They will forsweare them and be liuing still:
               Some doe court all, and not alone doe proue,
               But for because with all they are in loue,
               With such deep passion, that they cannot smother,
               Their hot affection till they meete another:
               But why will man against himselfe and Reason,
               
               Consent to such a Tyrant in his treason?
               Why will he so his liberties foregoe
               To be a slaue to such a monstrous foe?
               For what is this same passion We call lust,
               
               
                  Ist not a Brutish longing and vniust,
               And foule desire of the soule, to gaine
               
                  Some euill pleasure? Or to speake more plaine,
               A furious burning passion, whose hot fumes
               Corrupts the vnderstanding, and consumes
               
                  The very flesb of man? then what's the fact?
               What may I terme that vile and shamefull act,
               
                  But this; The execution of an ill,
               Out of set purpose and with a good will,
               
                  In spight of Reason? Tell me ist not base?
               When men shall so their worthy sex disgrace,
               To giue their bodies in a deed vncleane,
               With a foule nasty prostituted queane?
               Or in their vnderstanding be so dull
               As to obserue on idle short-heeld trull?
               A puling female Diuell that hath smiles,
               Like Syrens songs, and teares like Crocadiles.
               
               Yet there be some (I will not name them now)
               Whom I haue seene vnto such Puppits bow,
               
                  
And be as seruiceable as a groome,
               That feares another man will beg his roome:
               They had beene glad ful oft to please their pride,
               With costly gifts, and forc't for to abide,
               Imperious scoffs, with many scornefull words;
               Such as the humors they are in, affords
               And yet for these thei'le venter Honors, liues;
               
               If they command it; when for their poore Wiues:
               
               (Though they in Beauty, loue and true delight,
               Exceed them more then day-time doth the night)
               Theyle scarcely take vppon them for to speake,
               In any case of theirs their, loues so weake,
               Yea and their lust doth wrap them in such blindnes
               They cannot giue them one poore look in kindnes.
               Moreouer for their lust they haue not laid
               Base plots alone, like him that was conueyd
               In a close trunk, because in secrecy,
               He would (vnseene) enioy his venery.
               I say not only therein haue they retcht,
               Their damn'd inuentions, It hath also stretcht,
               Vnto strange lusts, of which I wil not speake,
               Because I may offend the minde that's weake,
               Or least I to some simple one should show,
               Those sinnes by naming, he did neuer know:
               And here I leaue: there's lurking holes such store,
               This stinking Vermin I wil hunt no more.
            
            
               
               OF HATE.
               SATYR. 3.
               BVt I haue rous'd another here as bad
               They call it: Hate; A worse I neuer had,
               Before in chase: I scarce can keepe (insooth)
               My selfe from danger of his venom'd tooth.
               This is the Passion that doth vse to moue,
               The mind a cleane contrary way to loue;
               
               It is an inspiration of the Divel,
               
               That makes men long for one anothers euill,
               It cankers in the heart, and plagueth most,
               Not him thats hated, but the hateful host.
               And yet theres too too many I do know,
               Whose hearts with this soule poyson ouer-flow:
               Of which I haue a true intelligence,
               By the sharpe scoffs and slanders springing thence,
               For where it rules they cannot well conceale it,
               But either wordes or deeds, or both reueale it,
               Were it iust causes that did stil engender
               This passion in them; or if they could render,
               A reason fort 'twere somwhat, but their will
               Carries them on in spight of Reason still.
               These are their humors, for a slight offence
               Thei'le hate th' offender for a recompence.
               Some malice all that any way excell,
               In which who thinkes but they do very well,
               
                  
And many haue abhorred (God amend them)
               The stranger that did neuer yet offend them:
               VVhich they are not asham'd for to confesse,
               Yet in their hate continue ner'e the lesse,
               But though that they can yeeld no reason why,
               They beare them causlesse mallice, yet can I:
               Their hearts are il, and it is seldome knowne,
               That a sweet bro
                     •
                  ke from bitter springs hath flowne:
               Theres some to when they see a man respected
               More then themselues, though they be not neglected,
               They inly grudge, and outwardly disdaine,
               Being alike condition'd as was Caine,
               
               Some hate their friends that loue and count them deare,
               As by the sequel plainely shal appeare;
               One that a seeming friendship had profest me,
               Vpon a time did earnestly request me
               That I would plainely my opinion shew,
               What I of his conditions thought or knew;
               And that I would without exceptions tel,
               What acts of his did not become him well.
               
                  I scorning flattry, with a louing heart,
               Twixt him and me my mind did soon impart;
               And as a friend, that is vnfaigned, ought,
               Left nothing vnreueald of what I thought,
               Yea without feare I boldly reprehended,
               If I perceiud he any way offended,
               Provided alwayes that I did not swerue,
               From a decorum fitting to obserue,
               But marke Mans nature: he perceiuing I
               
               Had taken note of some infirmity,
               
                  
He would not haue vnript; And seeing toe,
               I espide more then he wisht I should doe
               Of his ill humours; (though I must confesse)
               Being my friend I lou'd him nothing lesse;
               In steed of thankes and liking for my paines,
               My company and sight he now refraines;
               And for my kindnes like a thanklesse mate,
               Doth ill repay me with a lothing hate.
               This one I know, and by that one I finde,
               That there be many beare as bad a minde,
               But let vs for their true conuersion pray,
               For we alasse may very iustly say.
               Quod nulla est in terra Charitas,
               Et Odium parit ipsa Veritas.
               Againe the wicked hates beyond all measure
               The righteous man, that contradicts his pleasure;
               And that's the fundamentall cause I know,
               That many men doe hate their teachers so:
               These common humors are obseru'd of few,
               Yet may a yong experience find them true.
               And boldly say that all in whom th'are found,
               Haue poysoned hearts polluted and vnsound,
               But they corrupted aboue all the rest,
               Which hate their friends they should account of best
               But let Men striue and study to remoue
               This passion from their hearts and graffe on Loue.
               
               Let them not harbor such a hellish sinne,
               Which being entred marreth all within;
               Nor let them thinke my counsell merits laughter,
               Since Scripture saies, to hate our brother's slaughte
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               OF ENVY.
               SATYR. 4
               THen some enuenom'd with an enuious touch,
               Think eu'ry thing their neighbor hath to much▪
               
               O Lord say they (if in the field they be)
               What goodly corne, and wel-fed beasts hath he?
               
                  (If in the house) they neuer in their liues,
               Saw fairer women then their neighbours wiues:
               Tis pitty shee that puts so many downe,
               Should be embraced by so rude a clowne:
               That house is too well furnisht, or doth stand,
               Better then his, or it hath finer land:
               This farme hath profits more then his by much,
               For wood and water he had neuer such.
               Yea so he grudges inwardly and frets
               At euery good thing that his neighbour gets:
               Of these besides there are that when they see,
               Any beloued, or in fauour be,
               Especially in Courts, and great mens houses,
               Then the heart swelleth, and the Enuious rouses,
               Ne're resting till that like a spightfull elfe,
               He doe displace them or disgrace himselfe.
               Now some are in the minde that hate and This,
               Still goe together and one Passion is;
               Indeed, they soule iniurious Humors be,
               So like, they seeme to haue Affinitee:
               
               
                  
But if 'twere so, me thinks betwixt them both,
               There should arise more wrangling them there doth,
               So tis with kinsmen, they enuy the good
               Of those that are the same in flesh and bloud.
               But here may be the difference, and it shall
               Hate doth extend to some, and this 
                     •
                  o all:
               Yet enuious men doe least spight such as be
               Of ill report, or of a low degree:
               But rather they doe take their ayme at such,
               Who either wel-be-loued are, or rich:
               
               And therefore some doe fitly liken these,
               Vnto those flies we terme Cantharides:
               
               Cause for the most part they alight on none,
               But on the flowers that are fairest blowne:
               Or to the boisterous winde which sooner grubs
               The stately Cedar then the humble shrubs:
               But yet that sometimes shakes the bush below,
               And moues the leafe that's Wither'd long agoe:
               As if he had not showne sufficient spight,
               Vnlesse it also could orewhelme him quite
               And bury it in earth; So I haue found,
               The blast of enuy flies as low's the ground.
               And though it hath already brought a man
               Euen vnto the meanest state it can,
               Yet tis not satisfi'd, but still deuising,
               VVhich way it also may disturbe his rising,
               This I know true; or else it could not be
               That any man should hate or enuy me,
               Being a creature, (one would thinke) that's plast
               Too low for to be toucht with enuies blast,
               
                  
And yet I am; I see men haue espi'd,
               Some-thing in me too, that may be enui'd;
               But I haue found it now: and know the matter.
               The reason, they are rich and ile not flatter:
               Yes and because they see that I doe scorne,
               To be their slaue whose equall I am borne,
               I heard (although 'twere spoken in a cloud)
               They censure that my knowledge makes me proud,
               And that I reach so farre beyond my calling,
               They euery hower doe expect my falling:
               With many a prayer, and prognostication
               To shew their loue not worthy Reuelation,
               But what care I; to quit their good surmising,
               I doe desire my fall may be their rising.
               Which say should once be, as I hope twill neuer,
               I trust to God it shall not be for euer;
               And for because I know it cannot be,
               Much lower then it is, it greeues not me,
               And where they say my wit augments my pride,
               My conscience tels me that I am belide:
               For knowledge of my wants doth greeue me so,
               I haue small ioy to boast of that I know.
               But let them scandall as I heare they doe,
               And see whose lot the shame will fall vnto;
               The shafts are aim'd at me, but Ile reiect them,
               And on the shooters too, perhaps reflect them,
               I care not for their enuy, since they show it;
               Nor doe I feare their mallice, now I know it:
               For to preuent the venome of their throat,
               Ile of this poyson make an Antidote:
               
               
                  
And their presaging (though it be abuse)
               I hope wil serue me to an excellent vse;
               For where before I should haue tooke no heed,
               Their wordes shall make me circumspect indeed.
               Yea I wil be more careful to do wel,
               Which were a plague as bad for them as hel.
               
               Some I do know, yea too too well I know them,
               And in this place do a remembrance owe them,
               These; when that through their enuy they intend,
               To bring one out of fauour with his friend,
               Wil make as though they some great vices knew,
               That he is guilty of, and not a few:
               Theile shake their heads, as if they did detest
               The course he followes; and that not in iest.
               If to the Father they dispraise the sonne,
               It shall be slily, indirectly done:
               And thus (I hope) there's some wil vnderstand,
               He liues I tel you at a s
                     •
                  cond hand.
               Should I say al I know, 'twould much offend you,
               But more such children I pray God neu'r send you,
               With other words of doubt to breed suspition,
               But dare not (being of a base condition)
               To name them any fault: And good cause why,
               It may be prou'd vnto their shames a ly;
               Now tis a quality I do dispise,
               As such a one doth him whom he enuies,
               If therefore any do that loue professe me,
               Lord from their friendship I beseech thee blesse me,
               Some crafty ones wil honor to their face,
               Those whom they dare not openly disgrace:
               
                  
Yet vnder-hand, their fames they'l vndermine,
               As lately did a seeming friend of mine;
               They'l sowe their slanders as if they with griefe,
               Were forc't to speake it: or that their vnbeliefe
               Were loth to credit it, when 'tis well knowne,
               The damn'd inuention was at first their owne:
               Some doe not care how grosly they dispraise,
               Or how vnlikely a report they raise;
               Because they know if 't be so false an ill,
               That one beleeues it not, another will;
               And so their enuy very seldome failes,
               But one way or another, still preuailes:
               Oh villanous conceit! an engin bent
               To ouerthrow the truest innocent;
               For well they know, when onee a slander's sowne,
               And that a false report abroad is blowne,
               Though they would wipe it out; yet they can neuer,
               Because some scar will stick behind for euer.
               But what is this, that men are so inclind
               And subiect to it? how may't be defin'd?
               Sure if the same be rightly vnderstood,
               It is a griefe that springs from others good.
               And vexes them if they doe but heare tell,
               That other mens endeauors prosper well,
               It makes them grieue when any man is friended,
               Or in their hearing praised, or commended,
               Contrariwise againe, such is their spight:
               In other mens misfortunes they delight;
               Yea, notwithstanding it be not a whit
               Vnto their profit, not their benefit,
               
                  
Others prosperity doth make them leane,
               Yea it deuoureth and consumes them cleane:
               But if they see them in much greefe, why that
               Doth only make them iocund, full and fat;
               Of Kingdomes ruine they best loue to heare,
               And tragicall reports do only cheere
               Their hellish thoughts: And then their bleared eies
               Can looke on nothing but black infamies,
               Reprochful actions, and the foulest deeds,
               Of shame, that mans corrupted nature breeds:
               But they must winke when Vertue shineth bright,
               For feare her lustre mar their weakned sight.
               They do not loue Encomiastick stories.
               Or for to read their predecessors glories;
               For good report to all men they deny,
               And both the liuing and the dead enuy:
               Yea many of them▪ I do thinke had rather
               Loose all good fame then share't with their owne father.
               The biting Satyr they do only like,
               And that at some particulars must strike,
               Or al's worth norhing: if they can apply
               Some part of this to him they do enuy,
               As well perhaps they may, then theil commend it,
               And spite of their ill natures, I that pend it,
               Shall haue some thank, but why? not cause they deem
               Me, or my writing either worth esteem:
               No, heere's the reason they thy labour like.
               They think I meane him, then suppose I strike:
               Now whose endeauors thinke you prosper should,
               If the euent of thinges were as these would?
               
                  
(No man can answere that, for it's vnknowne)
               Nor parents, no nor childrens, scarce their owne:
               (I say) their owne hand-works are seldome free,
               But subiect to their proper enuies be:
               'Witnesse a certaine rich-man, who of late
               'Much pittying a Neighbours wofull state,
               'Put to his helping hand, and set him cleare
               'From all his former misery and feare:
               'But when he saw that through his thrift, and heed,
               'He had well cur'd againe his former need,
               'And grew to pretty meanes, though he no whit
               'Vnthankfull was for this his benefit:
               'Yet, being of a nature that did long,
               'And ioy, to see anothers case goe wrong,
               'Hauing no second cause; much grieued now,
               'That he once helpt him; all his study's how,
               'To ruinate the poore mans state againe,
               'And make through Enuy his owne labour vaine.
               I wonder men should so from reason range,
               
               Or entertaine a humor that's so strange
               And so vnprofitable, tell me why,
               Should we the honors, or the wealth enuy
               Of other men? if we delight to see,
               Our brethren when in euill case they be,
               Lets wish them Riches, Titles, and promotion,
               Twill make them greedy, proud, & choke deuotion,
               Twill plunge them in a flood of misery,
               In the respect of which, the beggery
               We thinke so vile, is heauen, Yea I know,
               It is a thousand more mens ouerthrow
               
                  
Then Pouertie can be. That if we hate,
               Or would enuy who are in happy state,
               In my opinion they must not be such
               That titles haue attaind, or to be ritch;
               No, poore men rather, who are combred lesse,
               And haue indeed the truest happinesse.
               But be they rich or no, I passe not whether,
               For my part, I am sure, I enuy neither,
               So I but reach the glorie I desire,
               I doe not care how many mount vp higher;
               And if I want not, what hurt is'
                     •
                   to me,
               If I the poorest in the kingdome be?
               Yet from this Passion, I beleeue not many
               Can be exempted, if there may be any:
               But sure more mischiefe alway doth betide
               Th' enuious then to him that is enuide;
               And they haue often, (who would then bemone?)
               Lost both their eyes to lose their neighbour one:
               Yea there is many a periur'd enuious Noddy;
               
               Damnes his owne soule to hurt his neighbours body.
               But now such men may best by this be knowne,
               They'le speake in no mans praise but in their owne,
               And in their presence but commend a man,
               They'l from his worth detract eu'n all they can:
               So do the foule mouth'd Zoili, spightfull Momes,
               
               VVhose eyes on euery new pen'd treatise romes.
               Not for their owne auaile or benefit;
               To feed their humors by disgracing it,
               They rather seeke: and that they'l disallow
               Which they would mend themselues, if they knew how:
               
                  
But what are they that keep this censuring court,
               None Ile assure you of the wisest sort;
               None of the wisest said I: yet content ye,
               They are a great way past Ass in presenti;
               
               And think themselues, (but thought somtime is free)
               A great deale wiser then indeed they bee,
               For howsoeuer their insinuation
               Hath gain'd a little vulgar reputation,
               They are but glow-wormes that are briske by might,
               And neuer can be seen when sunne giues light;
               Ill tong'd and enuious, ignorant of shame,
               And vile detractors of anothers fame;
               But let them carp on, what need any care;
               Simce they are knowne for fooles without compare;
               But fellow Christians, thinke vpon this euill,
               Know 'tis an instigation of the Diuell,
               
               Remember 'tis a knowne apparant foe
               To Charitie; and friendships ouerthrow.
               A vicious humor, that with Hell acquaints,
               And hinders the communion of Saints:
               
               Consider that, and how it makes vnable,
               To be partaker of the holy Table.
               
               And so I trust you'l root it from the heart,
               And, as th'Apostle counsels, lay apart
               
               Dissembling, Enuie, Slander, Malice, Guile;
               And Euil-speaking as most bad and vile.
               Chiefely in those men, whose Religion saith,
               Her mainest piller, is True-loue, next Faith.
               
            
            
               
               OF REVENGE.
               SATYR. 5.
               ROome for Reuenge, he's no Commedian
               
               That acts for pleasure, but a grim Tragedian,
               
               A foule sterne monster, which if we displease;
               Death, wounds and bloud, or nothing can appease;
               
               So wicked that though all good men disdaine it,
               Yet there are many rashly entertaine it,
               And hugge it as a sweet contented Passion:
               
               But all men act not in one kinde, nor fashion,
               For one so priuate is, that no man knowes it;
               Another cares not, before whom he showes it,
               Then some of them are fearefull, some are bolder,
               Some are too hot, and some againe are colder:
               Oh, I haue seene, and laught at heart to see't,
               Some of our hot-spurs drawing in the street,
               As though they could not Passions rage withstand▪
               
               But must betake them to it out of hand.
               But why ith' street? Oh company doth heart them,
               
               And men m
                     •
                  y see their valorous acts and part them.
               That humor yet, I rather doe commend
               Then theirs whose fury hath no stay nor end;
               Till of their liues they haue bereft their foes,
               And then they thinke they pay them; yet who b
                     ••
                   knows▪
               
               That tis a smal reuenge? since to be slaine,
               Is to be free from danger, care and paine.
               
                  
So whilst his enemy lies and feeles no smart,
               He hath a thousand tortures in his heart.
               And say his conscience do escape a flaw,
               He brings himselfe in danger of the Law.
               If such reuenge be sweet sure Ile forgiue,
               And neuer seeke for vengeance whilst I liue.
               But oh (me thinkes) I heere our Hacsters tel me,
               With thundring words, as if their breath would fel me:
               I am a Coward if I wil not fight,
               True, Cauelieroes you hane spoke the right,
               And if vpon good tearmes you vrge me to it,
               I haue both strength and heart enough to doe it,
               Which you should find; and yet my mind is still,
               Rather to defend my selfe then kill.
               But most men thinke, that he which kils his foe;
               Is most couragious: now I tell thee no:
               For he that hath a heart that fact to doe,
               Is both a Tyrant and a Coward toe.
               But how is he a Coward some will aske?
               To answer that is but an easie taske,
               Thus he is one: He hauing by his might,
               A power on him with whome he haps to fight:
               Thinkes if he spare his life, in such a case,
               He one day may reuenge his foule disgrace;
               That thought with feare, of future dangers fils him,
               Which to preuent, he like a Coward kils him.
               But those that iustly in excuse can say,
               For present safety, they were forc't to slay,
               I must count blamelesse. Thou that hast a Foe,
               
               Seeke not to be his wofull ouerthrow.
               
                  
Rather if't may be keepe him liuing still;
               I tell thee 'tis a necessary ill, (inimicus amicus)
               
               My selfe haue some, their liues I do no grutch,
               For they haue done me seruice very much;
               And wil do still for wheresoere I goe,
               They make me careful what I speak, or doe:
               And when I step aside I here on't roundly,
               Or (as themselues say) they wil tel't me soundly.
               Whereas my friend, til I were quite vndone,
               Would let me stil in mine owne follies run,
               Or if he warne me it is so in sport,
               That I am scarse a whit the better sort.
               But this same good, I know but few can vse,
               Because that they do better thinges abuse.
               Mans nature's ill, and I haue noted this,
               If they vpbraided bewith what's amisse
               They cannot brooke it, but are readier still,
               For to reuenge that, then amend what's ill.
               We must not now our lusty-blouds gain-say,
               No not so much as in a yea, or nay;
               But presently we dye for't (if we will)
               
               They haue both hand, and heart prepar'd to kil.
               Let them but thinke a man to them iniurious,
               Although he be not so, thei'le straight grow furious
               And are so quickly up in a brauado,
               They are for nothing but the imbrocado:
               
               And in this humor they respect not wheither,
               They be vnto them friends, or foes, or neither;
               All are alike; and their hot choller ends,
               Not only loue, and friendship, but their friends:
               
                  
I know 'twere vaine if I should tel to these
               The peaceful mind of ancient Socrates:
               
               Or if I should Lycurgus vengeance shew,
               How he behau'd himselfe vnto his foe,
               
                  
                     •
                  Twere but in vaine (I say) for there's no doubt,
               Our watle-headed Gallants would but flout
               At their wel tempred passions; since they deeme,
               None now but fooles, or mad-men, worth esteeme
                     •
                  
               
               But whats the cause of their vnbridled rage?
               Oh know it is a humor of their age,
               For to be foolish desperate; and many
               Account not of him wil not fight with any
               On the least quarrel. Therefore most to gaine,
               A little fame that way, though nere so vaine,
               Wil put their liues in danger: nay there's some,
               Had rather haue it then the life to come,
               Alas poore men, what hath bewitcht your mind?
               How are you grown so sencelesse and so blind,
               For to affect vaine shaddowes and let slide,
               The true substance, as a thing vnspide?
               
                  
                     •
                  s Reason in you growne so great a stranger,
               To suffer an affection of such danger
               To settle in you? Bannish't from your breast,
               And there let Mercy and Forgiuenes rest:
               
                  
                     •
                  t is a token of a humane mildnes,
               But vengeance is a signe of Bruitish wildnes:
               Not fitting any but the Tyger, Beare,
               
               
                  
                     •
                  r su
                     •
                  h like creatures, that remorslesse teare
               What ere they light on. Cast it from you then,
               
                  
                     •
                  e in condition as in shape y'are men;
               
               
                  
And stand vnmoou'd, for Innocence ere long,
               Will shew her selfe abroad in spight of wrong:
               And of your Patience you shall not repent,
               But be auenged to your owne content:
               Yet some may say the Counsell I haue giuen,
               Is hard to follow, strict, and too vneuen,
               And whatsoeuer show I seeme to make,
               Such as my selfe would hardly vndertake.
               Know you that thinke so; I am not afraid.
               If that it be a burthen I haue laid,
               To bear't my self; Nay, I haue vndergone
               If this be hard, a more vneasie one:
               For but of late, a friend of mine in show,
               Being (indeed) a spightfull secret foe,
               I know not why, (for I did ne're in ought
               Wrong him I'me sure; no not in an ill thought.)
               Yet this man hauing wisely watcht his Time,
               When I (a stranger, in another Clime)
               Left my owne Country; did meane while repaire,
               To my best friends, and with dissemblings faire,
               And showes of loue and griefe, did there vnfold,
               The grosest slander, euer Villaine told.
               A dam'nd inuention so exceeding vile,
               That gallants 'twould haue made your bloud to boile
               And out of your abused bodies start,
               I know it would haue broken veines or heart:
               I say if you had felt that cruell sting,
               You would haue fret, fum'd, stampt, done any thing
               Or angry rag'd like mad-men in their fit,
               Till mercilesse Reuenge, had quenched it:
               
                  
But what did I? at first I must confesse,
               I was a little mou'd, who could be lesse?
               But when I felt my troubled thoughts begin
               To ioyne with brutish Passion within,
               And raise disquiet humors in my brest,
               I fear'd if I should yeeld 'twould mar my rest.
               And therefore to my selfe I Patience tooke,
               VVhich whil'st I haue about me I can brooke
               Any misfortune. Then that Patience,
               
               Grew so much stronger through my Innocence
               
               That I forgot both wrong and vengeance too;
               Some thinke 'twas cause that I lack't Might to doe
               The hurt I would; No, it was onely Will
               
               For I had power enough to doe him ill;
               
                  
                     •
                  t is well knowne the coward dares not stand
               T' abide the Vengeance of my wronged hand
               Were his strength tripled; Nay were I in bands
               Of impotencie wrapt, and had no hands,
               Yet I haue friends (whom if I had not prai'd
               And beg'd vnto, to haue their fury stai'd)
               Had chopt him, and made dogs meat for my sake
               Of his vile Carkas; yea and he would quake,
               A twelue-month after, had he but the daring,
               To thinke vpon the vengeance was preparing
               For that lewd slanderous tale of his; which he
               Might better raise on one vnborne then me:
               Now though that course my Reason did gain-say,
               I was allow'd Reuenge a better way,
               Both Law add Iustice, proffer'd me a scourge,
               To whip him for it, which my friends did vrge:
               
                  
Shewing me motiues to allure me to it:
               Yet still was I vnwilling for to doe it:
               For though I might (beside submission) gaine,
               No little summes; my heart doth much disdaine,
               For to encrease my substance through his shame,
               Or raise it with the ruines of my fame:
               Now for because there's some may thinke I faine,
               Or speake a matter fram'd by mine owne braine:
               Know, this back-biter liues and may doe long
               To doe me more, and many others wrong:
               And though I doe not mind to staine my verse,
               The name of such a Monster to rehearse,
               For others satisfaction and to grace it,
               Vpon the Margent here I thought to place it:
               But that perhaps would Vengeance counted be,
               Whereas it shall not be reueng'd for me:
               Yet Gallants you may see I wish you to
               No other thing, then I my selfe would doe,
               You heare that I was wrong'd, and yet withstood
               My owne mad Passion in the heate of bloud:
               And am not I in as good case as those,
               That haue reueng'd themselues with stabs & blows
               In my opinion it is as well,
               As if that I should pack his soule to hell
               With danger of mine owne; and heere remaine,
               To greeue and wish he were aliue againe;
               Nay now tis best, for why, he may repent,
               And I with a safe conscience liue content:
               Ther's some (perhaps) misdeem'd my innocence,
               Because they saw that I with Patience
               
               
                  
Indur'd the wrong: tis thought that I did know,
               My selfe in fault, because I tooke it so.
               Indeed tis true, I let him scot-free passe,
               What should I doe vnto him? say an Asse
               Had strooke me with his heeles; how should I qui
                     •
                  
               
               The harme he doth me? you would blame my wit
               If I should kill him; If I went to law
               Who would not count me the most asse? a daw;
               The worst of fooles; I pray what were I lesse,
               If I had don't to his vnworthinesse?
               One that's more ignorant of his offence,
               And seemes as if he had no sparke nor sence
               Of humane goodnesse: one, whom if I touch,
               Or offer to lay hands on, tis as much,
               As if I in my anger would begin
               To breake the stoole that erst had broke my shin.
               I knew in this, and that, the case was one,
               And therefore I did let Reuenge alone:
               Yet will I note him, for this cause indeed,
               That other men may know him and take heed:
               And therefore marke, the greatest feast ith' yeare
               
               And ioyfullest his name at full doth beare.
               A sacred syllable makes the first part;
               Which since tis there alone, and not in's heart:
               Take it from thence with the ensuing letter,
               And the remainder will befit him better:
               Hereof enough; for why there doth remaine,
               Some more of these mad humors to explaine,
               Besides those I first nam'd; for their brother,
               They cannot their Reuengefull Nature smother;
               
                  
And for because they dare not deale with swords:
               Like valiant Champions fight it out with words.
               Such fraies haue made me oftentimes to smile,
               And yet they proue shrewd combats other while,
               For from such braules do sodaine stabs arise,
               And somtime in reuenge the quart-pot flies;
               Ioyne-stooles, and glasses makes a bustling rumor:
               Yea this is growne a Gentleman-like humor:
               But in my mind, he that so wel can fight,
               Deserues for to be dubd an Ale-house knight:
               
               Ist not a shame that men should at their meeting,
               Welcome each other with a friendly greeting,
               As I haue seene, and yet before they part,
               Bandy their swords at one anothers heart?
               Wondrous inhumane, the Sauage bore,
               The wild Armenean heards wil do no more:
               Sure such beleeue not it is God hath said,
               Vengeance is his and must by him be paid.
               For if they did I thinke there would not be,
               Such caruers for themselues: But we may see,
               The Diuel doth so much possesse them than,
               They haue no honest thought of God or Man.
               As in this Humor you shall see't explain'd,
               Two falling out, would fight, but are restrain'd:
               Yet stil they striue to be each others fall,
               Which shewes their loue to man-kind none at all:
               But curbed of their wills through standers by,
               Forth breakes their fury, and they straight let flye,
               Such horrid, bloody, fearefull cannon oathes,
               As theirs no honest Christian eare but loathes,
               
                  
Almost to heare them nam'd they seeme to teare
               
                  Christs Man-hood peece-meal from him when they sweare
               For foot, heart, nailes, stil vsing God withall
               Their foule-mouth'd-rackets like a tennise ball
               Doth bandy too and fro: His blood and wounds,
               
               Set forth their vaunts they think with brauest sounds,
               And makes the simple people to admire;
               Their courage which is but as a flame on fire.
               Thrice valiant Champions whereby should one gather
               They haue a thought of God that's good? but rather
               That they are vile blasphemers; for when they
               Cannot haue Vengeance they desired, why,
               As if they scorn'd th' Almighties fearefull rod,
               Thus thinke they to auenge themselues on God,
               Who were he not as merciful as iust,
               Might with a blast consume them into dust.
            
            
               OF CHOLLER.
               SATYR. 6.
               BVt now the cause of mens Reuengefull thirst,
               
               Proceeds from rash vnbridled choller first:
               
               Which Passion flowes from imbecillity,
               And brings vs vnto much absurdity:
               Yea those that are infected with this crime,
               Are in a manner mad-men for the time:
               'Tis a short Fury, where-with man possest
               Resembles most a wild vntamed beast:
               It makes him foolish, quite besides his wit,
               Doing and speaking many a thing vnfit.
               
                  
Those men in whom I find this Passion raigne,
               I haue oft seene to storme for things but vaine,
               Yea, and as if they had some greeuous crosse
               Chafe out of measure for a penny losse,
               And fret as much in loosing of some toy
               As if therein consisted all their ioy:
               This too I noted in a Chollerick man,
               
               (Let any one disproue me if he can)
               They are not onely apt for to beleeue,
               Any report that may occasion giue;
               But in light matters if they should contend,
               Would pick a quarrell with their dearest friend:
               Yea I haue seen where friends, nay more, where brothers
               That should & haue bin dearer far thē others:
               These I haue knowne in choller e'ne like foes.
               Mingling sharpe words, with farre more sharpned blows.
               When they are in their fit they do not spare,
               Any degree; No reuerence, nor care
               Doth then remaine; Thei'le speake though they be sure,
               Their heedlesse words, not foes alone procure,
               But loose their friends: nor doe they in that case,
               Respect the Time, the company, nor place:
               Besides there is this ouersight in some,
               Where Choller doth the Reason ouercome:
               They doe not onely blame him that offends,
               But are displeased euen with their friends,
               And all that are in presence or in view;
               I haue obseru'd it often to be true:
               Then if that any should but tell these men,
               Their anger were without iust Reason, then,
               
                  
Although it be so and thy know it right,
               Their fury is the more increast with spight:
               They cannot brooke 
                     •
                  ontroule, nor yet can they
               Endure that a man should nothing say,
               For then indeed tis presently suspected,
               He cares not, and his anger is neglected:
               And in some Masters I haue noted this,
               Wherein they doe in my conceit amisse:
               If they but thinke their seruant doth offend,
               He must not his suspected crime defend,
               Guilty or no; but yeild it an offence
               As if men still were slaues; but surely hence,
               Springs this abuse, in whom this humour passes:
               Choller beares sway, and they are wayward Asses:
               Who though they haue read some strict rules in Cat
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Were neuer Schollers, to diuiner Plato:
               
               Oh Anger is a wondrous headstrong Passion,
               
               That hath a beastly, frantick operation;
               From which, how can we any man release
               Since we must neither speake, nor hold our peace?
               Some will be angry, if they cannot make,
               Another their opinions for to take.
               Others haue meanings but they cannot shew them,
               Yet are displeas'd, with those that doe not know
               And I haue seene (that anger may be holy) them:
               A good man mooued for anothers folly;
               Yet in such cases let not any chafe,
               But pray (as I doe) they may mend and laugh;
               Me thinkes they should be men vnfit to weild
               The sword of Iustice that do basely yeild,
               
                  
Vnto so brute a passion; yet haue we
               Some Gouernours that ouer-ruled be
               By this, and worse affections; yea some now
               Haue charge of others, that doe worse know how
               To guide themselues: the angry Magistrate,
               
               To be aueng'd on him whom he doth hate,
               For priuate causes drawes the publike sword,
               And all the Rigor that the lawes affoord
               Must serue his Choller; such there be, so many
               You cannot misse one, though I name not any.
               Now diuers doe affirme such men as be
               
                  Hasty, (so they tearme this infirmitie)
               Are the best natur'd: who that lesson taught?
               If they be best Ile sweare the best be naught:
               Moreouer there be many doe suppose,
               It is a signe of courage; what meane those?
               Where is their iudgements? they me thinkes should gather
               That it were weakenesse did produce it rather,
               Or else why should the feeble and the sicke,
               Women and children be most chollerick?
               Againe there's some (whose iudgement is as rude)
               Doe thinke that Anger quickens fortitude:
               
               But that's a vertue surely will deny,
               With such a Vice to haue affinity:
               Thou that hast iudgement, tell me, can it be,
               That Fortitude and Anger may agree?
               I thinke it not, for why, the one is steady,
               And rul'd by reason, t'other rash and heady:
               The one doth nothing but on consultation,
               The other cannot take deliberation:
               
                  
And therefore if that we be well aduis'd,
               It is a humor ought to be despis'd:
               And though some thence much help may seeme to gather,
               To whet on Fortitude, it hinders rather:
               Yea tis a strange vnreasonable Passion,
               
               That brings the owner cleane beside all fashion;
               Making him speake if ought but discontent him,
               Yea doe the thing of which he shall repent him,
               And of a friend if I might chuser be:
               I'de rather haue a man that's mad then he:
               Some say 'tis inflamation of the blood,
               And may with carefull heed be soone withstood;
               But their's so few that seeke to stop this ill,
               That most do let it runne at randome stil:
               And very faintly yeeld to the inuasion
               Of this wild Passion, on the least occasion,
               But he indeed that would a medcine find
               For this disease, must haue a setled mind,
               Not giuing credit vnto all reports▪
               
               Nor yet delighting in vaine toyes, nor sports:
               On dogs, or hawkes his mind must not be set,
               So much, as for their losse to chafe or fret:
               He should not fancy fuch fond idle trash,
               But euer taking heed of being rash;
               
                  Athenodorus good aduice embrace,
               And follow Cotis that wise King of Thrace,
               
               Whereby he best shall quench this Passions tinder,
               And many an Angry fumish fit may hinder.
            
            
               
               OF IEALOVSIE.
               SATYR. 7
               BVt though these angry-ones soon breed a braule
               And are pernicious to conuerse with-all.
               Not one 
                     •
                  ot better is the iealous-head,
               
               That thinks his friend, and's wife are still a-bed:
               This Passion, (as it plainely doth appeare)
               Proceeds out of a too-much loue with feare;
               
               
                  Loue in a match procures the highest bliss,
               That for vs men on earth ordained is:
               But adde a feare of loosing of our ioy,
               And that we loue so dearely, 'twill destroy
               All our delights; and strewing good with ill,
               Makes that seeme lost which we haue with vs still:
               Thus doth it often with the Iealous proue,
               VVho carefull in the choosing of his loue,
               
               Hath gotten her that is not faire alone;
               But modest, wise, and curteous, hating none,
               Nor yet affecting any but her peere,
               For which good parts, her husband counts her deere,
               As well he may, her vertues he'll vphold,
               Dares sweare she will not be allur'd with gold.
               Honor, nor beauty; but as she is chast
               So hee's perswaded will be to the last;
               And to himselfe so well he seemes to thriue,
               He thinkes his owne the happiest choise aliue,
               
                  
'Tis good: Thus for no hurt, he wiued well;
               But soft there, there is an after part to tell;
               This man when he by daily proofe doth see,
               His wife no other then a wife should be,
               It so augments his Loue to that extreame,
               He knowes not if he be awake or dreame;
               Now doth this Loue (for Loue will euer doe it)
               For a Companion take in Feare vnto it;
               A feare of loosing what he loues so much;
               And then the nature of this feare is such,
               That it begets suspect; which creeping in
               Doth by a little at the first begin
               To make him doubt his spouse doth loosely liue;
               Whereto vpon a slight report to giue
               Firme credence he seemes loth; but yet ere long
               He doth (but) think perhaps she doth him wrong,
               Which if he doe, that one false thought's enough,
               To giue all former truths the ouerthrow,
               And why? Suspect growes thereupon so great,
               See thrusts true iudgement, quite besides her seat:
               Which being done, then straight begins to wane,
               The good conceit he of his bliss had tane;
               For if his friend doth to his house repaire,
               He thinkes tis onely, cause his wife is faire:
               But if't be strangers, he durst pawne his life,
               There's some compact betweene them & his wife:
               Yea though their busines to himselfe he find,
               He thinks tis b
                     •
                  t a hood to keep him blind;
               Then all the sweet he had is turn'd to sowre,
               Faine would he think well, but hath not the powre;
               
                  
Much care torments his heart, and yet he will,
               Be prying farther to encrease it still:
               Yea, he will seeke, although he truely know,
               The more he seekes, the more he findes his woe:
               Beside, suspect receiueth in the head,
               All things that may be mis-interpreted,
               And the best thought her vertue's like to winne
               
                  Is onely this: It seru'd to cloake her sinne.
               In briefe, his liking thus he marreth quight,
               And there he loath's where once he tooke delight;
               But wherefore? Onely cause he doth mistrust,
               And not on any proofe, that she's vniust:
               Vnhappy woman haplesly to wed
               So meere a sot, and such a Iealous head;
               An owle-eyed buzzard, that by day is blind,
               And sees not things apparant; yet can find
               That out which neuer was. The feare to loose
               The Iewell he aboue all Iemms did chuse,
               That feare, I say, of wit doth so bereaue him,
               He thinks that's gone which means not yet to leaue him:
               Oh foolish man, that hauing gain'd a bliss,
               Doost mak't a curse by vsing it amiss,
               If iudgement be not blinded in thee? looke;
               Try if thou hast not all this while mistooke:
               Is not thy wife still faire? and to the eye
               Seemes she not yet to haue that modesty,
               Thou didst commend her for? Is she not wary
               With whom she walks, or speaks, or where to tarie?
               Is she not still as willing for to please;
               As louing toe, as in her former daies?
               
                  
In shew he sees it, but he thinks 'tis fein'd,
               Out blockish dolt that art most iustly pain'd:
               Thou but a few supposed shadowes hast,
               That makes thee to account thy wife vnchast,
               But many firme substantiall proofes make cleare,
               That shee's vnstain'd, and ought to be as deare
               As e're she was; Why should an ill in thee
               Make her seeme so, vnlesse she euill be?
               A woman that is faire, shall much be view'd,
               And haue perhaps vnlook't for fauours shew'd,
               She shall be courted where she will or no,
               Nay be resorted to; and though she show
               Scarcely so much as common curtesies
               She shalbe censur'd by misiudging eyes,
               And false reports will fly; But what of this?
               Shall he that hath had triall what she is,
               And ne're saw ought amiss, shall he, I say,
               Cast all the good conceit he had away;
               And streight grow iealous, trusting the surmise
               Of the lewd vulgar more then his owne eyes?
               It were mad folly; and yet I doe knowe
               Some that are thus besotted, more's their woe.
               And pitty 'twere but they had horned him,
               Were't not a greater pitty so to sinne:
               Should you but sit with such a one at table,
               To hold from laughter you were scarcely able,
               To see what note the Iealous wood-cock-takes,
               Of his Wiues words, and euery looke she makes,
               In what a feare he eates his meate, and drinks:
               What signes he vses, how he nods and winks,
               
                  
With twenty scuruy gestures; though he see
               No reason he should so suspicious be:
               Now some haue cause enough, but that's all one;
               Why should men striue to hold what will be gone,
               Vexing themselues so for anothers ill,
               Which they can neuer help? Let him that will:
               But this is true, to seeke for to restraine
               A womans will, is labour spent in vaine;
               And he that tries to doe it, might haue bin,
               One of the crew that bedg'd the Cuckow in.
               Why should a man go put himselfe to paine,
               As some haue done, a iourney for to faine?
               And then at night come lurk about his house,
               Where, be it but the stirring of a mouse
               He doth obserue it: wherefore doth he so?
               Since if thereby he ought amisse doth know,
               The greatest good that he shall thereby find,
               Is more vexation to molest his mind:
               For then the mischiefe he but fear'd before,
               Hee's certaine of, and need not doubt it more:
               A goodly meed, but sure those wretched elues,
               Take pleasure in tormenting of themselues;
               They hearken, watch, set spies, and alway long
               To heare some tales or inckling of their wrong:
               And he that can but whisper some such fable,
               Shall be the welcom'st guest that sits at table,
               Though it be ne're so false; they loue so well
               To feele the Torture of this earthly hell:
               But I doe muse what diuell keeps their heart,
               They should affect the causers of their smart;
               
                  
Those euer-buzzing-deadly-stinging flies;
               Those that of Echoes onely can deuise
               A formall Lie. What if't be true they say?
               It is a meanes to draw thy loue away
               From her thou ow'st it to; and that's a crime,
               Cause she must be thy best belou'd a time,
               Better or worse, be sure thou must abide her,
               Till from thy selse the death of one deuide her:
               Then tell me were it not by much lesse paine;
               A good opinion of her to retaine?
               Could'st thou not be contented by thy will,
               At least to thinke that she were honest still?
               Yes sure in heart thou would'st be glad,
               Vnlesse that thou wer't voide of sense, or mad:
               Why shake off all these claw-backs then that vse
               Thy soone-beleeuing-heart for to abuse;
               For (trust me) they, are but some spightfull elues,
               Who cause they haue not the like blisse themselues
               Would faine marre thine; or else I dare be bold,
               If thou the truth couldst warily vnfold,
               They are some lust-stung Villaines, that did court
               Thy honest wife to some vnlawfull sport:
               And finding her too-chast to serue their turne,
               Whose euill hearts with foule desires did burne,
               To spight her (being far more euill doers,
               Then Daniels elders, faire Susannaes woers)
               To thee they doe accuse her of an ill,
               VVhereto they sought for to allure her will:
               Nay, this I wish thee whatsoe're he be,
               That of such dealings first informeth thee;
               
                  
Beleeue him not what proofes so ere he bring.
               Do not giue eare to him for any thing:
               And though he be the nearest friend thou hast,
               From such like knowledge shut all sence vp fast;
               Flye and auoid him as thou wouldst the Diuel,
               Or one that brings thee messages of euill:
               Let him be to thee as thy deadliest foe,
               A fury, or some one thou loathe'st to know;
               And be assured what soere he shewes,
               He is no friend of thine that brings that newes,
               So if that thou wert his most deadly foe,
               For any wrong i
                     •
                   were reuenge enough.
               Now some men I haue noted loue as well,
               The husbands faults vnto the wife to tell,
               And aggrauate them to: as if thereby
               They either meant to feed their Iealousie,
               
               Or else stir vp their vnbeseeming hates,
               Against their guiltlesse well-beloued mates:
               But of these monsters (fairest sexe) beware
               Of their insinuations haue a care:
               Beleeue them not they wil coyne tales vntrue,
               To sow foule strife betwixt your loues and you
               Out of ill-will: or else heere is my doome,
               
               They hope to get into your husbands roome
               
               By the aduantage of the discontent
               They'll worke in you, But their intent
               They'l soe disguise, that you shal neuer spy them▪
               
               Til you are snar'd too fast for to deny them:
               But oh you Creatures that for excellence,
               Haue reasonable for a difference,
               
                  
Auoid this passion; If your wiues be ill,
               Aduise them well, but let them haue their will,
               For curbing makes them worse, and their condition
               Indeed is such they cannot brooke suspition;
               
               Restraine them not I say, for as the pouder,
               Being fast stopt makes the report the louder,
               Sending the bullet with the greatest force,
               So he 
                     •
                  at seekes to barre a womans course,
               Makes her more eager, and can ne're out-striue her,
               But on she wil because the Diuel doth driue her.
               Let those that are so matcht then patience take,
               And there are none shal know their heads do ake,
               But beware chiefely that no false surmises,
               Or flying tale some enuious head deuises,
               Make them to wrong their chast and modest wiues,
               Who haue with vertue led vnspotted liues,
               For though some stand vnmoou'd for thats the way,
               To make a woman soonest go astray:
               But now I think on't, I do wonder why,
               The greatest part brand him with infamy,
               That is a Cuckold? Since that all men know,
               It is not his offence that he is so,
               I neuer heard a reason fort it'h Schooles,
               
                  Yet sure tis this, the greatest part are fooles:
               But now I will conclude these I ealous humors,
               
               Which part I found b'experience, part by rumors;
               
               I feele it not, yet know it is a smart
               That plagues the mind and gripes the very heart,
               Yet I could wish but for the others sake,
               Their thought-tormenting-paine might neuer slake;
               
                  
For there's none iealous, I durst pawne my li
                     •
                  e,
               But he that hath defil'd anothers wife.
            
            
               OF COVETOVSNES.
               SATYR. 8.
               BVt of that Passion how mist I to tell,
               The same that brings her Pedigree from hell?
               
               Cal'd Auarice, a humor vile and base,
               
               And yet as common as to haue a face:
               I muse it scap't, I say, since Ile be plaine,
               I looke not vp but see where it doth raigne;
               Many I know, and yet indeed but few,
               That can this slauish dunghill-vice eschew;
               I neither can excuse sex nor degree,
               Young folks, nor such as middle-aged be:
               Nay I perceiue them giuen most to craue,
               VVhen they had need to dig themselues a graue,
               Like earth-bred moles they scramble in the dust,
               Not for the treasure that shall neuer rust;
               But for vile cankred drosse is all their care,
               As if the same their summum bonum were.
               When all that they haue with their labour bought
               In my opinion is not worth a thought:
               I haue knowne Chuffs, that hauing well to liue,
               Yea and sufficient for to lend and giue:
               Will naith'less toyle, moile, and take more paine,
               Then a Iewes bond-slaue, or a M
                        ••
                     re in Spaine;
               
               
                  
All day they brooke the raine, haile, frost and snow,
               
               And then as if they had not drudg'd enough,
               They lie and thinke all night with care & sorrow,
               How they may take as little rest the morrow.
               'Tis strange their minds so much for gold should itch
               And being gotten that it should bewitch;
               It is by nature in a prison pent,
               Vnder our feet i'th' basest element:
               
               And shall we pluck't from dungeons, filth, and mire
               
               To giue 't the chiefest seat in our desire?
               'Twere want of iudgement, but braue spirits know
               Tis base, and therefore doe account it so.
               I haue heard those say that trauell to the East,
               
               Where this beloued mettaile hath its neast,
               
               That in those places where such minerals be
               Is neither grasse, nor herbe, nor plant, nor tree;
               
               A cursed soile; and this at home I find,
               That those which too-much do imploy their minde
               About that trash; their hearts are (Ile be bold)
               As barraine as the earth where men digge gold.
               This humor hath no bounds, tis a desire,
               (Or disease rather) nothing can expire;
               'Tis hell, for had it all the world, yet,
               It longs asmuch as if't had ne're a whit;
               A boundlesse gulfe: and I lament their paine
               Who haue this neuer-quenched thirst of gaine;
               So bottomelesse a whirle-poole that receaues
               Still, yet the self-same roome still empty leaues;
               Hee's mad that food to such a Vulture giues
               That's neuer full; and e'ne as good fill siues
               
                  
That haue no bottome, as for to endeauor,
               To glut a Monster that will hunger euer:
               Yet men still striue although it be in vaine;
               And though they feele their longing still remaine,
               They'l weary out themselues like him that drinks
               Brine, or salt water, and still thereby thinks
               To slacke his thirst at last; though he feel't more
               Augmented, at each draught then twas before:
               Yea, wealth doth as much lessen this desire
               Of Auarice in men, as flames of fire
               Alay the heate: besides, though they haue store,
               This makes them to themselues exceeding poore;
               And howsoeuer they may seeme, yet such
               Vntill their dying-day are neuer rich▪
               
               They very seldome haue respect or care
               To promise, or Religion; thei'l not spare
               To wrong their neighbour, friend, or God himselfe,
               Thereby for to increase their cursed pelfe:
               They neither reuerence the right of lawes,
               Nor are they touched with the poore-mans cause:
               They would be well content to shed their blouds,
               Loose Soule and Heauen, for to saue their goods:
               To talke to them of better things 'twere vaine,
               For they are onely capable of gaine;
               They neuer liue in true societie,
               
               Nor know they friendship, loue, or pietie;
               
               And in a word, those that are thereby led,
               Neuer doe good till they are sick or dead.
               
               And therefore with these vermine I wil place them▪
               
               That serue to no vse till that we vncase them▪
               
               
                  
I haue obserud' that such mens children be,
               Borne many times to greatest misery;
               For they haue neither mean es nor education,
               
               According to their Kindred, State nor Nation:
               VVhereby we see that they do often run,
               Into vild actions and are quite vndone;
               So then, these greeue to heare they do amisse,
               But nere consider that their fault it is;
               'Tis greedines that makes a man a flaue,
               To that which hee should for his seruant haue,
               And teaches him for to esteeme of more,
               The vicioius-Ritchman, then the honest poore,
               
               Alas! how many are there I could name,
               Iniurious villaines; that for to defame,
               Or wrong another would forsweare saluation,
               As if they thought that there were no damnation?
               Prouided that when they their conscience straine,
               It be out of a hatred or for gaine:
               Yea there be idle theeuing rogues a many,
               That haue no Vertue, nor wil nere haue any:
               Yet for their wealth shall highly be respected,
               When honest men their beetters, are neglected,
               And then
                     •
                  we also see that most men do,
               Put many worthy titles on them toe,
               That such base scummes must oft entreated be,
               With good your Worship, and with cap and knee:
               But sure the world is now become a gull,
               To thinke such scoundrels can be worshipfull;
               And yet in these dayes, if that men haue ritches,
               Though they be hangmen, Vsurers or witches,
               
               
                  
                  Diuels-incarnate, such as haue no shame,
               To act the thing that I should blush to name,
               Doth that disgrace them any whit? Fie no,
               The world it meanes not for to vse them so;
               There is no shame for Ritch-men in these times,
               For wealth wil serue to couer any crimes:
               Wert thou a crooke-back-dwarfe, deform'd in shape;
               
                  Thersites like, condition'd like an ape:
               Didst neuer do a deed a good-man ought,
               Nor spake true word, nor had'st an honest thought,
               If thou be ritch, and hap to disagree
               With one that's poore; although indeed hee bee
               In euery part a man and hath a Spirit
               Thats truely noble, able for to merit
               Euen praise of Enuy; yet if thou wilt seem
               A man far worthier and of more esteeme,
               Although thou canst inuent no means to blame him
               Yet I can tel a trick how thou shalt shame him,
               And that's but this, Report that he is poore,
               
               And there's no way for to disgrace him more;
               For so this Passion doth mens iudgement blind,
               That him in whom they most perfection find,
               If that he be not ritch they count him bace,
               And oft hees faine to giue a Villaine place.
               Moreouer the desire to gaine this pelfe,
               Makes many a braue man to forget himselfe:
               Some I haue knowne that for their worthy parts,
               Their vertue and their skill in many Arts,
               Deserued honor; and (if any can
               Iudge by the outward looke, the inward man)
               
                  
For to command men they me thought were born▪
               
               And seem'd a slauish seruitude to scorne;
               Yet haue I seene when such as these (alas!)
               In hope of gaine haue croucht vnto an Asse,
               Obseru'd a Dolt, and much debas't their merits,
               To men of vulgar and ignoble spirits;
               How many of our finest wits haue spent,
               Their times and studies in meere complement?
               Greasing with praises many a fat-fed Bore,
               Of whom the world thought too too well before:
               How many now that followed Mars his troope
               Whom force of death could neuer make to stoope?
               Nay more, how many of our graue Diuines
               That should seeke treasure not in earthly mines,
               
               What store I say of these, against the haire,
               
               (As goes the common prouerbe) can speake faire,
               
               Flatter for gaine, and humor such base groomes,
               As are not worthy of their horse-boyes roomes?
               They wrong themselues, but those are counted wise
               That now a daies know how to temporize:
               I cannot brooke dissembling: and I vow,
               E're I to any golden calfe would bow,
               Flatter against my conscience, or else smother
               That which I know for truth, to please another,
               E're I for gaine would faune to please a clowne,
               Or feed great fooles with tales of the renowne
               Of their reputed fathers, when (God mend them)
               
               Thēselues haue nothing why we should commend them,
               And ere Ile coine a lie, be't ne're so small,
               For eu'r a bragging Thraso of them all
               
                  
In hope of profit; Ile giue vp my play,
               And fall to labour for a groat a day;
               And for my clothing in a mantle goe,
               And feed on Sham-roots, as the Irish doe;
               For, what contentment can in riches be,
               Vnless the body and the mind be free?
               But tush what's freedome? look where gold beares sway,
               It takes That Credit, yea and Wit away;
               Corrupts the iudgement, and can make the lawes
               Oft-times to fauour an vngodly cause:
               Besides, a worldly mind doth so affect,
               Where wealth abounds, & beares so much respect
               To those that haue it: that their vice they deeme
               To be a vertue, and so make it seeme;
               For, say they vse extortion, no men more,
               Vndoe their Country, hurt and wrong the poore,
               Be damn'd Vsurers, and keep a house,
               That yeelds not crums enough to feed a mouse:
               Yet they'l not say hee's couetous; oh no,
               Hee's thrifty, a good wary man, or so.
               Another though in pride he doe excell,
               Be more ambitious then the Prince of hell;
               
               If his apparell be in part like vs,
               Italian, Span
                     •
                  sh, French and Barbarous,
               Although it be of twenty seuerall fashions,
               All borrowed from as many forraine nations;
               Yet hee's not vaine, nor proud; what is he than?
               Marry a proper, fine, neat Gentleman,
               Or if he be a drunkard that can swagger,
               Goe daily armed with an alehouse dagger,
               
               
                  
Quaffe soule-sick-healths vntill his eyes doe stare,
               Sing baudy Songs, and rounds, and curse and sweare;
               Though he vse gaming, as the cards and dice,
               So out of measure that he mak't a vice,
               Turne his owne house into a filthy stewes,
               Keep whores, and knaues, and baudes, as that's no newes
               Yet if he be a rich man what is he,
               A rude ranke ruffine if you aske of me,
               A Ruffin? Guep Iack sauce-boxe with a wannion,
               Nay hee's a merry and a boone companion,
               This is the Worlds censure. Yet beside,
               Another qualitie I haue espide;
               For those diseases they doe shun the poore,
               They doe abhor a Rich-man ne're the more:
               Him I haue knowne that hath disdain'd to sup
               Water, or beere, out of a poore mans cup,
               For feare of poysoning, or some thing as bad,
               Although he knew no malady he had;
               And yet haue I, seene the same curious Asse,
               
               Pledging a rich-man in the selfe-same glasse:
               When he hath knowne the party (if you please
               
               Ile speakeplaine English) had the French disease:
               
               But as the Prouerb saith, Birds of a feather
               
               VVill alwaies vse to flock and feed together:
               I haue oft mused and doe still admire,
               That men should hurtfull riches so desire,
               For weigh it well and you shall find it fils,
               The owner of it with a thousand ill's,
               Much worse then these forenam'd: for why we find,
               It choakes and mar's the Vertues of the mind:
               
                  
Then we perceiue it greatly doth annoy,
               Vexes the heart, and hinders the true ioy
               Would else be there; And as it may appeare,
               Loads vs with diuers troubles, cares and feare:
               It makes vs to grow arrogant, vniust,
               
               Drawes vnto pleasure, and prouokes to lust:
               More hopefull for to practise villany,
               Then for to further vs in honesty,
               It nere contents the owners that enioy it,
               And those that haue it many times employ it
               To corrupt iustice; or for to allure,
               Matrons, or Virgins, to an act impure:
               It hires murthers, and makes men seditious,
               Full of suspect, and enuie, or ambitious:
               
                  Yea it breeds claw-backs, pick-thanks, flattery,
               Makes many theeues and causes periury:
               
               It hinders knowledge, for most that haue lands,
               Liue neither by their wisedome nor their hands.
               They follow sloath and pleasure, not the schooles,
               And that's the reason there's such wealthy fooles:
               These are the fruits of wealth; yet that alone
               
               Seemes now the fairest marke of euery one
               To make his course for; and which to attaine,
               Or keep once gotten, we refuse no paine
               Labor nor danger; yet it doth appeare,
               They think that all, which they were plac't for here:
               Now ther's a Counterpassion vnto this,
               Which to speake something of 'twere not amisse:
               
                  Those, subiect therevnto, haue got a fashion,
               That's quite contrarie to the former Passion.
               
               
                  
Fore'ne as greedy men are set on fire,
               With an vnquenched and a soule desire,
               
                  Of hourding Riches (God in heaven amend them)
               So doe the other hie as fast to spend them:
               Their 
                     〈◊〉
                   diuers; some vaine-glorious Asses.
               Consu
                     •
                  n't in gaudy cloathes; and looking glasses;
               Others blowne vp e'ne with the selfe same bellowes
               Seeke to obtaine the loue of all good fellowes;
               These at the Althouse haue their daily pots
               Though they be there or no. And looke what shots,
               Are in their chambers spent, be't nere so many,
               He doth them wrong that thinks to pay a penny;
               These feast at Tauernes their supposed friends,
               
                  That pay with, Thankes, we nere shall make 
                     〈◊〉
                  :
               Yea, and in more things they haue lauish bin,
               But those are pathes I'uc no experience in,
               Yet such as they ere many yeares be past,
               Will wish (I warrant) they had held it fast,
               When for their kindnes and their former cheere,
               They hardly shall procure a cup of beare.
               But there must needs be some men prone there to,
               Or how a diuell shall our sharker doe?
               Yet can I not say rightly that these be,
               From Auarice and greedinesse quite free:
               For though they doe consume it knauishly,
               And spend it on vaine pleasures lauishly,
               They gladly would their euill course maintaine,
               And therefore ouerslip no meanes of gaine,
               For they haue vsed (by their owne confession)
               Secret and open Robberies; Oppression,
               
                  
And diuers tricks which show this spending vice,
               May haue some reference to Auarice.
               Others there are, (but few) who hauing store,
               Neglect their wealth, and rather would be poore;
               And why? it stops the way to heauen they say;
               Sure being misimployed so it may:
               And therefore rather then they should abuse it,
               'Twere good they had it that know how to vse it:
               For such are lightly weake in resolution,
               And men but of a simple constitution,
               Or are by some seducing Villan taught,
               That their goods (rather then their good) haue sought:
               Now I suppose the man that well obtaines
               His wealth, and in an honest calling gaines,
               More wisedome shewes in vsing it aright,
               Then such a Cynnick as contemnes in quite.
               Men will be in extreames; but sure the lesse,
               Is to neglect wealth, for much greedines,
               Makes not the body onely, leane and foule,
               But also spreads infection to his soule,
               And clogges her so with things of no account,
               That she is ouer-poyz'd to much, to mount.
               But those that for to goe astray are loth,
               Vse their endeuours to auoide them both.
            
            
               
               OF AMBITION.
               SATYR. 9.
               HEres yet another cal'd Ambition,
               
               Little with men of low condition,
               
               But 'tis a humor which doth euer search,
               The stout-high-minded, and doth alway perch
               In men of spirit. This doth farre surmount,
               The force of Loue; It maketh no account
               Of Nature, nor Religion; 'tis not Law,
               
               Nor Conscience, that can keep such men in awe;
               Ther's no estate contents them; peace and strife
               Are both alike to them; yea death and life:
               Wiues, children, friends, nor none but such as may▪
               
               Be vnto their Ambitious plots a stay,
               Shall be respected; and so they may reape,
               What they desire, the'il not stick to heape
               Murther on Murthers; yea and think't no sinne,
               Be it of strangers, or their nearest kin:
               They haue such flinty breasts they can out-beard,
               Danger it selfe, and be no whit afeard;
               Proud daring Spirits; yet we see, confusion,
               
               Of such high minds doth prooue the sad couclusion:
               
               And he that first was ruin'd by this euill,
               Was our grand foe which wee doe call the Diuell:
               
               For he aspir'd so high, that higher powers,
               Wrought his iust fall, and now he seeketh ours;
               
                  
He first infus'd this ill into our brest,
               For to disquiet and disturbe our rest.
               
                  This most vnreasonable, strong desire;
               
                  This too excessiue longing to aspire
               To honour and promotion; which indeed
               
               Doth from a sottish ignorance proceed;
               It is the wild'st and most disorderd'st passion,
               And a great enemy to contentation,
               For whatsoeuer state man hath attain'd
               Tis e' ne as if that he had nothing gain'd;
               For he hath hereby still a farther I cope,
               And neuer reaches to the end of's hope;
               That which he doth possesse he neere respecteth,
               But altogether things vnknowne affecteth,
               And counts them best; which whatsoe're they
               Being once gotten too, are not esteem'd:
               But what's the reason that they doe abhor, sseem'd,
               The things possest that they haue labor'd for?
               What is the cause I say they doe contemne,
               (Or cannot vse) things hauing gained them?
               Sure hence it doth proceed; they doe not know
               VVhat the things are that they doe long for so.
               And they obtaine them oft, e're they haue might,
               And Reason fit to gouerne them aright:
               Had many of our reaching Yeomanry,
               
               That haue growne wealthy through good husbandry,
               And some of our proud Gentry, that haue sought
               
                  Titles, and vndeserued Honors bought;
               Had they, I say, before-hand knowne the shame,
               And beggery that followed on the same,
               
                  
For want to knowing where to they aspir'd
               They would not haue those Dignities desir'd,
               And so indeed they might haue walk't the street,
               And not haue feard the Counters nor the Fleet:
               
               Yea and with Good-man haue contented bin,
               Where now there's scarce a good man of the kin.
               
                  Ambitious men wil euer enuious be;
               Regarding neither loue nor amity,
               And though that they may make a goodly shew,
               With reason it can neuer stand I know,
               They should be faithfull, or with Iustice deale,
               Either for Princes or for Common-weale:
               
               For why this humor makes them to attend,
               And all their labours and best counsels spend,
               In their owne plots; And so they haue no losse,
               They care not whose proceedings they do crosse;
               Vertuous endeauors this doth also let,
               Yea makes men many a good thing to forget:
               And though I'me loath to speake it I protest
               I thinke it raignes not in the Clergy least,
               For they at first shew great humility,
               While that they are of meane ability:
               Thei'l be industrious and take paine to teach,
               For twise a week shal be the least thei'le preach:
               Or in their pouerty they wil not stick
               
                  For Catechizing, viziting the sick,
               And such like dutious workes of Piety,
               As do belong to their society:
               But if that they can reach a Vicarage,
               
               Or be inducted to some Parsouage:
               
               
                  
Men must content the mselues and thinke it well,
               If once a yeare they heare the Sermon bell:
               Now if it be a Deanery or so,
               If not in twelue months it is oft enough,
               And why? Alas consider that Deuotion,
               
               Is but a busie thing that lets Promotion,
               
               And if that they should giue their minds too't all
               Who should haue their great places when they fall?
               No, no, twere fitter they their ease did take,
               And se what friendes and Patrons they can make
               For the next Hierarchy; or learne how
               To humor and to please the Great-ones now;
               But, if that they in that aduenture speed,
               Thei'le be more paineful; yes, tis like indeed:
               If they get into their formalibus,
               
               And Reuerent Pontificalibus;
               
               'Tis very like I say that we shall heare,
               They vse the Pulpit once in twise a yeare:
               Nay and tis wel if it be done so oft,
               For this Ambition beares men so aloft,
               They soone forget their duties: and this pride
               I in the Clergy worst of all abide,
               In them I hold it the most odious,
               And no Ambition so pernitious,
               Eeither for prince, or Church, or common good,
               VVitnesse the beast of Rome and his fou'e broo
                     •
                  
               
               Of clyming Cardinals, who from base states,
               
               Are gotten to be Kings and Princes mates,
               
               Yea their superiors. This the diuel makes,
               His cheefest engine where withall he shakes
               
                  
Religions soundnesse; And rends in it chinks,
               Which he dawbes vp againe with what he think
                     •
                  
               
               Shall ruin't all in time; was it not hence,
               He had his meanes to mar the innocence
               Of Romes first Bishops? yes, the Church grew strong
               And flourish't while it was supprest with wrong,
               But when the worthy Emperors embrac't
               The Sacred Truth; and with their fauors grac't
               Their good proceedings; They then gan to leaue
               Their humble Nature off: and closely weaue,
               Vnder a Religious shew (not a bare Miter
               
               It fits not the successors of Saint Peter)
               A triple Diadem; and such a state,
               That neuer any earthly Potentate
               
                  Enioy'd the like (yet all with humble preaching)
               A long degree I tak't, beyond the reaching
               Of temporall Ambition. But I pray
               
               Er'e the first Beast his time be done away,
               There rise not vp another monster heere
               'Mongst our Ambitious Churchmen; I should feare
               A second Antichrist, but that I hope
               They either shall be kept within their scope,
               Or the last iudgement, whose nigh times vnknowne,
               Shall cut him off e're he be wholly growne:
               But more of these I here omit to speake,
               Because, I thinke there's no mans sight so weake,
               But see's their doings; yet let none suppose,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   heare meane to defend, or maintaine those
               That doe our Bishops Callings disalow.
               Let them that can
                     •
                   for sure I know not how:
               
                  
Nor would I haue the world to vnderstand,
               That I tax all the Clergy in the land:
               Or the whole Hierarchy: Think not so;
               For why; this present age doth yeeld, I know,
               Men that are truely worthy; I hope many,
               Yea I am sure few times, since Christ, had any
               More knowing or more painefull then some few,
               And whatsoe're men thinke, yet for to show,
               Though I Satyrically carp at those
               That follow Vice and are true Vertues foes,
               I haue not such a spightfull cankred spirit,
               As to conceale and smother Worth and Merit:
               
               For Ile for Canterburies Grace be bold,
               Out of mine owne experience to vphold,
               That Sea was neuer gouerned as yet,
               By any one more Reuerent or more fit:
               For ouer and aboue his Country cares,
               Wherein he neither time nor counsell spares,
               Besides Church busines whereto he applies
               His mind to further it, what in him lies;
               I say beside this publick care at large,
               Few Ministers haue, in their priuate charge,
               Showne greater paine: that here the truth I tell,
               
                  London and Lambeth both can witnes well,
               And thou wert vnhappy London then,
               When thou didst loose this rare One among men;
               Yet thou wert blest againe, thy fate did bring,
               In place of such a FATHER such a KING,
               A maine Chruch-piller, and of so great worth,
               
                  Europe can hardly bring his equall forth:
               
                  
And for them both my Muse will this put downe,
               (Who scornes to sooth a King to get a Crowne)
               Had she not thought them to be what she saies,
               She would haue heere disdain'd to sing their praise:
               But to go foreword, I do wonder why,
               Men should be subiect to this Vanity
               
               For I haue seene those that had ritches store,
               Great offices, and fauours, no men more,
               Honor and credit, yea and wisedome to,
               Yet see what an ambitious head wil doe:
               Clyming to high they got so low a fall,
               They forfeited their honors, liues and all.
               Me thinkes ere they in such an act should stur,
               Twere no't amisse to thinke on Aesops Cur,
               
               Who catching but to get a shadow more,
               Did loose the substance that he had before:
               I might a while vpon example stand,
               Of former times; but that within this land,
               The present Age, the which I onely view,
               Can yeeld enough to prooue my saying true:
               And of so many in this Kingdome showne,
               I meane at this time to produce but one:
               And that shal be the late Ambitious plot,
               The like whereof the world sure yeeldeth not,
               I meane the pouder treason, and intention,
               Brought (had not God assisted) past preuention:
               Yet see ere they could clime to their desire,
               When they were for to mount but one step-higher
               
                  (Let God be honor'd for't) downe tumbled all,
               And gaue these hel-hounds a deserued fall:
               
                  
As often as I call to memory,
               That horrid and detested villany,
               It makes me sorry such a hellish plot,
               Should scape vnblas'd to be so soone forgot;
               But some good wit ere long I do not doubt,
               VVil vndertake to paint that action out;
               And in it owne true sable colour show it,
               That children that are yet vnborne may know it:
               And to make plaine that ruine and perdition,
               
               Are the last Periods to conclude Ambition:
               
               But to that purpose they may labour spend,
               And per aduenture all to little end:
               They wil not thinke thereon, for we may see,
               How lofty-minded stil there's many be,
               VVith what desires of titles they haue sought them
               And at how deare a reckoning they haue bought them:
               But that with other flowes from Vanity,
               
               A part essentiall in humanity,
               VVhich (if God grant me leaue) I meane to chase,
               But must referre it to another place:
               Some haue ambitious heads, but cannot rise,
               Because the want of meanes and friends denies
               What they aspire vnto: but such are vext,
               Their mind I know is troubled and perplext
               Beyond all reason; Oh strange humor'd men,
               Your folly you wil leaue I thinke, but when?
               Be with your states Content, for do you know
               VVether you wish be for your good or no?
               Oyes thinkes one; if I could once attaine,
               Such offices; or so much wealth to gaine
               
                  
As this or that man hath; my wish were ended,
               And such or such a fault should be amended:
               But this I say, though they may thinke it strange,
               VVith the estate the mind doth also change,
               And when in one thing thou hast thy desire,
               Thou canst not stay there but must mount vp higher
               And higher stil, vntil thou dost attaine,
               Vnto the top or tumble downe againe:
               Be warned then you that Ambitious are,
               And for to curbe your passion haue a care:
               Else at the length, 'twil certainely deceiue you,
               But you wil haue your wils to which I leaue you.
            
            
               OF FEARE.
               SATYR. 10.
               SOft now; what Pasion's this that followes next?
               Surely I thinke hee's with a feuer vext,
               He shakes and lookes so pale; O me, tis feare!
               
               Ile make his humors also to appeare,
               Since I haue found him. This is he that mar's,
               All our delight on earth: 'tis he that bars
               Man the right vse of pleasure. And tis he,
               That was at first ordaind our plague to be,
               Auoid him you that loue and looke for rest,
               Let a true courage banish him your brest:
               For this makes not your bodies only num,
               
               Tremblingly cold, deform'd, and pale become.
               
               
                  
But 'tis a passion vgly, grim, and foule,
               
               That doth with greefe e'ne clog the very foule:
               And comes (if that I faile not in my skill)
               Out of a false opinion of some ill,
               That's present or to come; It inly stings,
               
               And also for companions it brings
               Both paine and shame; and diuers haue I seene,
               That with this feauer haue sore shaken beene;
               Two but of late whose feare so foolish prou'd,
               Many thereby were vnto laughter moou'd,
               One came in puffing almost out of breath,
               As if he hardly had escaped death,
               And why? Alas! he thought a whited post,
               He on a sodaine saw had beene a Ghoast:
               And that surmise did such impression take,
               That though he after saw 'twas but a stake,
               If yet he do but come that way benighted,
               He is e'ne with the very place affrighted:
               Th'other came running like a man that's mad,
               Oh! he had seene the Diuel that he had,
               Where in an old house fitting on a block,
               We lookt and there we found a turky-cock:
               Thus many feare where cause of feare is none,
               And make themselues a iest for euery one;
               Yea feare hath made a number so affraid,
               That they haue oft their dearest friends betraid:
               For this cause onely I do nere intend,
               To choose a coward for to be my friend,
               And if that women be not growne so coy,
               To scorne to take aduisement of a boy,
               
                  
Let them not chuse a coward to their mate,
               Least they repent it as one did of late:
               For not far off there dwelt not long agoe
               (Ile tel a tale that many yet do know:)
               A Gentlewoman not of meanest ranke,
               Whose fauour might haue wel deserued thanke,
               For that in face and dowry few did match her,
               Many a gallant tride his wittes to catch her:
               Who being kept but narrowly at home,
               So she were gone she car'd not much with whom;
               Now see Dame fortune that wil seldome part,
               Her fauours vnto men of good desert,
               Brings to the house a fellow that in shew,
               Seem'd worthy of the prize, but was not so;
               Yet hauing opportunity he tries,
               Gets her good-will and with her thence he flies;
               But lo, the Parents quickly mist their daughter,
               Rais'd all the towne, and following hardly after.
               Were by meere chance into an old houseled,
               Where this young couple were new gon to bed:
               You that haue euer in that pickle bin,
               Iudge what a case these naked folkes were in.
               But what did he? there leaues his nevv stolne prey,
               And like a feareful Covvard slunke avvay.
               Out on such Asses; hovv could he for shame,
               So leaue a vvoman to beare all the blame?
               And for the greefe s
                     •
                  e suffers vvith her friends,
               Hovv can the villaine make the vvhore amends?
               I knovv not: but for playing such a part,
               'Tis certain be hath turn'd the vvenches heart,
               
                  
And she for climing to a Cowards bed,
               Hath lost her credit with her maiden-head.
               Such was th' effect of feare. And more, from thence
               
                  Proceedeth cruelty, impacience,
               Breach of our promise, with much enuying
               Together with the hatefull vice of lying;
               
               Murthers and treasons toe; theres nought so base,
               
                  So full of villany, shame or disgrace,
               The feareful would not act with all his heart,
               To free himselfe from feare of death or smart:
               Yea some would be contented very well,
               So they might scape Death, to goe quick to hell
               Such is their nature; I my selfe haue seene,
               Feare bring those euils that had else not beene:
               As it hath brought the plague on some. Beside,
               There's many a one for feare of death hath dyed:
               And there be diuers haue so careful bin,
               To rid themselues from feares which they were in;
               That as the ship that doth Charibdis shun,
               They ran on Sylla and were quite vndone;
               And why? alas it is the Cowards error:
               To think the present danger ful'st of terror:
               The feare of euil more tormenteth some,
               Then doth the thing they fear'd whē once tis come
               Men dread what is; what wilbe; and alas!
               Many a thing that nere shal come to passe;
               If they did only feare apparant things,
               That likeli-hood of terror with it brings,
               As troopes of enemies, or theeues, or treason,
               
                  Pirats or stormes at sea; there were some reason
               
                  
Or colour for it then, but they wil quake,
               At fictions; at meere nothings; their hearts ake
               At their owne fancies: Superstitious,
               At tales of Fairies, and of Visions,
               Yea I haue seene some heauy and sull sad,
               Because of a poore foolish dreame they had:
               Oh what meanes man that hauing mischeefes store
               Must in his owne conceit needs make them more?
               Thinkes he those wil not grim enough appeare,
               Vnlesse he apprehend them first by feare?
               Sure tis a plague the Diuel did inuent,
               To work in man a lasting discontent:
               And taught it Adam, whe revppon he said,
               I saw my nakednes and was affraid:
               This is our fault; but yet I cannot see,
               A reason why men should so fearefull be:
               May they not ioy and be as merry still;
               With hope of good, as sad with feare of ill?
               Sure I think yes; and wil on hope so feed,
               No ill shal feare me til tis come indeed,
               For that which likeliest seemes for to betide me,
               God in his mercy yet may put beside me.
               And though much proofe hath bred with in my brest,
               This resolution, yet of all the rest,
               This last confirm'd it most, for th' other day,
               When the hard frost had stopt the Scullers way,
               And that the flowing Thames with yce was arch't
               So that the people ouer on it march't,
               Amongst the rest one bolder then was fit,
               Wandring beside the path for want of wit:
               
                  
Stept on a peece of yce which with a crack,
               Rent from the maine, and stopt his going back:
               The ycie fragment ('twas a heauy token)
               Swam to the bridge where all the yce was broken,
               The people look't and he for aid did craue,
               But oh! there was no power in them to saue;
               Which soone conceiuing on his knees he fell,
               (I from the bridge perceiu'd him very well)
               And lifting vp his handes his ayd implores
               That sau'd old Ionas without sailes or oares;
               And see Gods mercy when he drew so neere,
               No hope of safegard seemed to appeare
               And when that he had three times whirled bin,
               And that the Arch was like to suck him in:
               Beyond our expectation (in a trise)
               There thrusts betweene a greater peece of yce,
               Which comming downe as if it scornd to stay,
               Beat by the lesser for to giue it way,
               And a while staid it; but he had beene faine,
               When that was gone to take his turne againe,
               Had not, next God, the people stood his friend,
               And sau'd him by a rope that's some mans end:
               So this prooues, men may scape a mischeefe now;
               When tis so neere them, they perceiue not how,
               And I do hope this argument is cleere,
               That we haue as much cause to hope as feare;
               More trembling humors I might here vnfold,
               Which, some will be vnwilling to be told,
               And therefore passe them; but I do protest,
               This hurtful monster I so much detest,
               
                  
That I am very loath for to omit,
               Any occasion of disgracing it:
               Yet do I not alow their resolution,
               That meerely of a hellish constitution,
               Haue such obdurate hearts so hard in euill,
               They neither seeme affraid of God nor Diuell.
               Such I haue noted to, but truely they,
               Are in as bad, but a contrary way.
               They prate and sweare as if they could affright,
               And make Hobgoblin run away by night,
               When questionlesse as bold as they appeare,
               They are perplexed with an inward feare;
               Yea I haue knowne a trifle or a blast,
               Hath made such Champions oftentimes agast.
               There is a feare thats good, and hinders sinne,
               Indeed that, euery good man should be in,
               And theres a feare that keepes a kingdomes state,
               
               From ruine, if it be not taine to late;
               Tis not a slauish terror, thats a crime,
               No rather 'tis a wise fore-sight in time:
               That makes men very heedfull to fore-thinke
               Danger to come, and not as we do, winke
               At our owne nakednes; as without care,
               Who spies it, so we see not our selues bare.
               This feare it is that makes men to prouide
               Against a storme they may the better bide
               The fury of it; this 'tis keepes off wrong,
               And makes a City or a Kingdom strong,
               And I much doubt the wanting of these feares,
               Wil make vs smart for't yet ere many yeares,
               
                  
For since we are become a pretty number,
               Although we can but one another cumber,
               Or serue to make a Hubbub, we suppose,
               There are no nations dare to be our foes,
               We thinke a wondrous policy we shew,
               If once in foure years we do take a view,
               
               Or count the number of our able men,
               Flattring our selues there with; as if that then;
               (Hauing so great and huge a multitude,
               Though we were nere so inexpert and rude)
               There were no cause of feare: but a Realmes might
               Consists not in the number that must fight,
               More in their skill, for of good souldiers ten,
               Will foile a hundred vnexperienc't men,
               Such as we are: For, 'tis a shame to speake,
               How wonderfull vnfitty and how weake,
               This ignorance makes most of vs, except
               VVhom braue South-hamptons gouernment hath kept
               In warlike order; I doe meane indeed
               Our Hampshire Ilanders, of whom for need
               A hundred boyes that nere had haire on chin,
               Shal from fiue hundred of vp-landish win
               Both field and Towne: By which it may appeare
               Good gouernment with profitable feare
               VVithin a few short yeares so wel wil thriue,
               One shal become to haue the odds of fiue:
               These therefore that haue wisedome for to tell,
               When they do any thing amisse or well;
               Stil in this Passion obserue a meane,
               And not to feare nor to presumption leane.
            
            
               
               OF DESPAIRE.
               SATY. 11.
               NO more of feare, for lo his impious brat,
               Lookes now to be admitted; this is that;
               We call Dispaire, with ghastly looks he stands,
               And poisons, ropes, or poin-yards fills his handes,
               Still ready to do hurt; one step, no more,
               Reaches from hence vnto dam nations dore.
               This is that Passion giues a man instruction,
               To wrest the Scriptures to his owne destruction;
               
               And makes him think while he on earth doth dwel
               He feeles the very torturing pangs of hell;
               It makes men rage, like furies screeeh and houle,
               
               With exclamations horrible and foule,
               Like Monsters more then men. Onely damnation
               
               Is in their mouthes; no mercy nor saluation
               They seeme to hope for: they extreamely feare
               Some monstrous shapes which seeme for to appeare
               Through their imaginations; and the paine
               That they in soule and conscience do sustaine,
               All earthly tortures doth so much exceed,
               That they haue thought them selues in hell indeed
               Oh what repentant liues, some vow to liue,
               If God would but once more vouchsafe to giue
               Their health and hope againe: then they would spend
               Their liues, and good, vnto no other end
               
                  
But wholly for his glory: yet theres now
               Some liuing that haue quite forgot that vow,
               
               God giue them grace to looke into their error,
               Or they wil one day find a double terror,
               Some in this agony haue little will,
               To any thing, vnlesse it be to kill,
               Or make themselues away; whereto the Diuell,
               
               The author and chiefe causer of this euill,
               (Vnlesse that God in mercy him preuents)
               Is ready to prouide him instruments,
               
               I euen quake to thinke what humors be,
               Attending on this hellish maladee;
               And for some cause I mean not here to shew them,
               But pray that all had grace for to eschew them:
               Now some do thinke this passion being taken,
               Can very hardly be again forsaken;
               But let none thinke so; for why? God in distresse
               Doth neuer leaue man quite without redresse:
               Nor can we say that he hath left vs voyd,
               Of helpe for this, when ere we are anoy'd
               Through Satans guile; for pittying our case,
               He leaues vs hope of fauour and of grace,
               If wee'l lay hold on't; which to make more cleare,
               He let his euerlasting loue appeare,
               In highest measure, by the sacrifice
               
               Of CHRIST his sonne for our iniquities;
               
               And also, did not sinne thus make vs blind,
               For euery greefe of body and of mind,
               He hath ordain'd a salue: All Christians know
               (Or should at least) the spring from whence doth flow,
               
                  
A pretious liquor that will quickly cure,
               Our strongest Passions, (if the cup be pure)
               Or if we do not so presume as stand,
               And lap it here and there with our owne hand,
               For thats the way to sooth vp many a passion,
               And the all-only cause of Desperation;
               
               Which from all good-men I do wish as farre,
               As earth's low center from the highest star,
               
               But now dispaire or▪, distrust is twofold,
               One sort of which I haue already told,
               Being concerning matters of saluation,
               
               The horriblest and feareful'st desperation,
               
               But th' other is alone of earthly things,
               Yet mighty disaduantage with it brings,
               VVhere it gets entrance; this makes many loath,
               To vndertake great matters cause through sloth
               They do dispaire to reach them; yea it breeds
               A carelessnesse in man, and thence proceeds
               Not a few treasons; for the breach of law,
               Makes many times the subiect in such awe,
               That he dispaires of pardon for his ill;
               And therefore not alone remaines in't still,
               But being guilty, for to salue one sore
               Incurs the danger of a thousand more;
               And for because he thinkes himselfe vndone,
               Wil for assurance to Rebellion runne:
               Besides, theres some dispairing of their cause,
               And being brought to triall by the lawes,
               For some offence are obstinately mute:
               To these forsooth the commons do impute
               
                  
A manly Resolution; cause thereby,
               They saue their landes to their posterity;
               But sure there is no wise-man wil commend
               Him that so desperately seekes his end;
               And wilfully doth cast away him
                     •
                  el
                     •
                  e
               (Body and soule perhaps) to saue his pelfe,
               To some suruiuors; where as if he bide
               On hope, and not dispaire for to be tride
               According to the lawes, he may be cleer'd,
               And quitted of the danger he so fear'd,
               As some haue beene: Besides, if we indure,
               But a small paine, if we despaire of cure,
               Ease or amends, 'twil make it seem to be
               Vnsufferable; whereas if that we
               Haue any Hope, the ease we looke to win
               VVill mittigate the torture we are in;
               His winter toyle what Ploughman could sustain▪
               
               If he despaired of his haruest gaine?
               And the strong'st army needs must faint and 
                     •
                  ly,
               If it despaire before of victory.
               But to conclude it must be vnderstood,
               
                  Dispaires a Passion that is no time good,
               'Tis alway hurtfull; and I can obserue
               Nothing whereto a man may make it serue,
               Vnlesse to helpe a troope of coward fight:
               For could a man lead them past hope of flight,
               VVhere they should see there were no remedy,
               But they must dye or get the victory;
               
                  Despaire in that case may giue them the day,
               That would haue lost it to haue run away.
            
            
               
               OF HOPE.
               SATY. 12.
               THrice welcome Hope the diuel keep home the tother
               (Dispaire & feare ar sitting for no other)
               This is the Passion that of all the rest,
               We haue most reason to esteme of best:
               For if it be with good aduise applide,
               A salue it is God did himselfe prouide
               To ease not onely euery outward greife,
               But when the very soule doth want releefe,
               It wil redresse her paine, although it were
               The shaking of that hideous monster feare:
               
               Oh precious Balme! Yea, if that man had power,
               To take it to himselfe at such an hower,
               When black Dispaire doth pinch him, that indeed
               Would quite expell it; and he should not need
               
                  Apothecary drugs. But what can wee,
               Apply aright and not instructed be,
               By Gods good inspiration? Nay, 'tis true;
               We are so farre vnlike for to pursue
               The way we should, that we do follow still,
               The crooked'st path to loose our selues in ill:
               This needing Hope, we either neuer vse it,
               Or else for want of knowledge do abuse it:
               Yea this that of all Passions was the best,
               Is now as much corrupted as the rest;
               
                  
We must consider then, Mans hope is double,
               
               One true and certaine: th' other ful of trouble,
               And most vnconstant: the first hope attends
               
               Things more immortall, and alone depends,
               On th' expectation of the certain'st things,
               And such perfection of true ioy, as brings
               No trouble with it, This through faith we gaine,
               And 'tis sufficient to make any paine
               Seeme short and easy; yea it cheares a man,
               And tis a help, without the which none can
               Endure to liue: but now great store there be,
               Who for because of their infirmity,
               Together through the bad and weake foundation,
               They build this hope on, make it in some fashion
               To be blame-worthy: It, cannot indure,
               Nor wil it (without doubting) make them sure
               Of what they looke for. Now the other kind
               Of hope, which I amongst vs men do find,
               Is of vncertaine earthly things, and this
               Of no continuance and oft frustrate is;
               For the best likeli-hoods that may be showne,
               And the strong'st humane reasons that are knowne,
               Are nothing for to ground a hope vpon;
               (Since in the turning of a hand tis gone)
               Were all the men on earth procured to
               Some easie thing that's in ones power to doe;
               And all were well resolu'd to see it done;
               Yea, wer't but one daies work, and that begun,
               We may wel hope indeed thei'l bring to passe,
               So smal a thing as that; but yet, alas!
               
                  
None can assure it, for because they know,
               No warrant from aboue it should be so:
               And therefore I could wish that euery man,
               Should take vnto him the best hope he can,
               In all his outward actions; but foresee,
               At least on honest grounds it builded be,
               And therewith be so well prepared still,
               That if these doubtfull hopes doe fall out ill,
               He ne're repine, but tak't as if the same
               Had beene expected long before it came;
               And since that fickle trust did nought auaile him,
               Depend on the true hope that shall nere faile him.
               For that indeed that's plac'd on wit or strength
               
               Is vaine, and most vncertaine; cause at length,
               How ere it may seeme sure, it will deceiue him,
               And when he hath most need of comfort, leaue him.
               Besides there's many to this hope are led,
               By sundry Passions within them bred:
               As Loue, Ambition, Auarice, and such,
               'Tis true that these will make a man hope much;
               But many thereby into errors run
               So blindly on, that they are quite vndone,
               Cause in their mindes, they hopefully expect,
               A thousand things which they shall nere effect;
               For they giue their desires too large a scope,
               
               And doe abuse themselues through fained hope,
               
               Not hauing plac'd it on a certaine ground
               (For then it neuer could be frustrate found.)
               But Louers hopes, and such as theirs, are bold,
               On euery paltry trifle to lay hold.
               
                  
And whatsoe're the Ambitious doe intend,
               The hopes they haue to bring their plots to end
               Are drawne frō n' other grounds but their affections
               
               Which for the most part giue such blind directions,
               
               That they, as we may by experience see
               Together with their hopes oft ruin'd be;
               But as this passion is now much abus'd,
               The next that followes is as hardly vs'd.
            
            
               OF COMPASSION.
               SATYR. 13.
               
                  PItty is knowne a kinde and tender Passion,
               
               In it owne nature worthy commendation;
               And if Discretion guide it, well may be
               Of meere alliance vnto Charitie;
               
               If not, it then from vertue quickly swerues,
               And with the rest a like reproofe deserues:
               Now some will muse thereat, such as suppose
               A man through pitty cannot erre; but those
               If they haue any iudgement of their owne,
               Shall say compassion may amisse be showne:
               Yea, and oft is, which they will quickly finde,
               Or else I'le say their Reasons eye is blinde;
               First let them tell me, is't not frequented now,
               That those the which our Country lawes allow
               
                  Iurors for tryall, are oft-times compell'd
               Through a base tender weaknes for to yeeld.
               
                  
Vnto this melting Passion? sometime by,
               A personall respect ta'ne by the eye:
               Sometime for that th' offendor (it may be,
               Already hath sustain'd much misery:
               And thinke they not this Charity and right?
               Yet through the Ignorance forgetting quite,
               Whilest they an ill deserued life prolong,
               Therein they doe not onely Iustice wrong,
               But by their indiscreete and fond Compassion,
               Vnwisely hazard e'ne their owne Saluation;
               Then for their need, or cause they much implore,
               In common pleas they leane vnto the poore,
               (If might o're sway them not,) and that they trust,
               (Because they meane well) may be counted Iust:
               Are there not some toe, who would faine be deem'd
               Good Common-wealths men? yet haue misesteem'd
               That Order which for wandring rogues was made,
               (And as if they allowd their begging trade)
               Much pittie those that iustly punisht be,
               As though it were done void of Charitie?
               Yea they haue dar'd to saie thus much and more,
               There's no lawes made now, but against the poore:
               Moreouer, he whose iudgement is so slender,
               And hath an yeelding heart so fondly tender
               To stoup vnto this Passion, neither spares
               The lawes of God nor man; but rashly dares
               Peruert them both; supposing his intent,
               Shall free him from deserued punishment:
               These though that God himselfe saies kill; reply
               
                  With no alas? tis pitty he should die:
               
                  
But such as they deserue the selfe same-check
               He had that spar'd the King of Amaleck:
               
               For to say truth as vertuous as it showes,
               A foolish p
                        •
                     tty quickly ouerthrowes,
               In War an Army and in peace a State;
               And this Ile stand to, 'tis as bad as Hate,
               
               For That and Bribes to such a power is growne,
               
                  Iustic
                        •
                     
                   can little in some courts now be showne:
               Yea it is cleere and cannot be withstood,
               That Pitty sometimes hurts the common good,
               And more we find that God's therby offended,
               And therefore man must haue this fault amended,
               And be perswaded 'tis his part to see,
               How farre this Passion may admitted be;
               For seeme how 'twill, all pitty is vnfit,
               Vnlesse Gods lawes and Mans do warrant it:
               But I haue noted some kind-hearted Asses,
               Worth laughing at, that all the rest surpasses
               For foolish pitty: but themselues alone,
               'Tis preiudiciall too; or hurteth none;
               To these do you but a Tragaedian be,
               Or else recite some ancient historie;
               
               If that the matter which you do relate
               Be sorrowfull and somthing Passionate,
               Though it were done a thousand yeares agoe,
               And in a Country they did neuer know,
               Yet wil they weep (kind-hearts) as if those men,
               Were of their friends; and that thing told, but then
               Before their eyes in action: nay, vnfold
               Some new made tale that neuer yet was told,
               
                  
So it be doleful and do represent
               Some strange and lamentable accident:
               Although not only (as I said before)
               It be a matter meerely fain'd, but more;
               Though that they know it so, they cannot keep
               Their melting eyes from teares but they must weep
               I might touch Parents, chiefly in the City,
               That mar their children by their cockering pitty,
               But other Passions call me now away;
               And yet before I leaue thus much Ile say,
               Those fond-kind Parents that take rods from schooles
               Haue almost fild the land with knaues and fooles
               
               And those that think we need no pitty rue,
               Let them not hold so stil, for this is true,
               Fond pitty rests in no true manly breast;
               And therefore you that are, or would at least
               Be counted men; be not therewith ore' borne,
               For tis a Passion that novv Women scorne.
            
            
               OF CRVELTY.
               SATYR. 14.
               BVt here's another beares vs farther wide,
               If we embrace it on the other side;
               And therefore whilst we seeke for to beware
               Of foolish Pitty, we must haue a care
               Least this do ouer-run vs: tis a thing,
               Whose very name doth seeme enough to bring,
               
                  
All men in the opinion to confesse,
               
                  Tis an inhuma
                     •
                  e hellish wickednes:
               A monstrous Passion, so vnfit to rest
               Or harbor in a reasonable brest
               That beasts, in whom it rather should remaine,
               Doe for the greatest part the same refraine:
               And yet as odious as it doth appeare,
               Vnlesse men looke to their affections neere,
               'Twill steale vpon them, and they shall begin,
               Not only to be quickly snar'd therein,
               Although at first they doe abhorre it much,
               
                  
                     •
                  ut more; the nature of this Passion's such,
               It will begin delightfull; and it makes
               So deepe impression in the heart, and takes
               So sound a root, 'twill hardly be displac't,
               Whilst that the body by the soule is grac't:
               And yet some doe supposer i
                     •
                   may with ease,
               Be left or tooke as eu'ry one shall please,
               But they are wide, like them that ouer-bold,
               And trusting to their proper strength, vphold,
               We neede not this same Passion discommend,
               Nature sufficient is to reprehend
               
                  That fault (they say.) And they detest it so,
               
                  Reason can neere haue such an ouerthrow,
               That they should liue themselues for to defile,
               With any passion that they know so vile:
               Indeed it is a monstrous villany,
               And most I thinke can raile at cruelty,
               Yet let none be so carelesse, for 'tis true,
               The odious vices we doe most eschew,
               
                  
Grow pleasing by degrees: When Hasael
               
               VVas told what he should doe to Israel,
               
               Full little thought he then his gentle heart,
               Should euer giue consent to act a part,
               Of such a Tragick Scaene; and yet we find,
               He became after of another mind:
               For our intents and best affections, be
               Exceeding subiect to vncertaintie:
               Those we thinke surest; and vnlesse each hower,
               We be remembred such a state is our
               We should forget our selues. Philip, the Sire
               Of that bold Grecian King that did aspire
               To be the worlds third Monarch, knew full well
               Himselfe to be a Man, yet could not tell
               Whereto he might through humane frailty fall,
               And therefore wil'd his seruant for to call,
               Thus at his window (ere the day began)
               Philip, Remember that thou art a man.
               And e'ne as hatefull as this Passion is,
               To be remembred so, 'twere not amisse,
               But men are stronger now they thinke then he,
               And much lesse prone to imbecillitie;
               But you that thinke so, and you that vphold
               This needs no warning, 'pray let me be bold
               For to demand some questions, since there be,
               So few as you thinke stain'd with cruelty;
               Is he not mercilesse, that without shame
               Doth rob his neighbour of his honest name
               By raising false reports? doth not that Lord,
               That to his Tenant grudges to afford,
               
                  
What Loue and Conscience giues? or he that takes,
               The common profit to himselfe, and makes
               His owne good of it, when he knowes thereby
               Many a poore man's brought to Beggery?
               Doth not I say that Landlord hardly deale?
               And is he not vnto the common weale.
               A cruell foe? some damned Vsurers,
               
               That are I thinke the Diuels Treasurers:
               (For by the small vse they of riches make
               They for another seeme their care to take)
               Are they not cruell, when they cannot be,
               Contented with their Statute Vsuree
               
               But must encrease their gaines by bribes and guifts,
               
               With many subtile and vnlawfull shifts;
               
               Pinching poore debtors till their greedy hands
               Haue got possession both of goods and lands?
               What are out Lawyers that can brooke to see,
               Christians like Beasts that still a wrangling be,
               And yet when it lies in their power to part them,
               Will for their owne gaine vnto discord hart them,
               Keeping them still at strife by adding fuell
               To maintaine an ill flame; Are they not cruell?
               Yes verily; and so are not alone,
               The mercilesse offenders; but each one:
               Who when he doth perceiue that there is need,
               Is slacke to doe a charitable deed:
               And what may they be that employ their care,
               To pamper vp the flesh with curious fare:
               Largely prouiding for the Bodies good
               Whilst the poore Soule is hunger-steru'd for food?
               
                  
They are not cruell? No, tis like that such
               That can take pittie on themselues so much,
               Are mercifull to others. You will say
               To poison men 'twere ill, then what are they
               That by false doctrine fraught with errors foule,
               Seeke to enuenome and infect the soule?
               
                  Cruell they are (I know) you must confesse,
               But then you'le say tis not that Cruelnesse
               You vnderstood; As if you did suppose,
               None through this Passion did offend but those
               That murtherers be: In truth I thinke that this
               I here recite, not principallest is.
               For it from other causes doth proceed,
               Whereas true proper Cruelty indeed,
               Is when a man delights and longs to see,
               Or doe, some deed that's full of Crueltee:
               Iust such was his that out of a desire,
               To see how Troy burn't when it was on fire,
               Caus'd Rome in many places for to flame,
               And longing to behold from whence he came,
               Ript vp his mothers wombe; a passiue right
               VVas also his, that tooke so much delight,
               For to behold men strangely tortured,
               That he out of his bounty promised,
               A large reward to him that could inuent,
               The cruel'st and vnusuall'st punishment;
               VVhich Phalaris demanding, was therefore,
               The first that made his Brazen Bull to roare;
               And like to this are those mens humors to,
               That vncompel'd, would make no more a doe
               
                  
To murther, till a Country were vnman'd,
               Then doth a schoole-boy with a walking wand,
               To lop downe thistles tops. Now these men be
               Passiuely cruell in the high'st degree:
               And though the first rehearsed be not so,
               Yet thereto they may very quickly grow:
               Vnlesse they haue oft warning to beware,
               Since they already halfe-way entred are:
               Especially the greedy hungry elfe,
               That would for profit gladly damne himselfe:
               For Auarice doth harden so the heart;
               In any mischiefe he may beare a part.
               No cruelty the Couetous refraines,
               Murther nor Treason so he may haue gaines.
               If that I thought 'twould any thing auaile,
               Against this Passion I could further raile;
               But as it raignes in man experience showes;
               So that 'tis euill there is none but knowes:
               Wherefore I'le say no more but onely this,
               As he is blessed that meeke hearted is:
               So for the Cruell lightly doth attend,
               A heauy curse, and a most fearefull end.
            
            
               OF IOY.
               SATYR. 15.
               OF all the Passions handled hitherto,
               VVith this that followes I had least to doe:
               
                  
And yet by some small trials I haue had,
               'Tis better I perceiue then being sad:
               Yea 'twere the greatest blessing that might be,
               Were't of it selfe, and from all combrance free:
               But seldome 'tis or neuer; cause that such,
               Is our estate; As if that Fa
                        •
                     e did grutch
               The vse of simples; we almost can finde,
               Nothing to pleasure vs in it owne kind:
               Neuer could any man as yet obtaine
               
                  Ioy, but there follow'd either shame or pain:
               And he no question that's allowed most,
               Doth deerely pay for what is quickly lost:
               But now the reason why mens Ioy so soone
               Is chang'd to sorrow; Is because there's none,
               Or very few that doe their gladnesse found
               Vpon a sollid, firme, substantiall ground:
               But on such subiects as no maruaile tho,
               It doth receiue so quick an ouerthrow
               And hath so sharpe a farwel: For one, Ioyes
               In Dogs, Apes, Monkeis, or some such like toyes,
               And when they faile, as how can they last long?
               Their mirth is finish't; they must change their song.
               Some in their honor all their Ioy dooe place,
               But let them take good heed: for if disgrace,
               Adde the least motion vnto Fortunes wheele,
               Sorrow takes place, and little Ioy they feele:
               Take but away his Substance you destroy
               The miserable rich mens onely Ioy,
               And soone by sicknesse that delight's defac't,
               Which man in beauty, or in strength hath plac't:
               
                  
Yea all our Ioy in transitory things
               They being lost, at last a sorrow brings:
               And therefore I wish men to make their choice,
               Of that wherein 'twere fit for to reioyce,
               And not in thinges so friuolous and vaine,
               They must repent them for their Ioy againe.
               Some do so firmely settle their delight
               On things vnworthy that they are e'n quite
               Bereft of vnderstanding when they see,
               They must of them againe depriued be:
               But oh you men (that haue your better parts,
               Of an immortall frame) awake your hearts,
               And from
                     •
                  delight in drosse, and clay, remooue
               Your Ioyes; and place them vpon thinges aboue:
               So shall you still haue cause for to reioyce,
               And not with sorrow thus repent your choyce.
               Another fault I in mans Ioy espy,
               Which I'le illustrate by this Simily,
               Looke how those men that being calm'd at Sea,
               And forc't the leasure of the winds to stay,
               Halfe starud for food, once cast vpon some shore,
               Where, of prouision they are seru'd with store:
               I say looke how those men by taking in,
               To their weake stomacks that haue fasting bin
               A little food; do then begin to faint;
               And cause their pallates they do not acquaint,
               With a spare dier, (although it wholsome be)
               Through former want and their infirmity
               It workes their bane; Right so it fares in this,
               For he that alway in some sorrow is,
               
                  
And tost vpon the boistrous seas of care
               If for his comfort he be landed there
               Where Ioy abounds; His heart, where (none hath bin
               Full many a day before) receiues it in,
               So out of measure; that it euen makes
               The Soule vnquiet, and thereby he takes
               A Surfet; whose strong violence is such,
               The body faints or is endanger'd much.
               I need not stand on proofes for this, I trow,
               Since there be many by experience know,
               At sodaine telling of some newes that's good,
               Diuers haue sencelesse and amazed stood.
               Yea bin so rauisht with the Ioy they tooke,
               That they haue e'ne their liues and all forsooke,
               Though flesh be fraile, me thinkes if eu'ry man,
               Would striue to curbe his nature what he can;
               Armes of resistance they might better weild,
               And not so basely to their Passions yeeld:
               Yea it befits not him that ought to be,
               At all poynts fenc't with Magnanimity,
               To suffer any mischeefe to anoy
               His mind, through either too much care or Ioy;
               
               But let these passions of each other borrow,
               He may be sad with Mirth and glad with Sorrow,
               Much I might speake more (some perhaps wil say)
               But here my Muse is now resolu'd to stay:
               Yet if heereafter I haue Ioy in store,
               
               If it be needfull, I wil tel you more.
            
            
               
               OF SORROW.
               SATYR. 16.
               OF this said Passion I may knowledge take,
               And wel say som-what for acquaintance sake,
               I heare it is complain'd vpon of many,
               Yet I dare say it seldome hurteth any,
               Excepting those by whom 'tis entertain'd,
               And such indeed haue with iust cause complain'd:
               For whilest they keepe it they shall neuer rest,
               'Tis so vntam'd and troublesome a guest:
               Yet such a guest, though he his host diseases,
               'Tis thought he cannot rid him when he pleases.
               Yet if that man would vse the meanes he might,
               Sure by degrees he might out-weare it quite;
               Yea tis his part and duty. For should he,
               That must on 
                     •
                  arth Iehouahs Viceroy be?
               Should he to whom his soueraigne Lord hath giuen
               A Countenance for to behold the Heauen?
               Should he, I say, blot out this manly grace,
               And groueling turne to earth his blubber'd face?
               It were a shame: yet more shall he that saith,
               He is a Christian and seemes t'haue faith,
               For losse of friends; when there's no remedy,
               Be passionate in such extremity,
               That childish teares not onely staines his face,
               (Which may be borne withall in such a case)
               
                  
But also raues, growes furious, and extends
               His griefe past reasons limits; who commends
               A man for that Say, is it any lesse,
               Then to deny by deed what words professe?
               For who would think which fees how he bewailes,
               The losse of breath that in a moment failes,
               That he beleeues, but rather thinke 'tis vaine,
               To hope or trust, the flesh shall rise againe;
               Or that there were, as holy Scripture saith,
               
                  Any reward for them that die in faith.
               It's a plaine token of a misbeliefe,
               When Christians so ore whelme themselues with greef
:
               And therefore though I doe not discommend,
               The moderate bewailing of a friend;
               I wish the Extreame hereof men might despise,
               Least they doe their profession Scandalize:
               Beside though as I seem'd to say before,
               Vnles 't be common, 'tis no common sore,
               Because it hurts but those that entertaine it,
               Yet were it good if all men could refraine it;
               For it not onely makes mans visage be
               Wried, Deform'd, and wrinkled as we see,
               Himselfe exiling from the common eye,
               To vexe and greeue alone, he knowes not why:
               But also brings diseases with his death,
               By the vntimely stopping of his breath.
               
                  
                     •
                  t makes his friends to loath his company,
               And greatly hinders his commoditie,
               For who for dealings in affaires is fit,
               Vnlesse with good will he attendeth it.
               
                  
And howsoere it seeme, yet surely this,
               As farre from vertue as bad pleasure is,
               For as through one one we to much euill runne,
               So many good things th' other leaues vndone:
               I wonder that this Passion should touch,
               The harts of men to make them greeue so much
               As many doe, for present miseries;
               Haue they no feeling of felicities,
               That are to come? If that they be in paine,
               Let hope giue ease; It will not alwaies raine,
               Calmes doe the roughest stormes that are attend,
               And th' longest night that is will haue an end.
               But 'tis still bad thou saist, take't patiently,
               An age is nothing to eternitie,
               Thy times not here: Enuy not though that some
               Seeme to thee happy; their bad day's to come,
               And if thou knew'st the griefe they must sustaine,
               Thou would'st not thinke so hardly of thy paine:
               I must confesse 'twas once a fault of mine,
               At euery misaduenture to repine;
               I sought preferment, and it fled me still,
               Whereat I greeu'd, and thought my fortune ill;
               I vext to see some in prosperitie,
               Deride and scoffe at my aduerstie;
               But since aduis'd, and weighing in my minde
               The course of things, I soone began to finde
               The vainenesse of them; these I saw of late
               In bliss, (as I thought) scorning my estate,
               I see now ebbing, and the once-full tide
               That ouer-flow'd the lofty banks of pride,
               
                  
Hath left them like the sand shore, bare and dry,
               And almost in as poore a case as I.
               Besides, I view'd my daies, now gone and past,
               And how my fortunes from the first to th' last
               Were link't together; I obseru'd, I say,
               Each Chance and Deed of mine, from day to day,
               That memory could keep; yet found I none,
               Not one thing in my life that was alone:
               But still it either did depend on some
               That was already passed, or to come;
               Yea, the most childish, idle trifling thing,
               That seemed no Necessitie to bring;
               In that hath the Beginnings oft been hid,
               Of some the waightiest things that ere I did:
               But cheefely to abate the excessiue ioying,
               In worldly things; and to preuent th' annoying
               Of any sorrow, this I noted thence,
               (And euer-since haue made it a defence
               For both these passions) I haue truely seene,
               That those things wherewith I haue ioyed beene▪
               
               Highly delighted, and the dearest lou'd,
               Euen those very things haue often prou'd,
               My cheefest Care: And I haue found againe,
               That which I deem'd my greatest losse, or paine,
               And wherewithall I haue been most anoyd,
               And should haue deem'd a blessing to auoid;
               That which my heart hath ask't for; and wherein,
               I thought me most vnhappy; that hath bin
               The ground of my best
                     •
                  ioyes: For which cause, I
               Aduise all men that are in misery
               
                  
To stand vnmou'd, for why they doe not know
               Whether it be to them for good or no:
               They ought not for to murmur nor to pine
               At any thing, shall please the powers Deuine
               To lay vpon them: for my mind is this,
               Each sorrow is an entrance into Blisse.
               And that the greatest pleasure we attaine;
               Is but a Signe of some insuing Paine.
               But to be plainer, this our life 's a toy,
               That hath nought in it worth our griefe or Ioy:
               
               But there are some base-minded dunghill elues,
               That sorrow not for any but themselues.
               Or if they doe 'tis onely for the losse
               Of some old crest-falne lade; But that's a crosse
               Past bearing; be it but a rotten sheep,
               Or two stale egs, they will such yelling keep,
               As if thereby had perished a brood,
               In which consisted halfe the kingdomes good:
               But I intreat them since it must befall,
               They would be patient; who can doe withall?
               And also let them of much Griefe beware;
               For there's small ods betweene the same and Care:
               And they haue heard (I need not tell them that)
               'Tis an old saying, Care will kill a Cat.
               
               Then let them take heart, chiefly since they see,
               None liue but sometime they must loosers be,
               VVhich is an ease: for I haue heard them tell,
               With mates they care not, if they goe to hell.
               But in good earnest now let vs not runne,
               Willingly hereinto as we haue done;
               
                  
Rather auoid it as a hurtfull foe,
               That can effect nought but our ouerthrow:
               And yet instead receiue into our breast,
               An honest mirth, which is a better guest;
               And whatso'ere our former griefe hath been,
               Let vs nere sorrow more, but for our Sinne:
               
               Thus with this Passion end the rest will I,
               Because it ends not till our End is nigh.
            
            
               THE CONCLVSION.
               THus haue I labour'd some Effects to show,
               That doe from mens abused Passions flow;
               Which from example of old ages past,
               And wise-mens Sayings, I might more haue grac't▪
               
               But that I am resolu'd to tie my Rimes
               
               As much as may be to the present Times;
               
               Also I might amongst these here haue told,
               The bodies Passions; as Hunger, Cold,
               
               
                  Heat, Thirst, and such like; but their force is seene,
               And most men haue sufficient carefull beene
               For to preuent them; they last not so long,
               Nor are by much so violent and strong,
               Or dangerous as these: but if men knew,
               Or with the eyes of Reason would o're view
               These foule-bred maladies, as sure they ought,
               They would with greater diligence haue sought
               
                  
The cure of them, then of such slight diseases;
               The which their bodies and no more displeases:
               But now the reason men disturbed are,
               For the most part with such preposterous Care
               Is this; through their corrupted iudgement they,
               Doe onely on things seene depend and stay;
               Which being most apparant to the sense,
               So muffles vp the weake Intelligence,
               And blinds her that she hath no power to see,
               The better things that more subsisting be;
               When if they could conceiue but halfe so well
               The Soules Estate, they'd labour to expell
               All these corruptions, that may cause her woe,
               All those fell Passions that molest her so:
               But some men haue in this opinion stood,
               That eu'ry passion's naturall and good;
               Indeed Philosophers the same doe call,
               A Motion of the soule that's naturall;
               And in some sort we may not be afraid,
               For to vphold as much as they haue said:
               But thus we must distinguish on it then,
               And make a two-fold Passion in men,
               Of which, one sort vnto the best aspires,
               And that alone, things meerely good, desires,
               Therein reioycing; moderate, and weake
               In operation; and the truth to speake;
               We haue it rather by Gods Inspiration,
               
               Then bred within vs at our Generation:
               
               The other, as th' effects thereof doe show,
               Doth by our owne corrupted nature grow;
               
                  
For it is head-strong, rash, insatiate,
               Wondrous disordred, and immoderate,
               Of which kind these are, whereof I haue spoken,
               And they are oft the cause mens sleeps are broken;
               That 'tis which makes them raue, or greeue, or ioy
               So out of measure for a trifling toy;
               Yea that 'tis onely makes them oft so teasie,
               Their friends seem troublesome, their beds vneasie,
               And lastly, these are the occasions still,
               Of all misfortunes, and of euery ill;
               Th' effects they doe produce we also see,
               Contrarie to their expectations be;
               For he that hopes, or lookes for to attaine,
               Great Ioy & Pleasure haps on greefe and paine:
               But by what meanes may men these passions kill?
               Sure not by the procuring of their will,
               As some imagine. For first it may be,
               A thing that's not in possibilitie
               For to be reacht vnto. But say it were,
               Will the Ambitious-minded-man forbeare
               To be Ambitious, if he once fulfill
               His longing thoughts? No; he will rather still,
               Encrease that passion which first he had
               Or fall into some other that's as bad;
               For altring the Condition or Estate,
               The soules vexation doth no more abate,
               Then changing roomes or beds doth ease his paines
               That hath a Feuer; since the Cause remaines
               Still in himselfe: But how and which way then
               May these Diseases be recur'd in men?
               
                  
                  Why by Philosophy, Counsell, and Reason,
               These being well appli'd in their due season
               May do much good. Else seek the Cause whence rise,
               These hurtfull and pernitious maladies.
               Let them consider That, and so they may,
               Cut off the 'ffect by taking it away.
               But if they cannot the occasions find
               Ile tell them 'tis a Basenesse of the mind:
               Or els a false Opinion that's in some,
               Of Good or Euill present or to come.
               Respecting good things thus: They do desire
               And are to yehemently set on fire▪
               
               With coueting what seemes so; Or anoying,
               Themselues with an Excessiue Ouer-ioying,
               In the obtaining. In regard of ill,
               They are oppressed with some sorrow still;
               So that we see if men would goe about,
               To change their minds, and driue that basenes out
               Through Magnanimity, (And note well this,
               That Passion but some false Opinion is,
               Fram'd by the will, and drawne by the direction
               Of Iudgement that's corrupted by affection)
               Me thinkes they might by reasons help confound,
               The former errors that haue tane such ground,
               In their weake Hearts, and learne for to esteeme,
               That which doth either good or euill seeme:
               (And in their soules such perturbation wrought)
               As things not good, nor ill, and that which ought,
               (Being vnworthy) neither to molest,
               Nor breed such Passions in their carefull breast.
               
                  
By these and other such like meanes as these,
               The wise Philosophers in elder daies
               Kept out those furies, and 'twere now a shame,
               If that we Christians could not doe the same:
               Hauing besides those helps whereon they staid,
               A certaine promise of a better ayd,
               If weele but aske it: Lets demand it then,
               To rid these euils from our soules agen.
               If that we feele them yet not stirring in vs,
               Let vs preuent them ere by force they win vs:
               
                  For 'tis more easie (eu'ry one doth know)
               For to keep out, then to expella foe:
               If any thinke I from my purpose swarue,
               Cause my intent was chiefly to obserue
               
               And not to Teach; let them not blame me tho;
               For who can see his friends lie sick, and know
               Which way to cure them? But you'l say my skill,
               Cannot instruct you: yet may my good-will
               Be worth accepting, and the other neither,
               A thing to be reiected altogether:
               For, I haue seene when in a knowne disease
               Doctors with all their Art could giue no ease
               To their weake Patient; a Country Dame,
               Hath with a home-made medicine Cur'd the same:
               And why not I, in this? Yes, Ile abide it;
               Being well vs'd it helps, for I haue tride it:
               Thus much for that; but still there doth remaine
               Some obseruations yet for to explaine;
               I haue not done, for I am further task't,
               And there's more Humors yet to be vnmask't,
               
                  
Wherein because I will not step astray
               Nor swerue from Truth a iot beside the way,
               I'le say no more (least men should seeme belide)
               Then what my owne experience hath espide;
               And then if any frowne, (as sure they dare not)
               So I speake truth, let them frowne still I care not:
               But if my Muse you should so saucy finde,
               Sometime to leaue her Notes, and speak her minde,
               As oft she doth, when she but haps to see,
               How vaine, or weake, or fickle, most men be;
               Yet blame me not, 'tis out of the good-will
               I beare to you, and hatred vnto ill:
               Which when I see, my purpos'd Course I breake,
               Because, indeed, I am compel'd to speake:
               Yet thinke not, though I some where bitter be,
               I count my selfe from all those Vices free;
               Rather imagine 'tis to me well knowne,
               That here with others faults I tell mine owne.
               The end of the first Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE
SECOND
BOOKE.
OF
THE VANITY.
Inconstancie, VVeake-nesse,and Presumption
of Men.
            
               
               
               PRECATIO.
               THou that Createdst all things in a weeke,
               Great God: whose fauour I doe onely seeke,
               E'ne thou by whose sweet Inspiration,
               I vndertooke this obseruation;
               Oh grant, I pray, since thou hast dain'd to show,
               Thy seruant that which thousands doe not know,
               That this my noting of mans hum'rous Passion,
               May worke within Me such an Alteration,
               I may be for my past offences sorry,
               And lead a life to thy eternall glorie.
               Let not Ambition, nor foule Desire,
               
               Nor Hate, nor Enuy set my heart on fire,
               
                  Reuenge, nor Choller, no nor Iealousie,
               
               And keepe me from Despaire and Crueltie,
               
               
                  Fond hope expell, and I beseech thee blesse,
               My soule 
                     •
                  rom feare and too much heauines.
               But giue me speciall grace to shun the vice,
               That is so common; Beastly Auarice:
               Yea grant me power I not onely know,
               But flye those euils that from Passion flow.
               Moreouer now Inspire my soule with art,
               And grant me thy assistance to impart,
               
                  
The rest of mens ill Customes, yet remaining,
               And his vaine humors; that by my explaining,
               They may perceiue how odious I can make them,
               Blush at the reading and at last forsake them:
               So let my Muse in this and things to come,
               Sing to thy glory, Lord, or else be dumbe.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND BOOKE.
Of the Vanitie, Inconstancie,
Weaknes, and Presumption
of MEN.
OF VANITIE.
               SATYR. 1.
               MY Muse, that now hath done the best she can
               To blaze corrupted Passion bred in man,
               Goes further here, and meanes for to vndoe,
               Another knot of ill's he's prone vnto;
               From which, as out of the main root there growes,
               All whatsoeuer euill, Mankind knowes,
               With thousands of bad Humors, of which some,
               (Such as to mind by obseruation come;
               As also, such as are the proper crimes
               Of these vngodly and disorder'd times:)
               She means to treat off: the chiefe heads be these,
               (Consider of them Reader if thou please)
               
                  
                  First VVanton, and light-headed Vanity,
               
                  Next that, Camelion-like Inconstancy.
               Then, miserable Weaknes; lastly this,
               
                  Damned Presumption, that ore-daring is.
               But ere I doe begin this worke, that I
               May speake to purpose with sinceritie,
               Lord I beseech thee help me to explaine,
               And teach me to contemne the thing that's vaine,
               I haue begun in thee this my endeauour,
               And constancie I craue for to perseuer;
               Also my knowledge I confesse is weake,
               Yet through thy strength and truth I hope to breake
               These mires of sinne, from which mankind, kept vnder,
               Must be let loose (like beds of Eelles by thunder)
               Then that I may man's pride the better see,
               From all Presumption Lord deliuer me.
               Likewise disperse the foggy mist of sinne,
               That to my purpose hath a hindrance bin,
               And th' euill by thy wisedome I perceiue,
               Lord let thy mercy giue me grace to leaue;
               That being free my selfe, I may not coldly,
               Tax others faults but reprehend them boldly.
               So hauing for this good assistance praid,
               My Muse goes forward trusting to thine ayd,
               To guide me in the Wildernes of Sinne,
               Great Vanities Suruey: for being in,
               
               I see now 'tis an intricate Maeander,
               In which (I feare) I shall confus'dly wander:
               It is a Labyrinth so full of wayes,
               And seemes so endlesse if my pen o
                     •
                  ce strayes,
               
                  
As doth the Fisherman amazed stand,
               That knoweth not, which way to row to land,
               When all alone in some close misty day;
               Far from the Hauen he hath lost his way.
               Knowing he may as well strike vp the Maine,
               
               As turne vnto the wished Shore againe;
               So I doe feare least this may carry me,
               Into an Ocean where no Sea-marks be.
               Because what way so ere my course I bend,
               There Vanity I see without all end;
               Which hath not vnder her Subiection gain'd
               Such things alone as are on earth containd,
               Or vnderneath the Orbs of Ayre and Fire,
               But reaches farther and encroaches higher;
               According to his meaning, who said plaine,
               That all things vnderneath the Sunne were vaine:
               But now I thinke it may a question be,
               
                  Whether the Sunne, the Moone and Starres be free,
               For sometimes false predictions they impart,
               Or are belyed by abused Art;
               But of Man onely here my Muse must tel's
               Who is by much more vaine then all things els.
               For Vanity his reason ouerswayes,
               Not onely on some certaine Monthes or Dayes,
               But is at all times in him resident,
               As if it were his proper accident;
               Neither doth age, in which he groweth on,
               Any thing lessen the proportion
               Of Vanities he had. But in the steed,
               Of some reiected follies there succeed
               
                  
Others as bad: for we perceiue when boyes,
               Begin to Man, (asham'd of childish toyes)
               These then leaue off, their former idle chat,
               And foolish games; but what's the cause of that?
               For being ill? No; rather they contemne
               Those bad things as not bad enough for them;
               And as one poore, playes first for points and pins,
               Once growing rich leaues that, and then begins
               To venture Crownes, dislikes not gaming tho
               He shun the first game as not fit enough,
               For his estate; So yong men doe forsake,
               The rope-ripe tricks, that their first age did take
               Cheef pleasure in; not cause they wicked deem them
               But being men they think't will not beseeme them;
               Then Hounds & Haukes, & Whores a
                     •
                   their delight;
               
                  Quarrels and Braules doe fit their humors right,
               Disordred meetings, Drunken Reuellings,
               Consuming Dice, and lauish Banquettings,
               Proud, costly Robes, this is the yong mans Vaine,
               The which his Elder doth dislike againe,
               Not since ill neither: But because his yeares,
               Him vnto other Vanities endeares;
               As Selfe Conceit, much Care for worldly pelfe,
               Heaping vp what he nere enioyes himselfe,
               Prone to Contentions, much desiring still,
               Be it his weale, or woe, to haue his will.
               Extreamely louing lies, and giuen to prate,
               Yet making shew as if he both did hate:
               Yea old men boast of what they did in youth,
               VVhich none disproouing we must take for truth:
               
                  
And thousands more or else they are belied,
               Each age is pester'd with; and yet beside,
               Vanities
                     •
                  proper vnto each degree,
               Millions of thousands I suppose there be.
               Princes haue these, They very basely can,
               
               Suffer themselues that haue the rule of man,
               To be oreberne by Villaines; so insteed,
               Of Kings they stand, when they are slaues indeed.
               By blood and wrong a heauenly Crowne thei'l danger
               T' assure their State heere (often to a stranger.)
               They quickly yeeld vnto the Battaries,
               Of slye insinuating flatteries,
               Most bountifull to fooles, too full of feare,
               And far to credulous of that they heare.
               So giuen to pleasure, as if in that thing,
               Consisted all the Office of a King.
               But if heere in my harmeles halting Rimes,
               Were onely ti'de vnto this Place and Times,
               And shold of none but of my Soueraigne tell,
               Spight of her heart she could not speake but well;
               For (I suppose) the Truth I must confesse.
               That Vanity no Prince ere harbord lesse
               Then IAMES hath done; vnlesse corrupted stories,
               Rob's former ages of deserued Glories.
               If any say to sooth I now deuise,
               His heart I know wil tel his tong he lies,
               For did I not thinke true what heere I Sing,
               I'de not wrong Iustice for to please the King.
               Great men are vaine toe, In much se
                        •
                     king Fames,
               
               With Nimrod and his Mates; they raise their Names
               
                  
By building Babels; yea and they suppose,
               Honour consists in Titles and in showes.
               They Thraso-like in Parasites delight,
               That do in presence claw, in absence bite.
               They vse their Pleasures not as pleasures now,
               Or Recreations as 'twere fit, but how?
               'Tis all their care, their cheefe and only ioy,
               In satisfying which; they doe employ,
               Both wealth and wit and all. if they would take
               Somthing in hand for recreations sake,
               They are wi
                     •
                  h pleasures so o'recloy
                     •
                   we see,
               It must be that which their affaires should be,
               
                  A wondrous Vanity! And their Care,
               Is for rich rayment and the Curioust fare;
               Pam
                     •
                  ring their flesh when all is but in vaine,
               For Dust it was and shal to Dust againe.
               Then since their euils we seeme not to see,
               In vaine they think that they wel thought of be;
               Tush, men their lewdnes cease for to repeat,
               Why: cause th' are faultles? no because th' are great
                     •
                  
               
               But for their vices though now none dare shew the,̄
               
               Vnlesse they mend another age shal know them;
               And therefore if they count their Honors deare,
               Let them be Good as wel as Great men heare;
               Let them leaue Vanity and not suppose,
               The World wil euer blinded be with showes,
               For that great mighty Peere that died so lately,
               Ere while was mighty, powerful, and stately,
               He was most croucht vnto and oft implor'd,
               Yea almost like a Demi-God ador'd;
               
                  
He onely (as my selfe haue heard some prate,)
               Was the vpholder of the Brittaine State.
               And all the wit this Kingdome did containe,
               Some thought was harbor
                     •
                  d in his little braine,
               Ahd had he liu'd (if all be true men say)
               He might haue wel beene Pater Patriae.
               
               But now alas hees gone, and all his Fame
               You sees not able to preserue his name
               From foule Reproach; but each one breaks his mind
               Which shewes though they winkt they were not blind
               In spight of all his Greatnes, 'tis wel knowne
               That store of Rimes, and Libels now are sowne
               In his disgrace: But I heare diuers say,
               That they are slanders, (then the more knaues they
               That were the Authors) but if so it be,
               He were from those vild imputations free;
               If that his Vertue's paid with such a curse,
               What shal they looke for that are ten times worse?
               Wel Nobles Ile the Court ere long suruay,
               And if I find among you such as stray,
               Through Vanity or Pride; vnlesse it be,
               Into some small faults through infirmity,
               If there be no man that dare taxe you for't,
               My Muse shal do it e'ne to make me sport,
               For though she keepe but a plaine hobling forme,
               Shee shall haue wit enough to make you storme.
               I wil not spare you thus, til death do fet yee,
               But rub you whilst you are aliue to fret yee.
               Yet do not think 
                     •
                   meane to blaze your shame,
               In scattered Libels, that shal want a name.
               
                  
No; I hate that: Ile tell the illes you doe,
               And put my name for witnesse therevnto.
               Then 'tis but fetching me ad Magistratum,
               
               And laying to me Scandalum Magnatum,
               
               Which though you proue not, rather yet then faile,
               You were best hang or clap me into Iaile
               To stay my tongue; so much you may do to me,
               And thats the worst I know that you can do me.
               But whether runnes my ouer-sawcy Pen?
               There's Vanity, besides in Noblemen.
               
               The Gentleman, for some repute but Vaine,
               Beyond his power oftentimes doth straine,
               Our Yeomen toe that neuer Armes haue borne
               To Gentillize it makes themselues a scorne;
               But their Gaine's enuy, with a greater charge;
               Yet of these fooles the Catalogue is large.
               Then ere that lesson be halfe taken forth,
               They must ad Knight-hood or 'tis nothing worth:
               Mony may get it, therefore many sue it,
               Although with shame and Beggery they 
                     •
                  rue it.
               And Credit they expect in vaine thereby,
               For it turnes rather to their infamy;
               Because it is bestowne without deserts,
               And yet in troth our Knights haue done their parts.
               For most haue well deseru'd it, but as how?
               Brauely in field, en'e in a field at Plow.
               But why looke we in meere Humanity,
               
               For that which sauors not of Vanity,
               
               Since Diuine matters cannot quite be free,
               But with the same must oft corrupted be?
               
                  
                  Diuines, striue not so much for to impart,
               The truest Doctrines as to shew their Art:
               
               The grace their speach more with vaine words for sound,
               Then with graue sayings, needful and profound;
               But tis a vaine thing, wondrous full of shame,
               And in my iudgement highly merits blame,
               To paint o're that whose beautie's neuer fuller,
               Then when it shines forth in it proper Colour.
               
               Againe they striue what Ceremonies fit
               And best beseemes the Church, meane while omit
               More weighty matters; who that's wise would stand,
               Like many wrangling spirits in this land,
               Vpon such idle Questions as they know,
               'Tis no great matter on which side they goe?
               And such as best in my conceit befits,
               None but vnquiet and seditious wits.
               
               Heeres my Opinion: be they not the cheefe
               
                  Grounds of Religion, or the same Beleefe
               
               
                  Saluation comes by, that men go about
               By their inuentions for to bring in doubt,
               So't be not that they touch, (as sure they dare not)
               Let all the rest go which way 'twill I care not,
               Haue not our Lawyers many vaine delayes,
               Vnnecessary Writs and idle staies,
               For to prolong mens suites? when they might foile,
               The party faulty e'ne with halfe that quoile,
               They'l for their fee relate some pretty tale,
               Like the wise story of old Iack i'ith vale,
               
               Which (if they once haue thorowly begun)
               Vndo them quite that tarry til't be done.
               
                  
                  Iack Doe, Dick Roe with whom y'ad ne're to doe,
               Theile bring to help your cause and God knowes who
               And for your benefit they can affoord,
               Many a foolish sencelesse idle word.
               Which they I know will not account as vaine,
               Since that 'tis with a Vengeance brings them gaine.
               Besides as I suppose their lawes they pen'd,
               In their old Pedlers French vnto this end
               The Vulgar should no farther knowledge reach,
               Then what shall please their Maisterships to teach;
               Or else they haue the selfe-fame policie,
               As the Professors of damn'd Papistry,
               
               Who Sacred writ in forraine tongues conceal'd,
               Least that their knauish trickes should be reueal'd.
               What can they not in our owne language find,
               Words of sufficient force t' expresse their mind?
               That cannot be denied, but tis a trouble,
               So easily to counterfeit and double
               In a knowne Tongue, when th' other but a few,
               Can vnderstand, but that obstreperous Crew.
               
               These make the lawes almost to none effect,
               Their courses are so wondrous indirect,
               To them they fauour they delaies can grant,
               Though Iustice her due expedition want.
               Sometimes vpon one matter we may see,
               That sundry iudgments shal pronounced be;
               Now theres a motion granted, next day crost,
               So fee and labour's to no purpose lost:
               And stil the Clrent shal be so deluded,
               That when he hope's al's done there's nought concluded
               
                  
Nay though we heare the vtmost sentence past,
               Which by all course of Law should be the last▪
               
               Why then, I say, (though all seeme wholly ended)
               Yet may the Execution be suspended:
               And for some trifle, to the poore mans terror,
               Be cald in question by a Writ of Error.
               
               So that the right oft yeelds vnto the stronger,
               VVhen poore mens purses can hold out no longer.
               Oh miserable state! what should we say?
               May not the Country think themselues a prey
               These Rauens liue on? May we not suppose,
               By their delayes, and some such tricks as those,
               They practise only for to cheat and gull;
               And on our ruines fil their gorges full?
               Yes questionlesse; for they, Themselues do raise,
               Vnto this height on other mens decayes,
               Not their owne Vertu
                        •
                     s; Oh though't be too late,
               Yet let me wish that we had kept the State
               And Simple Innocence we once retain'd,
               For then we had not of this ill complain'd,
               Nor yet those moouers of sedition knowne,
               (Now to a mony-headed monster growne.)
               But since that time is past, we may complaine,
               Yet must nere looke to see those dayes againe,
               We haue good Lawes, but they too, seeme in vaine,
               Since they according to each Lawyers braine,
               May be now wrested too and fro to make
               The matter good that he doth vndertake;
               I'le say it plainely, and yet not belye them,
               Theres few but rich-men can haue iustice by them.
               
                  
And pray you iudge now, is not that Law vaine?
               Which when it is enacted (to restraine,
               Some priuiledge or custome that hath stood
               As a great hinderance to the publike good)
               Should of it Vertue be so slightly gui'd,
               As by a licence to be disanuld.
               Moreouer there be some too much to blame,
               Or poenall lawes are onely lawes in vaine,
               Made in terrorem tantum, to affright
               And not for execution of the right:
               And I may liken them vnto those logges,
               
               That Iupiter threw downe to rule the frogges;
               
               At first they come forth with such thundring terror,
               That we doe tremble to commit an error,
               But in a day or two they are so still,
               For ought I see, we may doe what we will,
               Vnlesse that we be poore; or some despight vs,
               Then peraduenture thei'le go neere to fright vs
               A tweluemonth after; if so long they last,
               Twenty to one then all the furie's past.
               Did you but note it you would much admire,
               To see how strictly Iustices inquire,
               On daies of sitting, what Abuses raigne,
               How those they threate that slackly doe complain,
               How they wil raile and fume, and chafe, and storme
               As if all evils they would quite reforme
               Within a moment: But things violent
               
               Cannot you know be long time permanent,
               
               Nor is their zeale; for surely (God amend it)
               One twise twelue howers will begin and end it.
               
                  
But why are they so earnest then? oh know,
               That the small springs within the dales below,
               Glide gently on, vntill a land-flood fils
               Their empty channels from the higher hils.
               
               But when thei'le swell vntill they can discharge,
               Their Burthens in some plaine to runne at large,
               So these low Magistrates, would gladly sleepe,
               And their owne easie crooked Channels keepe;
               But when that any Streame of Ivstice showers,
               And comes downe to them from the Higher powers
               
               Then peraduenture the'le grow big a day,
               And Iustice shall haue course the nearest waie:
               Yet in a little space she must be faine,
               To runne within their winding banks againe.
               Some falsely haue affirmed Iusti
                        •
                     e blind,
               Yet I am sure she knows how to finde
               (If that she be disposed for to looke,)
               Who giues her daie-workes by her counting books.
               
               Nay she knowes Capon, Turkey, Goose or Swan
               
               And thee I warrant from another Man
               What ere thou be: But whilest she sees so plaine,
               It is no wonder we haue lawes in vaine,
               Also when Officers doe vndertake
               Their charge at first, Lord what a quoile they make
               
                  A drunkard cannot with his capring feete,
               Cut out Indentures, as he walkes the streete,
               But he's straight stockt for't, or for his offence,
               By fining to the poore he must dispence.
               Then those perhaps that slackly doe frequent
               
                  Gods deuine Seruice, somewhat shall be shent;
               
                  
And many other goodly deeds thei'le do,
               But these grow quickly weary of them toe.
               Againe, sometimes comes out a Proclamation,
               
               Which threatens, on the paine of Confiscation,
               
               That no Recusant doe presume to stay
               Within ten miles oth' Court from such a day,
               Yet sure 'tis notwithstanding ment, that some
               Should daily to the Presence Chamber come,
               And shroud within a furlong on't or two;
               Some Great-one's may; and so I hope they doe,
               And by their owne Authority no doubt,
               May keepe the rest from danger thereabout,
               Pish, they at such a matter will but scoffe
               'Cause they know surely how to put it off.
               Yet I'le not say it is in vaine; for why
               The Printer's sometime set on worke thereby:
               And 'tis moreouer for our satisfaction.
               Who else might think the State were out of action,
               But oh you noble English Senators
               
               Our Kingdomes Guard, and Princes Counsellors
               
               How can you see your labours so mis-vs'd?
               Or brooke, to haue your Soueraigne so abus'd?
               Doe you suppose that it deserues no blame,
               To make a Scar-crow of the Regall Name?
               
               And to erect it on some common stall,
               
               For to be gaz'd on, to no end at all?
               Respect it more; and vse it not for course
               Or fashions sake; but shew it hath some force.
               Pluck out those Vipers that for feare of harme
               Their chilled spirits in your bosomes warme:
               
                  
D'ye not perceiue their stings? No danger feare yet?
               Oh 'tis apparant let them not shroud neere yee?
               For if you doe, 'tis doubtlesse the Conclusion,
               
               If God preuent not will be your Confusion.
               
               Yet all (for ought I see) should still remaine,
               Were there not some, who (out of zeale to Gaine
               More then Religion, or their Countries weale,)
               Their scuruie base conditions doe reueale,
               In begging and in rifling of some few;
               But they their owne corruptions rather shew
               Then redresse any. More I here could vtter
               But I methinkes already heare some mutter,
               As if I should be sure of R
                        •
                     mes great curse:
               
               But then 
                     •
                  'me sure I shall be ne're the worse.
               Yea, let them go to Rome, curse, ban, & spare not,
               I'le sit at home and laugh; because I care not,
               But why doe I of Lawes alone complaine,
               Since all Man deales in, is in some sort vaine?
               
                  Religion is with Ceremonies stuft,
               And with vaine-glory and presumption puft,
               Now our Almes-de
                        •
                     ds and guifts of Charitie,
               
               Are done for shew and with hypocrisie.
               
               Yea, al's made vaine, for if you would but view
               Our Vniuersities; indeed 'tis true,
               There you may yet see, how that heretofore,
               In better daies, hath been erected store
               Of Pallaces; (whose curious build are still,
               A faire remembrance of the worke-mens skill)
               Which, least that knowledge in the land should fade,
               VVere by the Patrons of good learning made,
               
                  
That there the Muses shelter'd from the rages
               Of former, present, and succeeding ages
               Might safely liue and not beholding be
               To Pyren for his hospitality.
               'Tis also true, there wants not, to sustaine
               Their proper needs, nor yet to entertaine
               Such as desire knowledge, theres enough;
               The worthy Founders haue prouided so,
               But of these profits now why make they stay?
               Best sel't, or let some Courtier beg't away.
               For publike Guifts are turn'd to priuate vses,
               Faire Colledges are ful of foule Abuses.
               And their Reuenues I account as vaine,
               Because they lazy Dunces do maintaine,
               Who to themselues do claime the profits, by
               Nothing but witlesse Seniority.
               Such as saue Beard (with reuerence be it spoken)
               Of profound learning haue nor marke nor token.
               Good Founders dreaming not of these Abuses,
               Gaue them at first to charitable vses;
               But we find now all alter'd, and the dues,
               The which by right vpon desert ensues,
               Like Offices in Court, are bought and sould,
               And places may be had, but how? for gold,
               
               There as else-where they now are growne so bad,
               Without Quid dabis nothing can be had,
               'Tis strange to see what Auarice can doe,
               But are the Muses taken with it to?
               Oh no? for they esteeme such gaine a losse,
               And their high Spirits scorne such earthly drosse▪
               
               
                  
How then? There are some Cormorants crept in,
               Who in their youth pretended to haue bin
               Addicted vnto knowledge: when alas.
               Tis wel seene since that all their purpose was
               To snort in ease; augmenting still their store,
               Til they grow wealthy and their houses poore;
               Foule droanes, whose voices must be hir'd with mony
               Steruing the Bees, while they deuoure the hony.
               But oh you Birdes of Athens, cleare your Hals
               
               And driue those lazy Hornets from your stals.
               
               Through them it is men thinke you couetous,
               They make your groues and walks grow scandalous,
               But how wil you discerne them? Marry thus,
               Since they haue made themselues notorious
               Ile point them out; And though their heads they shroud
               As Venus did Aeneas in a cloud,
               I'le so vnmask them; if their eares they show
               You shal be able to say, there they goe.
               First note them; there are some by Bribes and Fees,
               Can soone passe thorough two or three Degrees:
               
               And if they sue for ought are not deni'de it:
               When better Students must be put beside it.
               Then there be others who their nests to fether,
               Can keepe in office nineteene yeares together,
               Enforcing many vnto penury,
               To haue wherewith to feed their luxury.
               
               Note you not some at fifty winters study,
               That haue their wits so thin and braines so muddy,
               They must procure of other men to doe,
               The excercises they were cal'd vnto?
               
                  
And sit there not of Dunces pretty store,
               From Sunne to Sunne at euery tradesman dore?
               Huge fat Curm
                        •
                     dgeons? tell me, I think no,
               Do Commons of Three halfe-pence feed them so?
               Or can such puffes so Humberkinlike set,
               Into a Pulpit once in seauen yeare get?
               Sure if they do, their memorie's so weake,
               When they come there they know not what to speake,
               Nor are they halfe so fit if't came to proofe.
               To serue for Pastors as to hang at Roofe,
               
               It is no maruaile then that blockish rout,
               Retaine their places and keep better out,
               For no good Patron that doth Conscience make,
               Will vnto them the Charge of soules be take:
               Because if such, the flock of Christ should keepe,
               No question they would make but Carion Sheepe.
               
               Then they must stay, yet in their stay thei'le be
               A plague vnto the Vniuersity.
               
               For ouer and aboue the mischeefes nam'd
               The vice for which the younger sort is blam'd,
               They are most guilty of; for forc't to tarry,
               Through want; and by their lawes forbid to marry.
               Thence springs it that the Townes-men are reputed,
               Thus by a common voyce to be Cornuted:
               
               For I haue knowne that such haue daily beene,
               Where younger scollers neuer durst be seene.
               And all (vnlesse that they haue eyes like Moles)
               May see those Foxes vse the Badgers holes.
               
               Nor hath their lewdnesse in that action staid,
               But on the place a fouler blemish laid.
               
                  
Which heere Indeed I do forbeare to name,
               Least it be to the place I loue, a shame;
               And for because I feare some spitefull mates,
               May taxe them with it that such dealing hates,
               Brought in by them; for who is so impure,
               But he that liueth like an Epicure.
               
               Oh Mues seeke in time to root these weeds,
               That mar your Gardens, and corrupt your seeds,
               And you that are appoynted Visitors,
               
               Who ought for to be strict Inqui
                        ••
                     tors,
               
               To search the foule abuses of these Times
               
               And see them punisht Oh! let these my Rimes
               
               Moue you for to reforme this villany;
               Or let the hate of damned Periury
               Stir vp your zeale these euils to restraine
               If not for loue of good for feare of paine:
               
               Which else (though you set light as at your heele)
               As sure as God is Iust, your soules shall feele.
               Do you not see now all the wondrous Cost
               Of worthy Benefactors vainely lost,
               The Lands, Reuenues, Customes, Charters, Rents
               Which they haue left for diuers good intents
               Vainely employed; see the Student poore
               For whom it was ordain'd stands at the doore
               And may not enter, whilst the golden Asse,
               
               Is quietly admitted for to passe,
               And shroud himselfe within those sacred gates,
               
               Which wer't not for commodity he hates.
               You sacred Genii that did once attend
               Those wel deuoted Patrons to their end;
               
                  
Although your bodies be entoomb'd in claie,
               Since you suruiue, because you liue for aye;
               Looke downe on your abused guifts and see, be,
               What oddes twix't th' vse and your good meanings
               Come and behold how the laborious sits,
               Sharing some hungry Commons, scarce two bits;
               And that but when a double gauday haps
               Full glad alas at other times with scraps;
               While that the Lazy Dunce on dainties feeds;
               Oh come (I say) if you respect your deeds,
               And fright them with some ghastly visions thence,
               They may haue more remorse for their offence.
               If I could take on me some monstrous forme;
               I'de either make them their bad liues reforme,
               Or hare them quicke to hell: But I am vaine,
               Thus for to inuocate, or to complaine,
               Because I doubt this fault will nere be mended,
               Vntill all euill with the world be ended.
               
                  Learning is vaine too, or so made at least,
               Consider it, I speake it not in iest;
               Doe we not see that those who haue consum'd,
               Halfe a mans age in Schooles, and haue assum'd
               
                  Degrees of Art, and howrely ouer-looke,
               Many a leafe, many a wise-mans booke,
               Still studying to know; fellowes that can,
               As they themselues thinke, put downe any man,
               That dares of Predicables to dispute,
               Yea such as can to, if need be, refute
               
                  Knowne Truths; and that in Metaphisicall,
               
               Much more I thinke in matters Naturall,
               
               
                  
Seeme greatly read. Doe we not see I say?
               That these from study being tane away,
               For some employments in the Publike weale,
               
               A man would be ashamed to reueale
               Their simple carriage? sooner theile speak Treason,
               
               Then any thing that shall be law, or Reason.
               
               Aske their opinions but of this or that,
               Thei'le tell a Tale they scarcely know of what;
               And at the last you must be well apaid,
               With This the Poet, or This Tully said;
               
               So other mens opinions shall be showne,
               But very seldome any of their owne:
               What is't to heape vp a great multitude,
               Of words and sayings like a Chaos rude,
               For to be able for to bring in Plato,
               
               Great Aristotle, with the wiseman Cato:
               
               And diuers more, yet like a blockish Elfe,
               
               Be able to say nought at all himselfe?
               As if it were all well and he had paid it,
               If he can once say, Such a man hath said it.
               
               Then by their actions, who gather can
               They haue more knowledge then another man?
               Since they doe worse absurdities commit,
               Then thoe that seeme their Iuniors in wit,
               As if they thought it were enough to know,
               And not with knowledge vnto practise goe.
               Those may be learned and of learning p
                     •
                  ate,
               But for affaires of Country, or of State
               
               In my conceit they are as farre vnfit
               As fooles and mad-men that haue lost their wit;
               
                  
And notwithstanding all their studious paine,
               I count their learning and their Knowledge vaine▪
               
               But thinke not I, hold Knowledge vaine to be,
               Or all that in the Vniuersitie,
               
               Mispend their Times; vntiftting men to deale
               About employments of the Common-weale.
               
               No; for I euer this accompt did make,
               That there are those know best to vndertake,
               Great Offices; and surely such as haue
               Both knowledge and desert: yet shall they saue
               But their owne credits: Th'other who are knowne
               To haue no gifts of nature of their owne,
               For all their knowledge gotten in the Schooles,
               
               Are worse by much ods then vnlearned Fooles.
               
               Now thou that wouldst know rightly these mens state
               Goe but a while and talke with Coryate
               
               And thou wilt soone be able to maintaine,
               And say with me that Learning's somewhere vaine.
               
               Then if there were ordain'd no other place,
               Where now-despised-Vertue should haue grace,
               She were vaine to, and those that lou'd her best
               Were to be counted vaine aboue the rest.
               For they be sure, of these worldly Crosses,
               And whosoere gaine, theirs must be the losses,
               
                  Iustice is wanting so; for if that men
               Commit an ill, the Law giues smart, but when
               They doe performe a vertuous deed 'tis hard,
               There's no Law heere that giues them a Reward.
               Nay if a man by wrong suspition be,
               Brought vnto any wofull misery.
               
                  
If he be wrackt and tortur'd so that Death
               May pleasure him by stopping of his breath:
               And if at last by proofes it doth appeare,
               That he of the suspected crime is cleare,
               Onely he may his life by that meanes saue,
               But shall no other satisfaction haue.
               Yea, and he must be glad and well content
               He hath his life for being Innocent:
               
               Whereof he would full glad haue ridden bin,
               To scape the torments they had plung'd him in,
               Tis meere Iniustice, And I say againe
               For to be vertuous in this age 'twere vaine;
               But that it one day shall rewarded be,
               By heauens chast iustice with eternitie.
               I will not heere take paines for to reueale
               The vaine trades crept into our Common-weale:
               
               Onely Ile say, and so I thinke will any,
               Would there were lesse, for such there be too many.
               But I must needesly shew their Sympathy,
               Who make their treasures and felicitie
               Of things meere friuolous, As Honour, Srength,
               
               
                  Pleasure, and VVealth, & Beauty, which at length,
               Yea in short time must Fade; Titles wrong plac't
               Without desert, are not alone disgrac't,
               And loose that reputation of their owne,
               But shame them too, on whom they are bestowne▪
               
               VVhat Noblenesse of Birth but meerely vaine,
               
               Vnlesse that in the linage there remaine,
               Some noble qualitie? which in them bred,
               They haue deriu'd from predecessors dead?
               
                  
What's Honor? but e'ne Smoke and Idle 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               A thing consisting onely in a name?
               
               Which if you take away then you take all,
               (For Alexanders glory was not small,)
               Yet were he namelesse, what would then remaine,
               For to inherit Honour for his paine,
               Since that his best part from the earth is fled,
               And t'other though remaining here, now dead?
               Then if that Honour doe aduantage bring,
               To Soule nor Body, but doth wholly cling
               Vnto the name: who Care, or Paines would take
               If he be wise, such Trophirs for to make
               Vnto the same, which may inioyed be,
               By many thousand other men, whilst he
               Rots; and which three mens vertues, I'le maintaine,
               Grace not so much as one mans vice shall staine?
               Wer't onely for a name, that men did well,
               And stroue in vertues others to excell,
               What good had Symon the Apostle gain'd
               More then the wicked Sorcerer obtain'd?
               And how should we giue each of them his fame
               Who liuing, being two, had but one name?
               Were outward Honour all that vertue got,
               He were a wise-man that esteem'd it not.
               But shee's the bodies comfort till it die,
               And soules Companion to eternitie.
               
                  Vulgar Repute, what is thereby acquired?
               Why is't so glorious, and so much desired?
               But I doe chiefely maruell what they ment,
               That haue prefer'd it before their content.
               
               
                  
I hold it vaine and wondrous friuolous,
               Extreamely foolish, or ridiculous,
               That any man should stand in greater feare,
               What they doe vnto other men appeare
               Then their owne consciences; or striue, (poore elues)
               To seeme to other, God, when to themselues
               Th'are worse then Diuels; why, I say, should they
               With vaine repute be so much borne away?
               And why boast men of strength that lasts no longer?
               And seeing the brute creatures are farre stronger;
               A woman may blind Sampson with her charmes,
               And little Dauid slay a man at armes,
               For God doth make, as holy Scriptures speake,
               Strong things to be confounded by the weake.
               Then some are vaine in pleasures, like to him,
               VVho for because he in delights would swim,
               In these his daies to please his fiue brute senses,
               Made twenty hundred crowns one nights expences▪
               
               I onely cease for to declare his name,
               Least he should hap to vaunt vpon the same.
               But why in Beauty should men glory so?
               As well we may perceiue there's many do;
               Since 'tis no better then a fading flower,
               That florishes, and withers in an hower.
               It could not saue the good King Dauids sonne
               For being iustly by his foes vndone;
               Nay, their's searce any that enioy the same
               Can keepe vnto themselues an honest name.
               
               VVe see moreouer men vaine-glorious grow,
               In building and apparrell; al's for show;
               
                  
And yet the Prince that's gorgioust in array,
               Must lie as naked as his Groome in clay.
               And though that men to build so curious be,
               How worthy of contempt it is we see,
               In that th'arch-King of heauen, earth and all,
               Was very well contented with a Stall.
               
               What mind are they in who suppose to raise,
               By such a vanity an endlesse praise?
               VVhen as they dayly see by obseruation,
               
                  Time vtterly decayes the strongst Foundation.
               
               Where are those wondrous high Pyramides,
               
               That were admired at in former daies?
               And of those huge Colossi what remaines?
               (Which to erect now were an endlesse paines)
               Nothing almost; no scarce his name that spent
               The paine and cost of such a Monument:
               
               If that be so, how much more vanity,
               
               Is it to hope for fames eternity,
               By such sleight trifles whose ground-worke needs mending
               Before the roofe be brought vnto an ending?
               Againe some thinke how e're their liues they spend
               Yet if they can attaine to in the end
               A glorious Funerall, and be inter'd
               VVith idle pompe and show, or be prefer'd
               In a bald Sermon, for some one good deed
               They did the Common-wealth for their owne need,
               Or by their owne, or friends procurement haue
               On their vnworthy scarce-deserued graue
               
               A goodly Epitaph; they thinke al's well;
               Alas poore silly men! what can they tell
               
                  
How long 'twill stand, before 't be razed downe?
               But say it bide a while, what faire renowne,
               Can in a peece of carued Marble be?
               VVhat can a guilded Tombe then profit thee?
               Preserue thy fame? I know it cannot passe,
               The wondrous Heape that once erected was,
               And yet e'ne at this day doth now remaine
               Not farre from Sarum on the VVesterne plaine,
               Yet who can say directly, (or what story
               Doth absolutely mention) for whose glory
               That was first founded? or by whom? or why?
               And if a Deed of such great wonder die,
               Dost thou suppose by a few Carued stones,
               Scarcely enough to couer all thy bones
               To be immortall? If thou long to liue
               After thy death, why then let Vertue giue
               And adde that liuing glory to thy name;
               Let her sound forth the Trumpet of thy fame,
               And it shall last; for she knowes how to place it;
               Nor time, nor enuy shall haue power to race it.
               I say endeuour to be vertuous heere,
               So shall thy sacred memory be deere
               To those that liue, aud whil'st thy Body lies,
               Entomb'd on earth, thy Soule shall mount the skies.
               
               But if in pleasure thou hast liued long,
               And tooke delight in seeking bloud and wrong:
               VVhen that the euill day shall come to end thee,
               The curse of the oppressed shall attend thee,
               Thy soule shall pay for't; and the selfe-same Graue
               
               Thou for thy Honour didst suppose to haue
               
                  
Shall be thy Shame; for those that trauell by it
               Shall often curse it, yea deride, defie it;
               And to each other say, There doth he lie,
               
               That acted such, or such a villany.
               Then why should gay clothes be delighted in,
               Since they are but a badge of our first sinne?
               And yet 'tis strange to know how many fashions,
               We borrow now a daies from sundry Nations.
               
               Some, but a few, in Irish trouzes goe,
               And they must make it with a codpeece too,
               Some (as the fashion they best like) haue chose
               
                  The soruce diminitiue neat Frenchmans hose
               
               Another lik't it once but now hee'll chop,
               Or chang't as we say for the Switzers slop;
               
               And cause sometimes the fashions we disdaine,
               Of Italy, France, Netherland and Spaine,
               
               Weele fetch them farther yet, for by your leaues
               We haue Morisco gownes, Barbarian sleeues,
               
                  Polonian shooes, with diuers far-fetcht trifles,
               Such as the wandring English gallant rifles
               Strange Countries for; Besides our Taylors know,
               How best to set apparell out for show.
               It either shall be gathered, sticht; or lac't,
               Else plated, printed, iag'd, or cut and rac't,
               Or any way according to your will,
               For we haue now a daies learn'd much vaine skill:
               But note you when these geu-gaues once be made,
               And that this cunning Maister of his Trade
               Must bring it home, Then lies all the iest,
               To see vvhen the poore slaue hath done his best
               
                  
To mend what faults he can (for by his trade,
               He can set right what Nature crooked made)
               VVhen he hath fitted to his power, and trickt,
               Whom he wold please; when he hath brusht & pickt
               E'ne till he sweate againe: Yet (though he spies
               Scarce any fault) You Rogue the Gallant cries.
               A plague confound thee; looke here how this sits,
               Zounds 'tis a mile too wide; where were thy wits?
               See, this is halfe too long that halfe too short,
               'Sbloud I could finde in heart to knock thee for't.
               Then for the faults behind he lookes in glasse,
               
               Straight raues againe and cals his Tayler Asse,
               
               
                  Villaine, and all the Court-like names he can,
               Why I'le be iudg'd (saies he) here by my man,
               If my left shoulder seeme yet in his sight,
               For all this bumbast halfe so big's the right.
               How is he seru'd? This day he should haue went,
               With such a Lord or Lady into Kent:
               
               To Hampton Court to morrow comes the Queene,
               
               And there should he with certain friends haue bin,
               Now he shall faile. Villaine go straight and mend it
               And see with all the speed you can, you send it:
               Or by my sword the Gallant sweares he will
               Make thee to wait twise twelu-months with thy Bil
               
               If e're he pay thee. Then the other takes it,
               Carries it home againe: turnes, rubs, and shakes it,
               Lets it lye still an houre or so, and then
               As if 'twere alter'd beares it back againe;
               Then 'tis so fit, our Gallant cannot tell
               That e're he had Apparel made so well.
               
                  
Ere-while, saies he, faith I was anger'd sore,
               Why couldst thou not haue done it thus afore▪
               
               With many gentle speeches in amends,
               And so these two vaine fooles grow quickly friends,
               VVhat shall Isay of our superfluous fare?
               
               Our beastly, vaine, and too excessiue care
               To please the belly? We, that once did feed
               On homely rootes and hearbs, do now exceed
               The Persian Kings for dainties; In those coates
               A man would think they liu'd with hay and 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     es,
               
               The diet they are growne vnto of late,
               Excels the Feasts, that men of high estate
               Had in times past, for there's both flesh and fish,
               With many a dainty new deuised dish.
               For bread they can compare with Lords or Knights,
               For they haue raueld, manchet, browne and white,
               Of finest wheate: Their drinkes are good and stale,
               
                  For Perry, Cider, Mead, Metheglin, Ale,
               Or Beere they haue great plenty of; but then
               This cannot serue the richer sort of men.
               They with all sorts of forraine wines are sped;
               Their cellers are oft fraught with white and red,
               
               
                  Be 't French, Italian, Spanish, if they craue it:
               
               Nay Grecian or Canarian, they may haue it,
               
                  Catepument, Veruage, if they doe desire,
               Or Romney, Bastard, Capricke, Oley, Tire,
               Muscadel, Malmsey, Clarey, what they will;
               
               Both head and belly each may haue their fill.
               Then if their stomacks doe disdaine to eate,
               
                  Beefe, Mutton, Lambe, or such like Butchers meate;
               
                  
If that they cannot feed on Capon, Swan,
               
               
                  Duck, Goose, or common houshold Poultry; than
               Their storehouse will not very often faile,
               
                  To yeeld them Partrich, Phesant, Plouer, Quaile,
               Or any dainty fowle that may delight,
               Their gluttonous and beastly appetite.
               So they are pamper'd whilst the poore man sterues,
               Yet there's not all, for Custards, Tarts, Conserues,
               
               Must follow to; And yet they are no let
               
                  For Suckets, March-panes, nor for Marmalet.
               Frute, Florentines▪ sweet sugar meats and spice,
               VVith many an other idle fond deuise,
               Such as I cannot name, nor care to know;
               And then besides the tast 'tis made for show,
               For they must haue it cullour'd, guilded, Printed,
               
               
                  With shapes of Beasts & Fowles, cut, pincht, indented,
               So idly that in my conceit 'tis plaine,
               That men are foolish and exceeding vaine,
               And howsoe'er they of Religion boast,
               Their belly is the God they honour most.
               But see whereto this dainty time hath brought vs,
               The time hath been that if a Famine caught vs,
               And left vs neither Sheepe, nor Oxe, nor Corne,
               
               Yet vnto such a diet were we borne,
               Were we not in our Townes kept in bith' foe,
               
               The woods and fields had yeelded vs enough
               To content Nature: And then in our needs
               Had we found either leaues, or grasse, or weeds,
               
               We could haue liu'd, as now at this day can
               Many a fellow-subiect Iris
                        •
                     man.
               
               
                  
But in this age, if onely Wheate doe rise
               To any extraordinary prize:
               Of if that we haue Cheese or Butter scant,
               Though almost nothing else that is, we want;
               Lord how we murmor, grumble, fret and pine,
               As if we would vpbraid the powers Diuine;
               Yea we prouoke God, as sometime the Iewes
               
               Did Moses; and with vs it is no newes.
               But you that are so like to sterue in plenties,
               Because you are a little bar'd your dainties,
               Leaue of your Luxury; let me intreat;
               Or there will come a Famine shall be great:
               When Soule nor Body neither, shall haue food,
               Or any thing to comfort them that's good.
               We talke of scarcity: yet here there came
               No want this twenty ages, worth the name
               Of Famine; but our gentle God hath bin,
               Exceeding mercifull vnto our sin.
               VVheat at ten shillings, makes no dearth of bread,
               Like theirs; where once (we read) an Asses head,
               
               Cost foure-score siluer peeces; where Doues dong,
               
               VVas highly pris'd: and mothers eate their yong;
               There famine raign'd. Pray in the like we fall not;
               If we can fast with Niniue we shall not.
               But truely much I feare the same, vnlesse
               VVe doe leaue off our gluttonous excesse,
               For though we quaffe and swill much time away,
               Yet three set Meales will scarce suffice a day
               To satisfie our lust; whereas but one,
               Suffis'd our predecessors, sometime none.
               
                  
It were a worke too tedious to quote
               The sundry vanities that we may note
               Sprung from this Greedinesse, as our Long-sitting,
               
               A custome rather in my mind befitting
               Pagans and Epicures, then honest men.
               But 'tis a vse now common growne; and then
               This Fo
                        •
                     lery we haue; we nothing deeme
               Worthy of our desire, or esteeme,
               Saue that which we haue either dearely bought,
               Or far-away from forraine kingdomes brought:
               Yea notwithstanding here in our land,
               Those things be better; and more neere at hand.
               Yet we out of an idle humor are,
               Much more affected to all Forraine ware
               Then to our owne: although the same be best.
               So that this vainenesse doth not onely rest
               In meates, and in apparell; but 'tis showne
               In many things; we least affect our owne.
               Our home-made Cloth, now quoddam est inanum,
               
               We are for Serges and Perpetnanum;
               
               With other stuffe, as Crow-graine, Chamblets, Rash.
               
               And such like new deuised forraine trash.
               Yea though our natiue country-men excell
               In any Trade, we like them not so well
               As we doe strangers: (and in very deed)
               I thinke for vaine inuentions they exceed.
               And then moreouer when we doe not want
               Any good wholesome hearbe, or fruit, or plant,
               
               That may be necessary, fit or good,
               Either to serue for Phisick or for food,
               
                  
Yet those we leaue, as if we did abhorre them,
               And send to seeke in other Kingdomes for them.
               So while we onely make our vse of them,
               Our better home-bred Simples we contemne.
               (Oh Vanity) our country yeelds enough,
               VVhat need we Grecian or Arabian stuffe?
               Why send we for them to those Countries thus?
               'Twas planted there for them and not for vs:
               What though it help them of diseases there?
               The Climate, yea, and our complexions are
               So different, for ought that I can gather,
               Heer 't may not help our griefs, but poison's rather.
               My selfe haue heard some Trauellers to say,
               That which will salue their wounds within a day,
               That of the farthest Easterne Countries be,
               VVill not recure an Englishman in three.
               Then sure if we should vse that medicine heere,
               It would not help nor cure vs in a yeare.
               Trust me I thinke, this ouermuch respecting
               Of Forraine Compounds, and the still neglecting
               Of our owne Symples is the cause that wee
               So little better for our Phisicke be;
               Some in their writings praise Tobacco much,
               Perhaps the vertue of it may be such
               As they haue said, where first the simple grew,
               But if it be replanted heere a new,
               From it owne soile where natures hand did place it,
               I dare not with those properties to grace it
               VVhich there it had; nor can the Vertue bide
               VVhen 'tis transported to our region, dri'd.
               
                  
Yet almost 'tis a wonder to behold,
               How generally now both yong and old
               Suck on that forraine weed: for so they vse it,
               Or rather (to speake right) so they abuse it,
               In too oft taking, that a man would thinke
               It were more needfull then their meate or drinke▪
                  
               
               But what's their reason? doe not aske them why,
               For neither can they tell you that, nor I:
               Vnlesse 't be this: So they haue seene some doe
               Forsooth, and therefore they must vse it too.
               Nay, wonder not; The Sunne lights not a Nation
               
               That more addicteth Apish imitation
               
               Then doe we English: Should a stranger come
               And weare his doublet fastned to his Bumme:
               Pluck gloues on's feet, & put his hands in's shoes,
               And we are his Rings and Iewels on his toes.
               And come so tired to our English Court,
               Attended in some strange preposterous sort;
               Most of our Courtiers would make much ado,
               But they would get into that fashion too.
               For when they did but happen for to see,
               Those that with Rhume a little troubled be,
               Weare on their faces a round masticke patch,
               Their fondnes I perceiu'd, sometime to catch
               That for a Fashion. Nay, we cannot name
               That thing so full of Barbarisme and shame
               
               That they'le not imitate: witnesse this smoake,
               
               VVhich though at first it was enough to choake
               
               Or stifle vp the sence; though 'twere vnpleasing
               In taste and sauour, oftentimes diseasing
               
                  
The takers bodies; yet like men halfe mad,
               Not knowing neither what effect it had,
               Onely because a rude and sauage Nation,
               
               Took't for some vnknowne need; thei'le mak't a fashion,
               Alas what profit England at thy need,
               Hast thou attain'd to, by this Indian weed?
               
               What hath it lengthen'd life or maintain'd health
               Or hath it brought thee more encrease of wealth?
               It dries superfluous moistures; doth't? indeed
               Tane with discretion it may stand insteed,
               And surely it deserues to be excus'd,
               Being with honest moderation vs'd.
               But I doe greatly wonder what they ment,
               That first did tak't in way of complement.
               
               For now it is as common at each meeting,
               As how d' yee, or, God saue yee for a greeting;
               
               Hee's no good fellow that's without the Pox,
               
               Burnd pipes, Tobacco, and his Tinder-boxe:
               And therefore there be some who scarce abide it,
               Yet alwaies will for company prouide it;
               With whom (though they alone the same eschew)
               Thei'le take it till they spit and cough and spue.
               
               Me thinkes they may as well since this thei'le doe,
               At all their meetings take Purgations too.
               There's not a Tinker, Cobler, shepheard now
               Or Rascall Ragamuffin that knowes how
               In a blind Ale-house for to drinke a pot,
               Or swagger kindly, if he haue it not;
               You shall haue some among them will not sticke,
               To sweare that they are for Tobacco sicke;
               
                  
When by their ragged outsides you would gather,
               It were for want of bread and victuals rather;
               And so I tak't; But now if you deny,
               
                  Th' Affecting forraine drugges, a Vanity,
               Yet you, I hope will grant, (because 'tis plaine)
               The vsing of Tobacco thus is vaine.
               I meane in those that daily sit and smoake,
               
               
                  Ale
                        •
                     ouse and Tauerne till the windowes roke.
               And you must yeeld if euer; Quod nunc sumus,
               
               E'ne as the old verse saies, flos, foenum, fumus,
               
               Some vainely much acquaintance seeke to get,
               And often in a strangers cause will sweate.
               VVhen none (vnlesse some one for rarity)
               VVill to their Kinne shew loue or charitie.
               The loue of men some striue for to attaine,
               And they haue iust their labour for their paine▪
               
               For what's the fauour or the loue of Men?
               
               A thing long getting and soone lost agen,
               For him I know whose company hath seem'd,
               In my poore iudgement to be so esteem'd
               By many, that in show he hath appear'd
               To be more neerely to their soules indear'd
               Then their owne brothers; And sure for the time,
               (But that inconancie's a humane crime)
               He hath been so; For when he hath departed,
               As if his absence inwardly had smarted;
               Out of their eyes full oft against their will,
               I haue seene, sorrow looke, and teares to trill.
               And yet againe hath my experience seen,
               The selfe-same man that hath so made of been,
               
                  
Euen of those men he hath been so respected,
               After some absence either much neglected,
               Wholly forgotten or they so estranged,
               As if their loue and good conceit were changed.
               Which hauing found, I weighed well the end,
               And thought them vaine that on the like depend.
               Also methinkes it makes me pretty sport,
               To note the Vainenesse of the greater sort;
               
               
                  How full of Congees, curtesies, and greetings,
               
                  Embracements, & kind words they be at meetings.
               Or else what Me
                        •
                     orandums past betweene,
               Of great good turnes that nere perhaps haue been,
               VVhat commendations, and ioyes there be,
               For one anothers good prosperitie.
               VVhen howsoeuer they their malice smother,
               They care not what becomes of one another.
               To see me well, hee's glad at heart, one cries,
               When 'tis well knowne that in his heart he lies,
               Another bids me welcome to my face,
               VVhen he would leaue my presence for my place.
               Yea and to sweare it too he will not tremble,
               Although he knowes, I know he doth dissemble:
               VVhich in my iudgement is a Vanity,
               
               Too full of shamelesse grosse absurditie,
               And I much wonder men delight to spend
               
                  Time that's so precious to so little end,
               As to consum't in idle Complement,
               
               And not so much as to a good intent;
               
                  Crouching and kneeling, when each peasant knowes
               
                  Much curtesie, much craft: the prouerbe goes.
               
                  
A quality beseeming men I deem't,
               For to be Courteous and I much esteem't,
               Yet sure without good meaning tis vnfit,
               And extreame vaine when men are cloy'd with it.
               When some man's Table's furnished with store,
               Of Dainties, that a Prince can haue no more,
               Hee'le bid you welcome, though that by your cheere,
               
               
                  It doth not (as hee'le say himselfe) appeare,
               
               And yet he sees and knowes well that his Bordes,
               
               Haue what the Water, Earth, and Ayr affords:
               With pray d'yee eat, I drink t'yee, nay be merry;
               
               And such like words; I oft haue beene as weary
               To thank, to pledge, and say I do not spare,
               
               As ere was Sommers of his trotting mare,
               But now I think of this, I'le without ieasting,
               Tell one absurdity l'ue seene in feasting,
               Amongst my Countrymen; when one intends
               For to be merry he bids home his friends,
               And for them all things needfull doth prepare,
               That they may well perceiue they welcome are;
               Yea, he would haue them frolick, and 'tis good,
               A signe of loue and honest neighbourhood,
               
               But then with all he oftentimes inuites,
               Som lofty Statesmen or proud neighbouring knights
               Who all their merriment doth ouerthrow,
               Because they looke for reuerence you know,
               And he must be a slaue vnto that guest,
               Contenting him, though he displease the rest.
               Now thats his fault, were I as he, my Boord,
               
               Should neuer entertaine that Knight or Lord
               
               
                  
In way of feasting; that allow'd not me,
               
               To be as merry and as blith as he;
               
               Or that through his disdaine would thinke amisse,
               To beare some iests of mine as I beare his;
               For who but fooles would while their guest is baiting
               Stand with bare heads like Alehouse-keepers waiting
               (As if they were some strangers wanted chearing)
               In their owne houses? while they dominering
               Say what they list; be therefore rul'd by me,
               Bid none but equals if you'le merry be:
               At least let them be such as can abide,
               To lay Superiority aside.
               Moreouer (if they haue the prouidence
               To bid their friends & keep these mar-feasts thence)
               They are too lauish and doe much deuize,
               How they the appetite may best suffize.
               But 'tis a signe their vnderstanding's weake,
               And they haue small good matter for to speake;
               It showes a shallow pate and muddy braine,
               
               When men haue no discourse to entertaine
               Their friends withall, but whiffes of smoake or drinke,
               
               Or curious fare; as if that they did thinke
               They could not shew their honest loue, vnlesse
               They did abound in gluttonous excesse.
               
               But there be many greedy-guts indeed,
               That will finde fault vnlesse their cates exceed.
               Such Socrates shewes how to answer best,
               Who hauing for his friends prepar'd a feast,
               And hearing one to discommend his store
               Told him directly, friend there needs no more,
               
                  
For be they vertuous her's enough for such,
               If otherwise (quoth he) there is too much
               A fitter answere we can neuer finde,
               For such nice gluttons; differing in minde
               From certaine deere and learned friends of mine:
               Whom, when I late requested for to dine
               Or sup with me one night; would not agree,
               Vnlesse I drest that they appointed me:
               I will said I, and not a bit beside,
               Why then (quoth they) we charge thee to prouide
               
                  One dish, no more, we loue not him that crams,
               And let our second course be Epigrams.
               
               Well, that they had with more good mirth & laughing,
               Then those that had their dainties, & their quaffing,
               Who can declare that Vanity man shewes,
               In hearing and reporting idle newes?
               
               The foolish tales, and lies that he doth faine,
               Are more then any numbers can containe.
               And now I thinke on that same lying euill,
               
               A mischiefe first inuented by the diuell,
               
               I cannot chuse but greatly wonder why,
               Men should delight so in that Vanity.
               
               It is not onely vicious and base,
               But also doth their credits quite deface.
               And truth out of their mouthe
                     •
                   is mis-esteem'd
               Because, oft lying, they are lyers deem'd.
               I meane not any falshood to maintaine,
               No though they be officious, or for gaine.
               
               Yet worst like them, who their wits bo bend
               To inuent tales vnto no other end.
               
                  
But for to find the company some talke,
               And cause they loue to heare their owne tonges walke
               Some I haue knowne (iudge of their Vanity)
               They haue told tales to their owne infamy;
               And yet vntrue, 'tis like they haue small care
               Of others credits when they wil not spare
               To wrong th
                        •
                     mselues: Another crew beside
               Among these ly
                        •
                     rs I haue also spide,
               Who, as it may appeare, do like so well,
               Strange newes, and matters past beleefe to tell,
               That notwithstanding they do surely know,
               It makes not only modest eares to glow,
               But that 'tis knowne they lie, yet stil they dare
               
                  Gainst Truth, their owne, & al mens knowledge swear.
               
               Yea, when they may aswell, and speake as right,
               Sweare that each man is blind, and all Crows white
               Oh too presumptuous and lewd offence
               Sprung from a brazen, 
                     
                        •
                     ellish impudence!
               Then there's a number to, that do suppose,
               All that beyond their little reason growes,
               Is surely false; And vainely do vphold
               That all reports which trauellers vnfold
               Of forraine lands are lies; because they see
               No such strange thinges in their owne parish be,
               If that I may not terme such fellowes vaine,
               
               I'le say th'are dul and of a shallow braine.
               
               And him I count no wiseman that imparts,
               To men of such base misconceiuing hearts
               Any rare matter, for their bruitish wit,
               Will very quickly wrong both him and it.
               
                  
For thus the saying goes, and I hold so,
               Ignorance onely, is true wisedomes foe.
               Then thou art vaine that wilt vouchsafe to spend
               Thy breath, with witlesse fooles for to contend
               In weighty matters; when it is well knowne
               Thei'le like of no opinions but their owne.
               Euer disabling what thou dost recite,
               Yea notwithstanding it be ne're so right.
               And be their owne case false, and all amisse,
               They'le proue it true; How? Thus: Because it is.
               
               So if there be no more wise men in place,
               Thou bear'st the shame, & thei'le haue all the grace.
               And yet the mischiefe hath not there an end,
               For tell me, you that euer did contend
               VVith such; is not their wayward disputation
               
               A meere confusion and a strong vexation?
               I know 'tis so; for I my selfe haue tride it,
               And since that time could neuer yet abide it;
               But let those follow Vanity together
               With purb
                        •
                     ind ignorance; and I'le send thither
               To keep them company, those that take pleasure
               In tedious discourse, they be at leasure,
               And those that loue to heare their owue tong
                     •
                  es walke
               Or still seeke out occasion for to talke
               Shall not stray from them: Yet I haue beheld
               More Vanities which must not be conceal'd.
               As foolish wishes: Many a silly Asse,
               
               Couets those things that cannot come to passe.
               
                  Another that in wishing is as heedlesse,
               Desires some trifling bables which are needlesse.
               
                  
Nay, I haue heard, without regard of shame,
               Such beastly wishes as I blush to name,
               VVhat damn'd infernall curses can each brother,
               In euery angry fit wish one another?
               When such as these their iesting words thei
                     •
                  e make ye
               A Pox, a Pestelence and a Murraine take yee.
               
               Which if the Lord should in his iustice send them,
               Their owne vaine wishes wold e're long time and thē.
               Some free-borne men I haue obserued too
               Who are thought wise, yet very vainely do.
               These, as if they lackt troubles of their owne
               For other men are slaues and drudges growne.
               I tax not such as honestly haue stood
               In the mainetaining a poore neighbours good.
               But rather those who are so out of measure
               Giuen to be for other men at leasure:
               That they can finde almost no time to bee
               Emploid about their owne commoditee.
               
                  Others there are, more knauish, and as vaine,
               Who seeming carefull of an others gaine,
               Intrude themselues into their actions; when
               'Tis not for any good they wish the men,
               But for this cause, and sure for nothing more,
               In each mans boate they loue to haue an oare.
               
               'Tis good men looke to their affaires, but yet,
               I hold it for a vaine thing, and vnfit
               They should be vexed with such extreame care
               In following them as I perceiue they are:
               For vnto me it seemes, the greatest part.
               
               Take businesse not in hand now, but in heart.
               
                  
What meane our wealthy Vsurers to hoord
               More vp for others then they can affoord
               Vnto themselues? whereas they do not know
               Whether it shall be for a friend or foe.
               Sure such me thinkes should be deseruedly,
               Recorded for their sottish Vanity.
               
               Now as these too well, of the world doe deeme,
               So others make thereof too small esteeme:
               As of a thing whose vse were of no weight,
               But both are led away with Vaine conceit.
               
               Then some mans care is, that when this life ends,
               Hee dying, may be buried with his friends.
               
               As if he fear'd his foes had not forgotten
               To do him mischiefe though their bones were rottē
               
               
                  Others extremely are distempered
               To thinke what men will do when they be dead.
               And vainely sit, (More wit God one day send)
               Lamenting what they know not how to mend.
               For worthlesse matters some are wondrous sad,
               Whome if I call not vaine, I must tearme mad.
               If that their noses bleed some certaine drops:
               And then againe vpon the suddaine stops.
               Or if the babling foule we call a Iay,
               
               A Squirrel or a Hare, but crosse the way.
               Or if the salt fall toward them at table,
               Or any such like superstitious bable,
               Their mirth is spoild, because they hould it true
               That some mischance must therevpon ensue.
               But I doe know no little numbers bee
               Seduced with this foolish Vanity:
               
               
                  
And questionlesse although I discommend it,
               There wants not some that stoutly will defend it,
               But all their proofe is onely this, I know
               By dayly triall they doe finde it so.
               Indeed 'tis true, God often by permission,
               To see if they will trust to superstition
               
               More then to him, doth willingly supply,
               VVhat they so look't for by their Augury.
               
               Then some for to be deemed men of State,
               Of nothing but the Court-affaires doe prate,
               If they but come amongst vs Countri-men,
               
               Lord what Magnificoes they will be then.
               Yea though they blow but the Kings Organ-
                        •
                     ellows
               
               VVe must suppose them Earles and Barons fellowes
               Or else we wrong them: 'Twas my chance to light,
               In a friends house, where one of these that night
               Tooke vp his lodging; At the first I deem'd him
               A man of some great place and so esteem'd him;
               And be tooke me for some soft Country gull,
               Thinking my wit (as tis indeed) but dull,
               But I perceiu'd his pride, I must confesse,
               And seem'd as If I had a great deale lesse.
               I made him more fine congees by a score,
               Then ere he had at Court in's life before,
               The worship, and the Honour too I gaue him,
               But from the charge of either I dare saue him.
               Yet my high tearmes so pleas'd the Courtiers vaine,
               That vp he rips me newes of Fra
                        •
                     ce and Spaine,
               
               Of Germany, of Denmarke, and of Sweed;
               
               And he had French store, thereof I tooke heed,
               
                  
Then next he tels me all their life at Court,
               
               Relates St. Georges showes and Christmas sport,
               With such like talke; which I in shew desir'd,
               And (as if I had neuer seen't before) admir'd:
               Which he perceiuing falls for to deuise,
               More strange reports, and tels me sundry lyes,
               Which stil I wondred at; and in his talke
               I noted though his tongue did euer walke
               He neuer spake of others then the best,
               For Earles, and Lords, and Ladies were the least
               I heard him mentioning; when sure the foole,
               Is but some seruant to the Groome o'th stoole.
               
               But howsoeuer for this once he passes,
               To shew the Nature of his fellow-Asses,
               
               I am affraid 'twill be to little end,
               If I should words and pretious leasure spend,
               To tel our Gallants what vaine, friuolous,
               Discourse they haue, and how ridiculous
               They are at meetings; I haue been for laughter,
               
               Often beholding to them a weeke after.
               And trust me I'le not giue a cue so soone,
               To see an Ape, a Monkey, or Baboone
               
               Play his forc't trickes, as I would giue a tester,
               
               To come and view them and their apish gesture,
               When they are either frollick in their Cans,
               
               Or courting of their light hee'ld Curtezans
               
               They thinke themselues fine men, I know they do,
               What will they giue me and I'le think so to,
               And yet I shall not sure, do what I can,
               They haue so little in them that is man.
               
               For my few yeares hath noted many fruits
               Producted in fine silkes and satten sutes
               VVorth obseruation: I could recite,
               Their braue behauiour in their Mistres sight:
               But sure thei'le nere endure't, they cannot do't,
               Yet if I list now I could force them to't,
               But I spare them; they are beholding to me,
               And may perhaps as great a fauour doe me.
               But faith I may not, nor I cannot hold
               Nor keep in all their vanities vntol'd:
               At least one humorous tricke I must not misse,
               VVhich lately I obseru'd; and that was this.
               Two lads, of late, disposed to be merry,
               Met at a Towne not farre from Canterbury,
               
               Where though their busines scarce would let them stay,
               They'd frolicke out a night, and then away;
               So there they sup't and slept, where I let passe
               To tell their mirth in what good fashion 'twas:
               But as I heard the parish clocke strocke one,
               Before their merry-mad-conceits were done:
               And then they went to bed, where I dare say
               They'd more deuotion for to sleepe then pray.
               Next morne th' one awaking suddenly vpstart,
               And lightly gert out such a boystrous—
               It wak't his fellow, who suppriz'd with wonder,
               Leapt vp amaz'd and swore he heard it thunder:
               And where there was a storme or no, 'twas sed,
               The chamber-pot ore-flow'd and drown'd the bed.
               Then hauing prai'd a curse or two, th' one rises,
               Yea, of his businesse with himselfe deuises,
               
                  
And therevpon like a considerete man,
               
               Sweares he will thence with all the speed he can,
               Come prethee rise (quoth he) and lets begone,
               Why goe (quoth th' other) I will come anon,
               Zonnds harke, I thinke the clock striks eight, why when?
               Oh soon: enough to breaks my fast by ten.
               Then Chamberlaine one cals aloud, dost heare?
               
               Come bring vs vp a double Iugge of beere.
               So either hauing drunke a good carouse,
               Downe come the Gallants to discharge the house,
               But taking leaue, oh what d' yee thinke they mist?
               Their Hostesse (pretty woman must be kist)
               Then vp she's cal'd, and in her night attire,
               Downe claps she on a stoole before the fire;
               Where hauing bid her welcome from her nest,
               Come say (quoth he) what Wine is't you like best?
               Truely (quoth she) I vse to drinke no wine,
               Yet your best morning's draught is Muskadine:
               With that the Drawer's cald to fill a quart
               (Oh! 'tis a wholesome liquor next the heart.)
               And hauing drunk it, whilst their heads were steddy
               They bad the Hostler make their horses ready
               
                  Nay (quoth the Hostesse) what needs al this hast?
               
               In faith you shal not goe til dinner's past;
               
                  I haue a dish prepared for the none's
               Arich Potato Pie, and Marrow-boxes;
               Yea and a bit which Gallants, I protest,
               
                  I wil not part with vnto euery guest;
               With that the Punies laid aside their cloaks,
               The glasses walke, and the Tobacco smoakes,
               
                  
Til dinner comes, with which whē they are fraught
               To get on horseback by and by tis naught.
               As hauing supt'ts good to walk a mile,
               So after d
                     •
                  nner men must sit a while.
               But what? wil they sit idle 'twere a shame,
               Reach them the Tables, they must play a game:
               Yet set them by againe, for now I thinke
               They know not when to leaue, thei'le rather drink
               A health or two, to some especiall friend,
               And then ifaith they meane to make an end,
               Then one calls Drawer, he cries What d' yee lack?
               
               Rogue bring vs vp a Gallon more of sack,
               When thats turn'd vp, Zounds one wil drinke no more,
               But bids the Hostler bring his horse to doore:
               The fellow might performe it without stay,
               For why? they had been bridl'd vp all day.
               Then like good husbands without any words.
               On went their cloakes, but first of all their swords,
               But stepping out of dore their Hostes meetes them,
               And with a full fil'd boule demurely greetes them.
               This was her pint, but thei'l giue hir the tother,
               Which drew the third down and the third another,
               Vntill these Gallants felt their heads so addle,
               Their bodies scarce could sit vpright it'h saddle.
               Then for to settle their vnsteady braine,
               They fell to their Tobacco once againe;
               At which they suckt so long, they thought no more
               Of the poore Iades, which they left ty'de at dore▪
               
               Til that the Sun declinde vnto the West,
               Then starting vp th' one swore he thought 'twere best,
               
                  
That they went thence; and to his fellow said;
               Come we shall be benighted I'me affraid,
               What if we be (quoth tother) by this light,
               I know the time when I haue rod all night.
               By twelue a clocke Ile be at home I vow,
               Yet Hostesse, by this kisse, I'le sup with you.
               And so they did, but after supper th' one,
               Hastens the other that they may be gone;
               
                  Nay be aduised (quoth his copesmate) harke,
               
               Let's stay all night for it growes pestlence darke.
               I marry (quoth the Host) perswaded be,
               There's many Murthers now I promise ye.
               Ile bid my seruants to shut vp the gate,
               No guest shall goe out of my house so late.
               
                  No surely (quoth their Hostesse) by S. Anne,
               
               You may be mischieft, stay and make a man.
               Well, thei'le be ruld for once, but swere thei'le goe
               The following morning ere the cock do crow.
               Introth at farthest, ere the day giues light,
               Then hauing kist their Hostesse ouernight,
               To bed againe these roystering youngsters went,
               Forgetting whereto they before were bent.
               But when the Morne her turne againe did take,
               And that it grew high time for them to wake;
               Then vp they busteld and began to lay
               The fault from one to t' other, of their stay.
               
                  For this (the first said) we may thanke your sl
                        •
                     th,
               
               (But I thinke therein they were guilty both)
               Nay (quoth the other) might you haue your will▪
               
               You'd drinke Tobacco, and be quaffing stildl
               
                  
Who I (quoth he) I weigh it not two chips,
               I could not get you from my Hostestesse lips.
               You doe me wrong (said th' other) for I sweare,
               I seldome toucht them, but you still hung there.
               To beare the burthen he grew discontent,
               And swore he would not drinke before he went.
               
                  But cald, Our horses Ostler quickly, and our wands,
               And sirra Tapster water for our hands:
               
                  (Quoth t' other) youle be ruled yet I thinke?
               Prethee let me intreat thee for to drinke.
               Before th
                     •
                  u wash; Our fathers that were wise,
               Were wont to say, 'tis wholsome for the eyes.
               VVell he will drinke, yet but a draught at most,
               That must be spiced with a nut-browne tost.
               
               But then 'twere good they had a bit beside,
               For they considered they had farre to ride.
               So he that would not drinke, a late for hast,
               Is now content to stay and breake his fast.
               Which e're 'twere ended, vp their Host was got,
               And then the drunkard needs must haue his pot,
               And so he had: but I commend my cozen,
               
               The Cuckolds one Can, cost the fooles a dozen.
               But then perceiuing they began to stay,
               
                  Quoth Guts, my bullies, harke ye, what d' ye say?
               Can you this morning on a rasher feed?
               Oh yes say they, that's Kingly meate indeed;
               They ask't it, and they had it; but this cheere,
               Quickly drew downe a dozen more of beere;
               Which being drunk, they had got out of Towne,
               But that their Hostesse was now new come downe,
               
                  
With whom they spent ere they could get away
               In kissing and in quaffing halfe that day.
               And fiue times as I heard they took the paine,
               To get on horseback and come off againe
               But at the last iust as the clock strook two,
               They were the sixt time hors't with much adoo:
               But then, as 'tis the drunkards vse, they sate
               Tipling some howre and a halfe at gate.
               So that the night drew on apace and then,
               Thither came riding other Gentlemen.
               And meant to lodge there; they had friendship showne.
               T' other were stale Guests and their mony flowne.
               Their honest Host for all their large expence,
               And former kindnes, quickly got him thence:
               Yea their sweet Hostesse that so worthy deem'd thē,
               Slunk out of sight, as if she nought esteem'd them.
               And as most will, except a very few,
               She left her old Guls to enter league with new,
               Who at their parting thought for to haue kist her,
               But were so drunken that they euer mist her.
               For there they quaft so long they did not know,
               Which way, nor whether, nor yet when to goe.
               That some suppose, yea and they think so still,
               Their horses brought thē thence against their will.
               For if so bee that they had wanted wit,
               (To come themselues) the fooles had been there yet
               If you 'twas made by, read with discontent,
               You are too blame, none knowes by whom 'twas ment
               There is no cause you should dislike my Rime,
               
               That learnes you wit against another time.
               
                  
When others are thus vaine, could you forbeare it;
               And note the follies in 't, you would forsweare it;
               As kind's your Hostesse seemes, yet this is plaine,
               Shee'l flout, and vse the next as wel for gaine.
               Now what do you vnto these Gallants say,
               Were they not pretty witty ones I pray?
               It may be they wil frowne at this, 'twere fit,
               And I am very sorry for't; but yet,
               One humor more which I haue noted vaine,
               For to be told of, they must not disdaine.
               It may anoy them if they do not mend it,
               Yea notwithstanding they so much defend it,
               'Tis this; they too much of their valour vaunt,
               And so extreamely for vaineglory haunt,
               That for to get themselues a valiant name,
               Or peraduenture halfe an howers fame
               Thei'l hazard life and limbe, yea soule and all,
               Rather then in their brauery thei'l let fall
               That vaine Repute: Oh silly sencelesse men!
               What wil the breath of fame auaile you, when
               You lye in dust and molded vp in clay?
               Perhaps you shall be spoken of a day,
               In some poore village where your bodies lye,
               To all the earth besides your fame shall dye.
               And it may be whereas you looke for glory,
               You shall but serue for to make vp the story
               Of hare-brain'd fooles: so how soere some deem you
               Men that haue vnderstanding wil esteeme you.
               But yet there is a crew that much anoyes
               The Common-weale, some call them Roaring-Boys
               
               
                  
                  London doth harbour many at this time,
               And now I think their Orders in the Prime:
               
               And flourishing estate. Diuers are proud,
               To be one of that Brotherhood alow'd.
               And reason too, for why they are indeed
               No common fellowes, but they all exceed.
               They do; but oh! Now wherein is it think ye?
               In villanies; for these be they wil drink yee
               From morne til night, from night till more againe,
               Emptying themselues like Conduits, and remaine,
               Ready for more stil: Earth drinks not the showers,
               Faster then their infernal throat deuoures,
               
                  Wine and strong liquors: These be they wil sweare,
               As if they would the veile of heauen teare,
               And compell God to heare their blasphemy
               These are the Patrons of all villany;
               
               
                  VVhoores Champions; Deceit and trechery,
               
               With the most loathsome vice of lechery,
               
               Is all their practise. Thunder when it roares,
               Ioynd with the raging waues that beat the shoares,
               Together with the winds most rude intrusion,
               Make not a noyse more full of mad confusion,
               Then do these helhounds where they vse to houze
               Or make their most vnciuill rendeuouze:
               
               For a more Godlesse crew their cannot well,
               Be pickt out of the boundlesse pit of hell.
               
               Yet these base fellowes (whom I must confesse,
               I cannot find words able to expresse)
               Are great mens darlings, (As some vnderstand)
               The absolutest Gallants in this land,
               
                  
And onely men of spirit of our time;
               But this opinion's but a vulgar crime,
               For they which vnderstanding haue, see plaine,
               That these and all their fauorites are vaine.
               And sure 'twere good if such were forc't to giue,
               A strict account by whom and how they liue.
               Thus haue I brought to light as wel's I can,
               Some of the Vanities I'ue seene in man.
               But I do feare in taking so much paine,
               
                  I haue but showne my selfe to be most vaine;
               Because I haue spent time, and reprehended
               That which will ne're the sooner be amended,
               But yet there's hope it may, and therefore I
               Will say thus much more; that this Vanity
               
               Consisteth not alone in words and workes,
               
               It hath tane root within, and also lurkes
               About the heart; and if it there be sought,
               I know it also may be found in thought,
               
               And that it is makes one man sit and plot,
               What is by traffick with Virginea got.
               What it may cost to furnish him a fleet,
               That shall with all the Spainish Nauy meete,
               Or how he may by Art or practise find
               A nearer passage to the Easterne Inde.
               
               When as perhaps (poore foole) besides his coate,
               He is, not worth a Portsmouth passage boate,
               Nor neuer meanes to trauell so much sea,
               
               As from High-ferry to South-hamp on-key.
               
               Another wood-cocke is as fondly vayne,
               And to no purpose doth molest his braine,
               
                  
To study if he were a Nobleman,
               
               What kind of carriage would befit him than:
               How, and in what set wordes he would complaine,
               Of the abuses that he now sees raigne:
               Where he would make his place of residence,
               How he would keep his house with Prouidence,
               And yet what plenty daily at his dore,
               Should be distributed vnto the poore,
               What certaine Sheepe, and Oxen should be slaine,
               And what prouision weekly to maintaine
               His Lordly port; How many seruing-men,
               
               He meant to keep, and peraduenture then,
               What pleasure he will haue, as haukes and hounds,
               What game he wil preserue about his grownds:
               Or else he falls to cast what profits cleare,
               His giftes and bribes wil come to in a yeare.
               How hee'le put off his hat, cause people than
               Shall say he is a courteous Noble-man.
               
               Then vpon this againe he falls to plot,
               How when that he the peoples loue had' got,
               If that the King and all his kindred dye,
               And if none may be found for to supply
               That Regall office, the respect they beare him,
               Vnto that Princely dignity may reare him:
               Then too his thoughtes, on that estate so feed,
               That he forgets quite what he is indeed,
               And if a man could hit so iust a time,
               To come vpon him when his thoughts in Prime:
               
               And giue him vnawares a sodaine knock;
               Conceit his vnderstanding so would lock,
               
                  
That I suppose because it stands with reason,
               He would go neere hand for to call out, Treason:
               
               For oftentimes mens hearts are so anoyd,
               VVith those vaine thoughts whereon they are imploid,
               That for a time they so forgetfull grow,
               Nor what they are, nor where, they do not know,
               But now since you may see there doth remaine,
               Nothing in man but is in some sort vaine;
               
               And since I must be driuen to confesse,
               His vanities are great and number-lesse,
               I'le go no farther in this large Suruey,
               
               For feare Discourse should carry me away;
               And peraduenture so I may become,
               Lesse pleasing, and more tedious to some;
               VVhich to auoyd, though I no end espy,
               Yet heare I end to treat of Vanity.
               
            
            
               OF IN CONSTANCY.
               SATYR. 2.
               YEt theres another property in men,
               That meanes to set my Muse to work agen,
               
                  In constancy, and that no other is,
               Vnlesse I vnderstand the same amisse,
               
                  
But an vnsetled humor of the mind,
               Which so vnstable is it cannot find
               By any study that Opinion,
               Of which it dares to be resolued on.
               'Tis meere Irresolution and Estranging
               
               For what is purpos'd by a fickle changing.
               But since this vice I meane for to detect,
               
                  Women I know will earnestly expect
               To be sore raild'on, but Ile gently vse them,
               Because I see their consciences accuse them,
               And notwithstanding they deserue much blame,
               Yet Ile not tax them by their proper name,
               
               So they will think I also meane them, when
               I vse no more, but this bare name of Men:
               
               And though their faults I seeme not to vpbraid,
               Cause nothing of them is directly said;
               Yet they, I hope wil nere the more disdaine,
               To be thought fickle, proud, and weak and vaine.
               
               But now for men; whereas I did complaine,
               He both in Dee
                        •
                     
                   and Word, and Thought was vain
                     ••
                  
               
               So I in this (I see) the like may doo,
               Since he in all these is inconstant to.
               And first it is a wonder for to see
               His actions how mutable they be;
               He labour's now, and's altogether set
               Vpon the world how he wealth may get,
               Vpon a sodaine; then he thinkes to mend it,
               Hee's in a humor then he meanes to spend it:
               Somtime he is consenting with the Diuell,
               
               And ready to do any act that's euill.
               
                  
The which, perhaps, repenting, some diuine
               Or heauenly matter doth his thoughtes refine.
               So that he is resolu'd to spend that day,
               In reading what Gods holy Prophets say;
               Whlch in his mind it may be worketh so,
               He leaues it, and wil to a Sermon goe;
               Where by the way a Bill he doth espy,
               Which showes there's acted some new Comedy
               
               Then thither he is full and wholly bent,
               There's nothing that shall hinder his intent,
               But ere he to the Theater can come,
               He heares perhaps the sounding of a Drum:
               
               Thereat he leaues both Stage-play and Deuotion,
               
               And wil forsooth go see some idle motion;
               Ere he gets in his rouling wandring eyes,
               Beholds some Fencer prest to play his prize.
               Faith then there is no remedy hee'le see 't;
               But e're he can get halfe-way o're the street
               Some very neere acquaintance doth salute him,
               Who for a miser would perhaps repute him,
               Vnlesse he kndly offer to bestow
               The wine or beere at least, before he goe?
               VVell then he will; but while they do deuise,
               What wine to haue, perhaps they heare the cryes,
               And howling which the eager Mastiffes make,
               VVhen they behold a Bull or Beare at stake.
               Oh, on a sodaine then they will be gone,
               Thei'le see that first and come and drinke anon,
               But iust as he out of the T
                        ••
                     ern
                        •
                     
                   peepes,
               Some gallant Lasse along before him sweepes:
               
                  
VVhose youthfull brow adorn'd with beauty trim
               And louely-making doth so rauish him,
               As if that he were bound for to attend,
               He leaues Play, Fencer, VVine, Bull, Dogs, and Friend.
               By which we see his mind doth alwayes vary,
               And seldome constant on one subiect tary.
               But stil that thing with most desire is sought,
               VVhich happens for to be the last in thought.
               
               One while he likes best of the Country sport,
               
               Anon prefers the pleasure of the Court.
               
               Another while his mind is all in Spaine,
               
               Then beyond Nilus, and straight heere againe.
               Now he thinkes highly of a single life,
               
               And hateth Marriage as full of strife:
               And yet e'ne in the turning of a hand,
               Hee's glad to make a Ioynture of his land,
               And woo with much intreaty to obtaine,
               A wife which he did but of late disdaine.
               One while he zealously professeth Christ,
               
               But shortly he becomes an Athe-ist,
               
               In Turkey he will Mahomet adore,
               Among the cursed Pagans can implore
               A Carued stone; In Rome he hath profest
               The worship of that Antichristian Beast;
               And yet in England heere with vs he grants
               No sound Religion but the Protestants.
               
               And not alone according to the place,
               Can these Camelions alter thus their case;
               But for a shift themselues they doe apply,
               To answere both the Time and Company.
               
               
                  
                  Gallants shall find them Formall, young men Wild▪
               
               Plaine men shall think them Simple, old men Mild.
               And for the time with Edward they wil be,
               (Ile warrant) Protestants, as wel as he.
               And when his Sister Mary comes to Raigne,
               They can be Papists easily againe.
               Nay I do feare me though we haue had teaching,
               And almost threescore years the Gospels preaching
               Vnconstant mankind is so prone to ill,
               (And to be changing hath so good a will)
               Too many both of old men and of youth,
               Might soone be drawne for to forsake the truth.
               Let vs but note, and 'twill be strange to see.
               What contradictions in our actions be.
               Sometime the same we do with Trophees raise,
               That we did but a while before dispraise:
               Nor can we alway in one passion keepe,
               But often for one thing reioyce and weepe.
               
               Is't not a signe of humane ficklenesse,
               And a true note of our vnsetlednesse,
               When not alone some one, or two, or few,
               But a great number, a selected Crew,
               Pickt out of all estates, and they the wisest,
               The vnderstandingst, yea and the precisest
               Of a whole Empire, and when these (I say)
               Haue argu'd pro & con, from day to day,
               From week to week to haue (perhaps) enacted,
               One Law or Statute, yet when al's compacted,
               And euery thing seemes clearely done and ended
               Then to haue somthing in't to be amended?
               
                  
Yea and when this is done, and the Records,
               
               Fram'd in their plain'st and most effectuall words,
               T' expresse their meaning, and they thinke it plaine▪
               
               Yet at next reading 'tis dislik't againe.
               This yeare they make a Law, repeal 't the next,
               Then re-inact 
                     •
                  t, and then change the text;
               Either by taking from, or adding to,
               And so they haue an endlesse work to do.
               But some may tel me that thus stands the case,
               They must haue both respect to time and place
               
               And that no Law deuis'd by humane wit,
               Can be for euery place and season fit:
               All which I yeeld for truth indeed; but then,
               We must confess't a misery in men,
               That he (Camelion-like) must haue a mind,
               With euery obiect vnto change inclin'd.
               I might speake of the ficklenesse I see,
               In mens External fortunes for to be:
               For this day he hath friends, to morrow none,
               Now he hath wealth, and in an hower 'tis gone,
               Some in their youth there be haue all things store,
               And yet do often liue til they are poore.
               Again, there's some in youth at begger States;
               Become in age for to be Potentates.
               Some are of Kings made slaues, and Kings againe,
               Whilst other with the contrary complaine,
               For poore Eumenes of a Potters sonn,
               By fickle fortunes help a Kingdome wonne;
               But for him such a dyet did prouide,
               That shortly after he of hunger dy'd.
               
                  
I many such examples might inferre,
               But that would wast more time and make me erre
               From my intent, who purpose to relate,
               The ficklenes of man, not his estate.
               Moreouer, hee's a Creature knowes not how,
               To do an act which he shall long allow,
               Or think of wel himselfe; he cannot tell,
               VVhat he would haue, nor what he would not, wel.
               For peraduenture he is now content,
               To do what he wil in an hower repent,
               He does, and vndoes what he did before,
               Is discontented, and with no man more
               Then with himselfe; In word hee's fickle to,
               For he wil promise what hee'le neuer do.
               If that he tels me he wil be in Pauls,
               
               I'le go looke for him in the Temple-hals,
               
               For soonest to that place resort doth he,
               VVhereas he saies or sweares he wil not be.
               Oh! had there beene in wordes a constant trust,
               I needed not to haue done as now I must.
               I should haue had no cause to haue bewail'd,
               That which I once thought would haue neuerfaild
               But since 'tis thus, at nothing more I greeue,
               Then that vnconstant wordes made me beleeue,
               Were promises worth trust, what needed than,
               Such written contracts betweene Man and Man?
               
               And wherefore should they make so much ado,
               To haue both hands and seales to witnes too?
               
               Vnlesse it be for proofes to make it plaine,
               Their wordes are both inconstant, false, and vaine.
               
               
                  
To morrow he wil earnestly gaine-say.
               What stoutly is affirm'd by him to day:
               Yea truely hee 's so wauering and vniust,
               That scarce a word of his deserueth trust.
               But as a creature of all good forlorne,
               Sweares what's deni'd, and straight denyes what's sworne
               That I suppose, in troth and do not mock,
               Hee 's flt for nothing but a weather-cock.
               
               Then that same thought that's likeliest to remaine,
               Another thats vnlike puts out againe.
               For Appetite, not reason, guides him still,
               Which makes him so inconstant in his VVill.
               
               Had he a sute at first but made of leather,
               
               And cloathes enough to keepe away the weather
               'Twere all his wish; wel so let vs grant,
               And ten to one he somthing else will want.
               But sweares that he for more would neuer care,
               Then to be able to haue cloth to weare,
               Which if he get, then would he very faine,
               Reach to haue silkes, for cloth he faith is plaine,
               And so his wishes seldome would haue stay,
               Vntill that he hath wisht for all he may.
               But though from this infirmity there's no man,
               That I can well except it is so common,
               Yet surely I most properly may cal't
               Or tearm't to be the common peoples fault;
               Think not I wrong them, for if it may not be,
               A fault for to digresse, you soone should see
               Their nature and condition; for I hate it:
               And now I think vpon 't I wil relate it.
               
                  
Tax me who list (I care not) heere Ile breake,
               My course a while, I may not chuse but speake,
               Somthing, I say my Muse of them must tell,
               She cannot beare it any farther well.
               And yet expect not all, for I'le but shew,
               Of many hundred thousand faults, a few.
               
                  And to be breefe: The Vulg
                     •
                  r are a rude,
               A strange inconstant hare-braind multitude:
               Borne too and fro with euery idle passion,
               Or by opinion led beside all fashion,
               They stil desire newes, and to a song,
               Or a bald Tale thei'l listen all day long.
               Soone weary of a good thing, and they try,
               To al reports how they may adde a lye;
               Like that of Scoggins crowes: and with them stil,
               
                  Custome hath borne most sway and euer will:
               And good or bad, what their forefathers did,
               Thei'l put in prastise to, (else God for bid)
               They are seditious and much giuen to range,
               In their opinions, and desiring change,
               For if their Country be turmoyld with warre,
               They thinke that peace is more commodious farre,
               If they be quiet they would very faine,
               Begin to set the warres abroach againe;
               I wel remember when an Irish presse,
               Had made a parish but a man the lesse,
               Lord what a hurly burly there was than!
               These warrs (say they) hathe cost vs many a man,
               The Countrey is impouerisht by 't and we,
               Rob'd of our Husbands and our Children be,
               
                  
With many lamentations: But now peace,
               Hath made 
                     
                        ••
                     ellonaes anger for to cease,
               Their euer discontented natures grutch,
               And thinke this happy peace we haue too much,
               Yea and their wisdomes beare vs now in hand,
               That it is warres that doth enrich the Land:
               But what are these? not men of any merit,
               That speak it from a bold and daring spirit,
               But lightly some faint-hearted brauing momes,
               That rather had be hang'd at their owne 
                     •
                  omes,
               Then for their Countries welfare for to stay,
               The brunt of one pitcht battell but a day,
               Of such as would distract with feare become,
               To heare the thundring of a martiall drum.
               They cannot keep a meane, a naughty crime,
               Nor neuer are contented with the time.
               But better like the state they haue been in,
               Although the present hath the better bin,
               E'ne as the Iewes, that loathing Manna, faine
               Would be in Egypt at their flesh again,
               Though they were there in bondage; so do these,
               VVish for the world as in Queene Maries dayes;
               VVith all the blindnes and the trumpery,
               That was expeld the land with Popery;
               VVhy? thinges were cheap, and twas a goodly m
                     •
                  ny.
               VVen we had foure and twenty agges a penny.
               But sure they ate them stale for want of wit,
               And that hath made them adle-headed yet.
               Then this (moreouer) I haue in them seene,
               They alwaies to the good haue enuious beene,
               
                  
Mild men they reckon fooles and do vphold,
               Him to be valiant that is ouer-bold:
               When he with wisemen is and euer was.
               Counted no better then a desperate Asse.
               He that doth trust vnto their loue, shall find
               Tis more vnconstant then the wauering wind,
               Which since my time a man that many knew,
               Relying on it: at his death found true.
               Then they haue oft vnthank fully withstood,
               Those that haue laboure▪ for the common good.
               And being basely minded euermore,
               Seeke lesse the publick then the priuate store.
               Moreouer such a Prince as yet was neuer,
               Of whom the People could speake well of euer,
               Nor can a man a gouernment inuent them,
               How good soeuer that shall long content them.
               Their honesty as I do plainely find
               Is not the disposition of their mind:
               But they are forc't vnto the same through feare,
               As in those villaines it may wel appeare.
               Who hauing found so vile vngodly cause,
               If there be any meanes to wrest the Lawes,
               By tricks or shifts to make the matter goe
               As they would haue it, all is well enow:
               Although the wrong and 
                     〈◊〉
                   they proffer,
               Be to apparent for a Iew to offer.
               They know not Iustice, and oft causles hate,
               Or where their should not are compassionate,
               
               As at an execution I hau
                     •
                   seene,
               Where Malefactors haue rewarded beene,
               
                  
According to desert; before they know,
               If he accused, gui
                     •
                  ty be or no.
               They on report, this hastie censure giue;
               He is a villaine and vnfit to liue:
               But when he is once arraign'd and found
               Guilty by Law; and heauily led bound
               Vnto the Scaffold, then they doe relent,
               And pi
                     •
                  ty his deserued punishment.
               Those that wil now braue gallant men be deem'd▪
               
               And with the Common people be esteem'd,
               Let them turne hack-sters as they walke the street,
               Quarrell, and fight with euery one they meet;
               Learne a welsh Song to scoffe the Brittish bloud
               
               Or breake a iest on Scotsmen, that's as good,
               Or if they would that fooles should much admire them,
               They should be Iugglers if I might desire them:
               But if they want such feates for to be glorious
               Make Ballets and they shall become not orious,
               
               Yet this is nothing if they looke for fame,
               And meane to haue an euerlasting name.
               Amongst the Vulgar let them seeke for gaine
               With Ward the Pirat on the boisterous Maine,
               
               Or else well mounted keepe themselues on land,
               And bid our wealthy trauellers to stand,
               Emptying their full cram'd bags; for that's a tricke
               VVhich somtimes wan renoune to cutting Dicke.
               
               But some may tell me, though that such,
               It doth not goe against their conscience much:
               And though there's boldnes showne in such a case,
               Yet to be Tost at Tyburns a disgrace,
               
                  
No, 'tis their credit, for the people then,
               Wil say, 'tis pitty they we e
                        •
                     proper men.
               
               With many such like humors base and naught,
               I do perceiue the common people fraught,
               Then by th'opinion of some it seemes,
               How much the Vulgar sort of men esteems
               O 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   or learning: Certaine neighbouring swaines,
               
               (That think none wise-men but whose wisdome games;
               Where knowledge be it morall or diuine
               Is valued as an Orient-pearle with swine
               Meeting me in an euening in my walke,
               Being gone past me, thus began their talke.
               First an old Chuff, whose roofe, I dare be bould,
               Hath bacon hang's in't aboue fiue yeares old.
               Said: That's his sonne that
                     •
                  s owner of the grounds
               That on this pleasant beechs mountaines bounds,
               D'ye marke me ne ghbors? This sa
                     •
                  e yong mans vather
               Had a bin my zunne chud a hangd him rather
               Assoone as he perze
                     •
                  u'd the little voole,
               Could creepe about the house, putten to schoole,
               Whither he we t
                     •
                  not now and then a 
                     •
                  purt,
               As't had beene good to keep him from the durt;
               Nor yet at leasure tim s, (thats my zunnes stint)
               Vor then 
                     〈◊〉
                   deed there had beene reason in'te
               B
                     •
                  t vor continuance and beyond all zesse
               A held him too't sixe dayes a weeke no lesse
               That by S. Anne ie was a great presumption
               It brought him no
                     •
                   his end with a Consvmption:
               
               And then besides he was not so content,
               To putten there where as our childers went:
               
                  
To learne the Horne booke, and the Abcee through,
               No that he thought not learning halfe enough,
               But he must seeke the Country all about,
               Where he might find a better Teacher out.
               And then he buies him (now a pips befall it)
               
               A vlapp
                     •
                  ng booke, I know not what they call it,
               Tis latine 
                     •
                  ll, thus it begins; In speech,
               
               And hat's in English, boy, beware your breech,
               
               One day my Dicke a leafe ont with him brought,
               Which he out of his fellowes booke had ra
                     •
                  g 
                     •
                  t,
               And to h
                     •
                   s Mother and my selfe did read it,
               But we indeed did so extreamely dread it,
               We gaue him charge no more thereon to looke,
               Vor veare it had bin of a coniuring booke,
               
               If that you thinke I iest goe as ke my wife,
               If ere she heard such 
                     •
                  ibberish in her life,
               But when he yonn had cond the same by heart,
               And of a meny moethe better part;
               He went to Oxford, where he did remaine,
               Some certaine yeares, whence hee's returnd againe,
               Now who can tell (it in my stomack stickes)
               And I doe veare he has some Oxford tricks.
               But if it be zo: would he had ne
                     •
                  e come hether,
               Vor we shall still be sure of blustring weather.
               To what end comes his paine and vathers cost?
               Th' one's charges, and the tothers labour lost;
               I warrant he so long a learning went,
               That he almost a brothers portion spent:
               And now it nought auailes him: by this holly,
               I thinke all learning in the world a folly,
               
                  
And them I take to be the veriest vooles,
               That all their life time doe frequent the schooles,
               Goe aske him now and see if all his wits,
               Can tell you when a barly season hits.
               
               When Meddowes must be left to spring, when mowne,
               When Wheate, or tares, or rye, or pease be sowne.
               He knows it not, nor when tis meet to fold,
               
               How to manure the ground that's wet or cold:
               
               
                  What Lands are fit for Pasture, what for corne,
               Or how to hearten what is ouer-worne.
               Nay; he scarce knowes a Gelding from a Mare,
               
               A Barrow from a Sow, nor tak she care
               Of such like things as these; be knowes not whether,
               There be a difference twixt the Ewe and Weather,
               
               Can he resolue you? (No nor many more)
               If Cowes doe want their vpper teeth before;
               Nay I durst pawne a groat he cannot tell,
               How many legges a Sheepe hath very well,
               Is't not a wise man thinke yee? By the Masse,
               
               Cham glad at heart my zunnes not zuch an Asse,
               
               Why he can tell already all this geare,
               As well almost as any of vs heare.
               And neighbors: yet I'le tell you more; my Dicke,
               
               Hath very pretty skill in Arsemetricke.
               
               Can cast accouts, writes his name, & Dunces daughter,
               Taught him to spell the hardest words it'h zauter.
               
               And yet the Boy Ile warrant yee knowes how,
               As well as you or I, to hold the Plow,
               
               And this I noted in the vrchin euer,
               Bid him to take a Booke he had as lether,
               
                  
All day haue drawne a Harrow; truth is so,
               
                  I likt it wel although I made no shew
               Vor to my comfort I did plainly see,
               That he heoreaster would not bookish bee,
               Then when that hauing nought at home to do,
               I sometime forct him to the schoole to goe,
               You would haue greeud in heart to heare him whine,
               And then how glad he was to keep the swine,
               
                  I yet remember; and what tricks the Mome,
               Would haue inuented for to stay at home
               You would haue wondred; But 'tis such another,
               A has a wit in all the world likes Mother;
               
               Yet once a month, although it greeues vs than,
               H'ele looke you in a books do what we can;
               That Mother, Sister, brother all we foure,
               
               Can scarce perswade him from't in halfe an howre,
               But oft I thinke he does it more of spight,
               To anger vs then any true delight.
               Vor why? his Mother thinks as others do,
               And I am halfe of that opinion too.
               Although a little learning be not bad,
               Those that are bookish are the so 
                     •
                  nest mad.
               And therefore since much wit makes vooles of many,
               Chil take an order mine shall ne're haue any.
               
                  Byr Lady your the wiser (quoth the rest)
               The course you take in our conceit's the best,
               Your Lonne may liue in any place ith land,
               By his industrious and laborious hand,
               Whilst he (but that his parents are his stay)
               Hath not the meane, to keepe him selfe a day,
               
                  
His study to our sight no pleasure giues,
               Nor me
                     ••
                  es, nor profit, and thereby he liues
               So little thing the better, none needt doubt it,
               He might haue been a happier man without it.
               For though he now 
                     〈◊〉
                   speake a little better,
               It is not words you know will free the debter.
               Thus so ne whose speeches shew wel what they be,
               For want of matter fell to talke of me.
               Of whom, though somthing they haue said be true
               Yet since insteed of giuing Act her due,
               They haue disgrast it; Notwithstanding I,
               Haue not the knowledge that these Dol
                        •
                     s enuy,
               Or can so much without incurring blame,
               As take vnto my selfe a Schollers name.
               Yet now my reputation for to saue,
               Since I must make account of that I haue,
               Ile let you know though they so lightly deeme it,
               What gaine's in knowledge, and how I esteeme it,
               As often as I call to minde the blisse,
               That in my little Knowledge heaped is.
               The many comforts, of all which the least,
               More ioyes my heart then can be well exprest.
               How happy then thinke I are they whose soules
               More wisdome by a thousand parts in rowles;
               Whose vnderstanding-hearts are so diuine
               They can perceiue a m
                        •
                     ll
                        •
                     ou more then mine,
               Such haue content indeed: And who that's man
               
               And should know reason is so sencelesse than
               To spurne at Knowledg
                        •
                     , Art, or Learning; when
               That onely showes they are the race of men?
               
               
                  
And what may I then of those Peasants deeme,
               The which of wisdome make so small esteeme?
               But that indeed such blockish sencelesse logges,
               
               Sprang from those clownes Latona turn'd to frogs;
               
               Alas, suppose they nothing can be got
               By precious stones, cause swine esteeme them not?
               Ot do they thinke, because they cannot vse it,
               That those which may haue Knowledge wil refuse it?
               Well, if their shallow coxcombs can containe
               A reason when Its told them, I'le explaine,
               How that same little Knowledge I haue got,
               Much pleasures me, though they perceiue it not:
               For first thereby (though none can here attaine
               For to renew their first estate againe)
               Apart reuiues (although it be but small)
               Of that I lost by my first fathers fall.
               And makes me man, which was before (at least)
               As haplesse, if not more, then is the beast
               
               That reason wants; for his condition still,
               Remaines according to his Makers will.
               They neuer dreame of that, and then by this,
               I find what godly, and what euill is;
               That knowing both, I may the best ensue,
               Aud as I ought the worser part eschew,
               Then I haue learn't to count that drosse but vaine,
               For which such Bores consume themselues with Paine:
               I can endure discontentments, crosses,
               Be Iouia
                        •
                     l in want, and smile at losses:
               Keep vnder Passions, stop those insurrections,
               Rais'd in my Microcosmus by affections.
               
                  
Be nothing greeued for aduersitie,
               
               Nor nere the prouder for prosperitie.
               
               How to respect my friend I partly know,
               And in like manner how to vse my foe.
               
               I can see others lay their soules to pawne,
               Looke vpon Great-men, and yet scorne to fawne.
               Am still content, & dare whilst God giues grace,
               E'ne looke my grimmest fortunes in the face.
               I feare mens censures as the char-coale sparks,
               Or as I doe a toothlesse dog that barks;
               Th'one frights children, 'other threats to burne,
               But sparks will die, and brawling curs returne.
               Yea I haue learn't that still my care shall be,
               A rush for him, that cares a straw for me.
               Now what would men haue more? are these no pleasures?
               Or do they not deserue the name of treasures?
               Sure yes; and he that hath good learning store,
               Shall finde these in't besides a thousand more.
               O
                     •
                   but our Chuffs thinke these delights but course,
               If we compare them to their Hobby-horse:
               
               And they beleeue not any pleasure can,
               Make them so merry as Maid-marian.
               
               Not is the Lawyer prouder of his fee▪
               
               Then these will of a Cuckooe Lordship bee.
               Though their sweet Ladies make them father that,
               Some other at their VVhitson ales begat;
               But he whose carriage is of so good note,
               To be thought worthy of their Lords fooles coate.
               
               That's a great credit, for because that he,
               Is euer thought the wisest man to be.
               
                  
But as there's vertue where the Diuil's precisest,
               So ther's much knowledge where a fool's the wisest,
               But what meane I? let earth content these moles,
               And their high'st pleasure be their summer-poles,
               
               About the which I leaue them for to dance,
               And much good do't them with their ignorance.
               
               So this I hope will serue for to declare,
               How rude these vulgar sort of people are.
               But herevpon there's some may question make,
               VVhether I onely for the Vulgar take,
               Such men as these; To whom I answer, no,
               For let them hereby vnderstand and know,
               I doe not meane these meaner sort alone,
               
                  Tradesmen or Labourers; but euery one,
               Be he Esquire, Knight, Baron, Earle or more,
               Yet if he haue not learn'd of Vertues lore,
               But followes Vulgar Passions; then e'ne he,
               Amongst the Vulgar shall for one man be.
               And the poore Groome, that he thinks should adore him,
               Shall for his Vertue be preferd before him.
               For though the world doth such men much despise,
               They seeme most noble in a wise-mans eyes.
               And notwithstanding some doe noblest deeme,
               Such as are sprung of great and high esteeme,
               And those to whom the Country doth affoord
               The title of a Marquis or a Lord,
               
               Though 'twere atchiued by their fathers merits,
               And themselues men but of dunghill spirits;
               
                  Cowards or fooles; (And such as euer be
               Prating or boasting of their Pedigree)
               
                  
When they are nothing but a blot or shame,
               Vnto the noble house from whence they came.
               Yet these (I say) vnlesse that they haue wit,
               To guide the Common-wealth, as it is fit
               They should; And as their good fore-fathers did,
               How ere their faults may seeme by Greatness hid,
               They shall appeare; And the poore Yeomans sonne,
               Whose proper vertue hath true honour won,
               Be plac't aboue him: But Nobilitie
               
               That comes by birth hath most antiquitie
               Some thinke; and tother (if at all
               They yeeld as noble) they an vpstart call,
               But I say rather no, his Noblenesse
               
               That's rais'd by Vertue hath most worthinesse.
               
               And is most ancient, for it is the same,
               By which all Great men first obtaind their Fame;
               
               So then I hope 'twill not offend the Court,
               
               That I count some there with the Vulgar sort,
               
               And outset others; yet some thinke me bold,
               Because there's few that these opinions hold.
               But shall I care what others thinke or say?
               There is a path besides the beaten way;
               Yea and a safer, for heere's Christs Instruction,
               
               The broadest way leads soonest to Destruction.
               
               And truely no opinions deceiue,
               Sooner then those the Vulgar sort receiue,
               And therefore he that would indeed be wise,
               Must learne their rude conditions to despise,
               And shun their presence; for we haue bin taught,
               Diseases in a presse are quickly caught.
               
                  
Now Satyr leaue them till another time,
               And spare to scourge the Vulgar with thy rime,
               If any thinke thou hast digrest too long,
               They may passe ouer this, and doe no wrong.
               But in my former matter to proceed,
               Who, being mans Race is so much freed
               From ficklenes, that he is sure to finde
               Himselfe to morrow, in that very minde
               Hee's in to day? though he not onely know
               No reason wherefore he should not be so,
               But also though he plainly do perceiue
               Much cause he should not that opinion leaue:
               May no man do it? who then iustly can
               Be forced to rely, or trust in Man
               
               Whose thoughts are changing, and so oft amisse,
               That by himselfe, himselfe deceiued is?
               Who is so sottish as to build Saluation
               On such a feeble tottering foundation
               As Man? who is't that hauing a respect,
               To his soules safety, will so much neglect
               That precious assurance, as to lay
               His confidence on that false peece of clay,
               Which being fickle, merits farre lesse trust,
               
               Then letters written in the sand, or dust?
               
               Do they not see those they haue soundest deem'd,
               And for their constants writers still esteem'd,
               All wauering in assertions? yea but looke,
               And you shall finde in one, and the same booke
               Such contradiction in Opinion,
               
               As shewes their thoughts are scarce at Vnion.
               
               
                  
Where finde you him that dares be absolute,
               Or alwaies in his sayings resolute?
               Ther's none; I by my owne experience speake,
               I haue a feeling that we men are weake,
               
               Whereon much musing, makes me inly mourne,
               And grieue at heart, that I a man was borne.
               (Yet herevpon I do desire that no man,
               VVould gather that I long to be a woman,)
               Alas! how often had I good Intendments
               And with my whole heart vow'd and sworn amendments
               Yea purpos'd that, wherein I once thought, neuer
               
                  Vnconstancy should let me to perseuer?
               And yet for all my purpose and my vow,
               I am oft alter'd ere my selfe knowes how:
               But therefore since it is not I alone,
               Or any certaine number that is knowne,
               To be vn-stable; but e'ne all that be;
               Since none (I say) is from this frailty free,
               Let vs confesse it all, and all implore
               Our nere repenting God; that euermore
               
               
                  Remaines the same, we may be (as we ought)
               More certaine both in Word, and Deed, & Thought
               
               That he will keep vs from Inconstancy,
               
               Yea from all damned, lewd Apostasie;
               
               But howsoeuer our affections change,
               And we in slight opinions hap to range:
               Yet, pray his Truth in vs be so ingraued,
               Continuing to the end we may be saued.
            
            
               
               OF WEAKNES.
               SATYR. 3.
               BVt oh looke here; for I haue surely found
               The Maine chiefe Root, the very spring and Ground.
               Of our Inconstancy. It is not Chance
               
               That so dis-ables our perseuerance:
               But a base Weaknesse, which to terme aright,
               Is meerely a priuat
                     •
                   on of that might,
               Or a detraction from that little power
               Which should be in those limbs and minds of our:
               We boast of strength; but tell me, can our daies
               Affoord a Milo, or a Hercules?
               
               Can all the world, (and that is large enough)
               A match for Hector or Achilles show:
               Haue we a Champion strong enough to weild
               This Buckler? or Sir Aiax seauen-fold-Shield?
               I thinke we haue not: (but I durst so grant,
               There be some liuing shall with Aiax vaunt.)
               Nay, now in these daies it is doubted much,
               VVhether that any former age had such
               As these fore-named; but indeed our faith
               Binds vs to credit, that as Scripture saith
               There was a Samson, who could fright whole hosts,
               And rent downe Azaths barred gates and posts,
               Whose mighty Arms vnarm'd could bring to passe,
               E'ne with the rotten iaw bone of an Asse,
               
                  
A thousands ruine▪ and yet 'twill be long,
               Er'e he shall thereby proue that Ma
                        •
                     
                   is strong.
               For first, the strength he seem'd to haue, was known,
               To be the Spirit of God, and not his owne.
               And then his proper weaknesse did appeare,
               When after his braue actiheihad wel-neare,
               Been dead for thirst; whereas if he in spight
               Of Nature had been able by his might,
               Out of this little Stony-rocke to wring,
               To quench his present thirst, some flowing Spring,
               As did a Stronger one: or if his power
               Could haue compel'd the melting clouds to shower
               For present need, such plenteous drops of raine,
               He might haue had no cause for to complaine,
               Or craue more aid. Sure then we might at length,
               Be brought for to beleeue that Men had strength;
               But ne're till then. Hee's mighty that can make
               The Heaueus, Earth, & Hell with's breath to shake.
               That in his spheare the Suns swift course can stop,
               And Atlas with his burthen vnder-prop.
               He that with ease his massy globe can rowle,
               And wrap vp Heauen like a parchment scrowle;
               He that fot no disease or paine will droop,
               Nor vnto any plague infernall stoop.
               He that can Meat, and Drinke, and sleepe refraine,
               Or hath the power to dye, and rise again
                        •
                     ,
               
               Hee's strong indeed; but he that can but teare,
               Or rent in two a Lyon, or a Beare,
               
               Or doe some such like act, and then goe lye
               Himselfe ore-come by some infirmitte,
               
               
                  
How ere with vants he seemes his deedes to grace,
               He is both miserable, weak, and base,
               
               What Creature is there borne so weake as Man,
               
               And so vn-able? tel me, he that can.
               Or if that they could number'd be by any,
               Count his disease and what hath so many?
               Or else what creature is there if he be
               In bone and flesh of the same quantity,
               So fraile as Man? or that can worse sustaine.
               
                  Hunger or thirst or cold or heat or paine?
               
               Sure none; and yet in Histories we find,
               Til Luxury hath weakened thus mankind,
               They weare much stronger; could indure the heat,
               
               Trauel a long time without Drink or meat,
               
               And their best dainty was no costlier thing
               Then a wild-root or water from the Spring.
               
               With which small Commons Nature was content:
               Yea in our Climate people naked went;
               And yet no question felt as little cold,
               
                  As we wrapt vp in halfe a dozen fold
               They had no wast-coats, night-caps for their heads,
               Nor downy pillowes nor soft feather-beds
               They scorn'd as much to haue such thinges about thē
               
               As we in this Age sc
                        •
                     rne to be without them.
               Their heads some stone bare vp their brawny sides,
               VVith ease the hardnes of the earth abides.
               
                  Gluttonous fare that so the pallat pleases,
               Nere fild their bodies full of foule diseases
               Nor any pleasing liquors with excesse,
               Made them grow weak through beastly drunkennes.
               
               
                  
No lust-prouoking meats made them vnchaste.
               Nor vnto carnall copula
                        •
                     ton haste,
               For I am in the minde they ne're requir'd it,
               Till Nature come to herfull strength, desir'd it,
               And that it is alone which made them be
               More stout, more strong, and brauer men then we.
               It was a noble care in them indeed; but how
               Are we become such Dwarfes and Pigmies now?
               How are our limbs so weake and feeble growne?
               I thinke I need not tell it, 'tis well knowne,
               
                  Nice tender breeding, which we well might spare,
               
                  Much drunkennes and our luxurious fare:
               
               Which ads not strength, as some doe vainely say
               But rather takes both strength, and health away.
               Yet chiefely this same imbecility,
               
               Comes by too soone and frequent venery.
               
               A beardlesse Boy now cannot keep his bed,
               Vnlesse that he be of his Night-geere sped,
               And many Giglets I haue married seene,
               Ere they (forsooth) could reach eleuenteene.
               
               Nay 'tis no wonder we are growne so weake,
               For now the'r matching brats ere they can speake;
               And though we yet say that the men are stronger,
               Yet he (I thinke) that liues but so much longer,
               The reuolution of an age to see,
               VVill say that men the weaker vessels be.
               But now our strength of body, which indeed,
               Deserues no more respect then doth a reed,
               Is not the strength of which I meant to speake,
               For we are yet another way too weake.
               
                  
Our minds haue lost their magnanimitie,
               And are so feebled through infirmitie;
               That either to be resolute we care not,
               Or else because of some base feare we dare not,
               Where can we finde almost a man so hardy,
               Who through his weakenesse is not somtime tardy,
               To speake the truth? or to declare his minde?
               Though he doe many iust occasions finde.
               He'le wink at's friends offence, and passe it blindly,
               Least (peraduenture) he should tak't vnkindly.
               And if it be a Great man that offends,
               Shew me but him that boldly reprehends,
               And i'le admire him; Nay wee'l rather now
               Bend our endeuour and our study how
               To sooth and fawne; or to their lewdnes tell,
               That all they doe (be't nere so bad) is well.
               Their very looks and presence we so feare,
               As if that they some monstrous Cyclops were,
               Which makes them worse. But howsoe're they trust
               Vnto their might, I'le tell them (for I must)
               Although they threaten, and can slanders make
               Of iust reproofes, my heart shall neuer quake
               T'informe their Honors, thus'tis censur'd by men,
               If they be Great-ones, Tanto maius crimen;
               
               One knowes the Truth, but dares not to defend it,
               Because he heares another discommend it.
               Yea diuers follow Vertues wayes but coldly,
               Because they dare not doe a Good thing boldly
               And doe we not perceiue that many a man
               Fearing for to be 
                     •
                  earm'd a P
                        •
                     ritan,
               
               
                  
Simply neglects the meanes of his saluation,
               Though it be needfull, and worth commendation?
               Some cannot well endure this or that:
               Others distempred with I know not what
               Shew an exceeding frailty: Few can brooke
               With any patience, that men should looke
               Into their Actions; and though they should loue them,
               They rather hate them for't that doe reproue them.
               Is there a man so strong, that he forbeares
               
                  Choller or Fury, when by chance he heares,
               Himselfe reuil'd, reproched and disgrac'd?
               If there be such a one, he shall be plac'd
               Amongst the Worthie, with the formost three:
               For in my iudgement, none more wothy be
               To haue renowne for strength, then those that can,
               On their rebellious Passons play the man.
               This Weakenes I do also find in men,
               They know not their owne happinesse till then
               When they haue lost it: And they doe esteeme
               Men for their wealth, and them most blessed deeme
               That are most rich; supposing no man more
               Accursed or vnhappy, then the poore.
               Some basely doe comdemne each strange report
               To be vntrue, because it doth not sort
               With their weake reasons. Some againe will be,
               Astonished at euery nouelty.
               But too much wondring doth discover plaine
               Where ignorance and frailty both remaine.
               Is it not weakenesse when some petty losses,
               Some hindrance in preferment, or such crosses
               
                  
Shall make men greeue? is it no weakenesse when,
               
                  Aduersitie shall so disquiet men
               That they should not with patience sustaine,
               Or vndetgoe a little crosse and paine?
               Yes questionles it is; or were they strong,
               They would so arme themselues gainst greefe and wrong
               That no disastrous, or il hap shold fright them
               Though Fortune did the worst she can to spight them.
               Nor would they those, as the vnworthiest deeme,
               To whom dame Fortune doth most froward seeme;
               But rather such as all their life time be,
               In quiet state and from disturbance free.
               For 
                     •
                  he oft giues what their base longing craues,
               Because she scornes to vexe deiected flaues,
               I haue knowne braue men, braue at least in shew,
               (And in this age now that is braue enow)
               That in appearance for bold champions past
               And yet haue basely yeelded at the last.
               Besides there's many who thought scorne to droop,
               By Fortunes power haue been made to stoop,
               And with discredit shamefully left vndone,
               What they with honor at the first begun;
               And their weake hearts (which frailty I much hate)
               Deiected, haue growne base with their estate.
               VVhereas (me thinkes) the mind should neuer be,
               Subiect to Fortunes frownes not tyrany.
               But here through weaknes, some, offence may take
               That I of fortune should recitall make:
               For they by Fortune say theres nothing done,
               But all things are both ended and begunne,
               
                  
By Gods appointment. I confesse indeed,
               That he knowes all, and all hath fore-decreed:
               In the respect of whom I cannot say,
               Ought comes by chance; respecting vs I may.
               So they are answer'd; But how can men be,
               So ouer-borne with this infirmitie?
               As those who are in euery matter led,
               
                  By Parasites and Apes: where is their head?
               
               I meane their will, their reason, and their sence,
               What is become of their intelligence?
               How ist that they haue such a partiall care,
               They can iudge nothing true, but what they heare
               Come from the tongue of some sly sycophant.
               But for because they strength of iudgement want,
               Those that themselues to flatterers inure,
               I haue perceiued basely to endure
               For to be plainely soothed, mock't and flouted,
               Made coxcombs to their faces, yet not doubted
               That they were highly reuerenc't, respected,
               And by those fauning Parasites affected
               
               And why forsooth? they often heare them prate,
               In commendations of their happy state;
               Yes, and they tell them that they vertuous be,
               Wise, Courteous, strong, and beautifull to see,
               When if the eye of reason were not lockt
               They plainly might perceiue that they were mockt.
               For what ist else, when they are prais'd for many
               Goodly conditions, that had neuer any?
               This frailty also merits to be blam'd
               When fearefull of reproach we are asham'd,
               
                  
Our ignorance in those things to explaine,
               Wherin, twere fit more knowledge to attain
               'Tis weaknes also when a bargaines bought,
               For to dispraise the penniworth as nought,
               And tell what might haue beene, or fondly prate,
               Of Counsel, when he sees it is too late,
               Nor is it any lesse to seeke to stay,
               Him that we know doth hasten on his way,
               O
                     •
                   be importunate, for that which will▪
               
               Be nothing for our good, yet others ill:
               Also, to be affraid for to gainesay,
               What men doe know vnture, or to delay
               The right of any matter to declare,
               Because they feare they vnbeleeued are:
               For notwithstanding Truth doth oft bring blame,
               It may be freely spoken without shame
               
               Diuers more waies of which I needs must speake,
               Theres many men doe shew themselues but weake:
               
               In some but lately I obserued this,
               And must needs say their nature euill is;
               If friends to them haue any kindnes showne,
               Or entertainments willingly bestowne,
               That they confesse they are indebted for it,
               Yet such is their condition (I abhor it)
               If that those freinds do hap to take the paine,
               To come somtime and visit them againe,
               In meere good will, because these weake ones see
               They cannot then so well prouided be
               To bid them welcome as their loues require,
               (Though more then loue their loues did ne're desire)
               
                  
A foolish Shame so blinds them that they shall
               (For giuing them to much) haue naught at all;
               Yea for because they want excessiue fare,
               Or some such things for which their friends neere care,
               (Though by their will it other wise had beene)
               They neither will be knowne at home nor seene.
               VVhich doth not onely shew impiety,
               But hindereth loue, and barres society,
               Yet now the greatest weaknesse that I finde,
               To be in man, is ignorance of mind,
               It makes a poore man hee's scarse good for ought,
               If rich men haue it, they are worse then nought.
               For hauing riches store, and wanting might,
               Or strength of mind to vse the same aright,
               Tis arrogancies and ambitious fuell,
               
                  It makes them Couetuous, Inconstant, Cruell;
               Intemperate, Vniust and wonderous heady,
               Yea in their actionsrude, and so vnsteddy
               They cannot follow any sound direction,
               But are still carried with a wild affection,
               This is their nature: (it is quickly noted)
               If they to honour be by hap promoted
               Then they grow insolent, beyond all reason,
               Apt for Ambition, Quarrels, Murthers, Treason:
               Or any villany, that followes those,
               Who doe the summe of happinesse repose
               In worldly glory: But if Fortune frowne,
               And from her fickle wheele once cast them downe,
               Then their deiected hearts againe grow base,
               They are impatient of their present case:
               
                  
Raue or run mad, and can doe nought poore elues,
               Vnlesse it be goe hang or drowne them selues.
               Moreouer the same weakenes that proceeds,
               From ignorance, this mischife also breeds;
               It makes men will conceited of their will,
               Which they will follow be it nere so ill.
               And they thinke all things needs must fall out bad,
               Wherein their wise aduise may not be had.
               But heere's the hell: to them all Counsell's vaine,
               Cause they all others wisedome doe disdaine,
               And wholly on their owne deuises rest,
               As men perswaded that their owne are best:
               But as all such are weake, e'ne so I say
               Is euery one that rashly doth repay
               Vengeance in anger; Or that's male content
               Oft; or oft mooued and impatient:
               Or those that iudge of Counsels by th'euent,
               Or that perswade themselues, if their intent
               Be good and honest, that it doth not skill
               If that the matter of it selfe be ill;
               Which were it true then Dauid might complaine,
               That Vzzah for his good intent was slaine.
               Others againe thinke Superstitious Rites,
               To be the seruice in which God delghts.
               But since I'me forst my mind of them to speake,
               I must needs say their iudgements are but weake:
               The like I must of them who disesteeme,
               All forraine customes, and doe onely deeme
               Their owne, praise-worthy; As also such as do
               Thinke those things best they cannot reach vnto;
               
                  
Yet in the vulgar this weake humor's bred,
               They'l sooner be with idle customes led,
               Or fond opinions such as they haue store,
               Then learne of reason or of vertues lore,
               We think that we are strong, but what alas!
               Is there that our great might can bring to passe,
               Since though we thereto bend e'ne all our will,
               We neither can be good not wholly ill.
               
                  God giues vs needfull blessings for to vse them,
               Which wanting power to do we oft abuse them,
               Some hold them wise and vertuous that professe,
               An heremitall solitariness:
               But it proceeds from imbecillity,
               
               And for because through Non-ability,
               
               Those thinges they cannot well in dure to doe,
               Which they indeed should be inur'd vnto:
               Besides, they wrong their Country, and their friends.
               
               For man (saith Tullye's,) borne to other ends
               Then for to please himselfe; a part to haue,
               The common-weale doth look, and parents craue
               A part; so doth his friend; then deales he well
               That closely mewd vp in a carelesse cell
               
               Keepes all himselfe; and for a little ease,
               Can in his Conscience find to rob all these?
               I say hee's weake, and so againe I must,
               But add withall, hee's slothfull and vniust:
               Then as hee's vaine that precious time doth spend,
               In fond and idle pleasure to no end:
               So are those weake, that with contempt disdaine
               All plesure and delights on earth as vaine;
               
                  
And though they would be zealous thought, & wise
               I shall but count them foolishly precise;
               For Man hath cares; and pleasures mixt with-all
               Are needfull; yea both iust and naturall.
               
               We are no Angels that our recreation,
               Should consist only in meer Contemplation:
               
               But we haue bodies to, of whose due pleasure,
               The soules must find sometimes to be at leasure
               For to participate; but in this kind,
               Though some find fault, we are not much behind
               Then tis through humane weaknes, when that we
               Of a good-turne will soone forgetfull be,
               And readier to reuenge a small offence,
               Then for that good to make a recompen 
                     •
                  
               
               And so 'tis also when that we eschew,
               Or shunne them vnto whom from vs is due
               Both loue and mony; this because their owne
               Th'other cause friendship at our need was showne:
               But 'tis well seen there's many so abhor,
               To be in presence with their Creditor,
               
               That (thankless elues) though he be still their friend.
               They rather would desire to see his end:
               He's weake, to that's not able to withstand,
               Any vnlawfull or vniust demand,
               As well as he that knowes not to deny,
               
                  Seruing-mens kindness, or pot-curtesie.
               
               Some simple fellowes, cause that silken-fooles,
               
               (That had their bringing-vp in Bacchus schooles.)
               In show of loue, but daine to drink vnto them,
               Think presently they such a fauour do them,
               
                  
That though they feele their stomack wel nigh sick
               Yet if to pledge these kind ones they should sticke:
               Or for a draught or two, or three refuse them
               They thinke in conscience they should much abuse them
               Nay there be some, and wisemen you would thinke
               That are not able to refuse their drinke,
               Through this their weaknesse; though that they be sure
               'Tis more then their weake stomacks can indure,
               And why? oh 'tis the health of some great Peere
               
               His Maisters, or his Friend he counteth deare;
               What then? if that the party vertuous be,
               He'le not esteeme of such a foolery;
               If not, who er't be, this is my mind still,
               A straw for's loue, his friendship, or good will,
               Some muse to see those that haue knowledge gaind
               And to Degrees of Art in Schooles attaind,
               Should haue opinion stuft with heresie,
               And in their action such Simplicitie
               
               As many haue, At first, without a pause,
               As meere a Boy as I may tell the cause:
               Ist not, the reason their acquired parts,
               And knowledge they haue reacht vnto by Arts
               
               Is growne a M
                        •
                     tch to great, and farre vnfit,
               For to be ioyned with their Naturallwit?
               
               'Tis so; and they insteed of rightfull vsing
               Draw from their leraning errors, by abusing.
               Plaine Reason should, and euery man that's wise
               Knowes though that Learning be a dainty prize,
               Yet if that Fate with such a weakling place it,
               Who hath no helpes of Nature for to grace it:
               
                  
Or one, whose proper Knowledge, is so small,
               He is beholding to his Booke for all;
               It onely breeds, (vnlesse it be some Treasons)
               Cripled Opinions, and prodigious Reasons.
               
               Which being fauour'd brings in the Conclusion,
               
               Publike Dissentions, or their owne Confusion.
               
               For I may liken Learning to a Shield,
               
               With a strong Armor, Lying in a field:
               Ready for any man that hath the Wit
               To take it vp and arme himselfe with it,
               Now if he be a man of strength and might,
               That happens on that furniture to light
               He may doe wonders; As offend his foe,
               And keep himselfe and his, from ouerthrow.
               But if a weake and feeble man should take
               These instruments of Mars; what would they make,
               For his aduantage? Surely I should gather
               They would goe neere to ouerthrow him rather:
               For they would loade him so, a man more strong
               Although he be vnarm'd, may doe him wrong.
               So he, that is depriu'd of Natures guifts,
               With all his Learning, maketh harder shifts,
               Through his owne weakenes, & incurs more shames;
               Then many that want Art to write their Names.
               
               We haue some Fellowes that would scorne to be
               Term'd Weake I know, especially by Me,
               
               Because they see that my vngentle Fate,
               
               Allow'd me not to be a Graduate.
               
               Yet whatsoeuer they will say vnto it,
               For all their scorning I am like to doe it.
               
                  
And to be breefe they are no simple fooles,
               
               But such as haue yauld Ergo in the schooles,
               
               Who being by some men of worship thought,
               Fit men by whom their children may be taught,
               And learnd enough for that they are allowd
               The name of Teachers, whereof growing proud,
               Because perhaps they heare that now and then,
               They are admired at by the seruing-men;
               
               Or else by reason somthing they haue said,
               Hath beene applauded by the Chamber-maid;
               
               They therevppon suppose that no man may.
               Hold any thing for truth but what they say:
               And in discourse their tongues so much wil walke,
               You may not heere a man of reason talke;
               They are halfe Preachers, if your question be,
               Of matters that concerne diuinity;
               
               If it be law; I'le warrant they'l out-face,
               A dozen P
                        •
                     oydens to maintaine their case:
               But if it be of Physick you contend,
               Old Galen and Hypocrates may send
               For their opinion; nay, they dare professe,
               Knowledge in al things, though theres none know less:
               Now I should wonder they preuaild so much,
               Did not the Common-people fauour such,
               But they are knowne although their verdit passes,
               Proud Dogmatists, and self-conceited Asses;
               
               Whom I may tearme (though I cannot out-scold them
               Weake simple fooles, and those that doe vphold them:
               Moreouer some, (but foolishly precise,
               And in my iudgement, far more weake then wise,)
               
                  
Misiudge of Poetry, as if the same,
               Did worthily dese
                     •
                  ue reproach and blame;
               If any booke in verse they hap to spy,
               Oh, out vpon't, away, pr
                     •
                  fane they cry,
               Burn't, reade it not, for sure it doth containe
               Nothing but fables of a lying braine;
               Al-as
                     •
                   take heed, indeed it oft pollutes
               The out-side of thy false-vaine glorious sutes?
               
               And to the blinded people makes it plaine,
               The Coulour, thou so counterset'st will staine.
               Because we see that men are drunke with wine,
               
               Shall we contemne the liquor of the Vine?
               
               And since there's some that doe this Art misuse,
               Wilt therefore thou the Art it selfe abuse?
               'Twere meere iniustice: For Diuinitie
               
               Hath with no Science more affinitie
               Then this; and howsoe're this scruple rose,
               
                  Rime hath exprest as sacred things as prose;
               When both in this age and in former time,
               
                  Prose hath been ten-times more profane, then rime;
               
               But they say still that Poetry is lies,
               And fables, such as idle heads deuise,
               Made to please fooles: but now we may by this
               Perceiue their weaknes plainely what it is:
               Yea, this both weake and ignorant doth proue them,
               In that thei'l censure things that are aboue them:
               For, if that worthy Poets did not teach,
               A way beyond their dull conceited reach,
               I thinke their shallow wisedomes would espy,
               A Parable did differ from a lie.
               
               
                  
Yea, if their Iudgement be not quite bereft;
               Or if that they had any reason left,
               The precious Truths within their fables wrapt,
               Had not vpon so rude a Censure hapt;
               But though that kind of teaching some dispraise,
               As there's few good things lik't of now adaies:
               Yet I dare say because the S
                        •
                     riptures show it,
               The best e're taught on earth, taught like a Poet:
               
               And whereas Poets now are counted base,
               And in this worth-lesse age in much disgrace;
               I of the cause cannot refraine to speake,
               And this it is; mens Iudgements are growne weake,
               They know not true desert; for if they did
               Their well deseruings could not so be hid,
               And sure if there be any doth despise
               Such as they are; it is cause he enuies
               Their worthines; and is a secret foe
               To euery one that truely learnes to know:
               
               For, of all sorts of men here's my beliefe,
               The Poet is most worthy and the chiefe:
               His Science is the absolut'st and best,
               And deserues honor aboue all the rest;
               For 'tis no humane knowledge gain'd by art,
               
               But rather 'tis inspir'd into the heart
               By diuine meanes; and I doe muse men dare,
               Twixt it and their professoins make compare.
               For why should he that's but Philosopher,
               
               Geometrician, or Astrologer,
               Physitian, Lawyer, Rhetorician.
               Historian, Arithmetician,
               
                  
Or some such like, why should he hauing found
               The meanes but by one Ar
                        •
                     
                   to be renown'd,
               Compare with him that claimes to haue a part
               And interest almost in euery Art?
               
               And if that men may adde vnto their name,
               By one of these an euerlasting fame,
               How much more should it vnto them befall,
               That haue not onely one of these, but all
               As Poets haue? for doe but search their works
               And you shall find within their writing lurks
               All knowledge; if they vndertake
               Of Diu
                        •
                     ne matters any speech to make,
               You'l thinke them Doctors; if they need to tell
               The course of starres, they seeme for to excell
               Great Ptolomey; entend they to perswade,
               You'l thinke that they were Retoricians made:
               VVhat Law, what Phisick, or what History
               
               Can these not treat of? Nay what mistery
               
               Are they not learn'd in? If of Trades they write,
               Haue they not all tearms and words as right
               As if he had seru'd an Apprentiship?
               
               Can they not name all tooles for workemanship?
               We see tis true; If once they entreat of wars?
               
               Of cruell bloudy fraies? of wounds? of scars?
               VVhy then he speaks so like a souldier there,
               That he hath beene begot in armes thou'lt sweare:
               Againe, he writes so like a Nauigator,
               
               As if they had seru'd Neptune in the water,
               And thou wouldst thinke he might of trauaile make
               As great a Volume, as our famous Drake;
               
               
                  
Old Proteus, and Vertumnus are but Apes.
               
               Compar'd to these, for shifting of their shapes;
               There is no humorous Passion so strange,
               To which they cannot in a moment change:
               Note but their Drammaticks and you shall see
               They I speake for euery sex, for each degree,
               And in all causes as if they had beene,
               In euery thing, or at least all things seene.
               If need be they can like a Lawyer prate,
               Or talke more grauely like a man of State;
               
               They'l haue a Tradesmans tongue to praise their ware,
               And counterfet him right (but they'le not sweare)
               The curioust Phisicians (if they please)
               Shall not quoine words to giue their patients ease
               So well as they; And if occasion vrge,
               They'l Choller, yea and Melancholly purge
               Onely with charmes and words; and yet it shall
               Be honest meanes and meerely naturall;
               Are they dispos'd to gossip't like a woman,
               They'l shew their tricks so right, that almost noman,
               But would so thinke them: Virgins that are purest,
               And Marrons that make shew to be demurest,
               Speake not so like chast Cynthia, as they can,
               Nor Newbery so like a Curtezan;
               
               They'l giue words either fitting for a Clowne,
               
               Or such as shall not vnbeseeme a Crowne;
               
               In show they will be chollerick, Ambitious,
               
               D
                     •
                  sperate, Iealous, Mad, or Enuious,
               In sorrow, or in any Passion be;
               But yet remaine still, from all passions free.
               
                  
For they onely to this end exprest them,
               That men may see them plainer, and detest them.
               But some will say that these haue on the stage,
               
               So painted out the vices of this age,
               That it not onely tels that they haue bin,
               Experienc't in euery kind of sinne,
               
               But that it also doth corrupt, and show
               How men should act those sins they did not know,
               Oh hatefull saying, not pronounc't by chance,
               
               Bnt spew'd out of malicious Ignorance;
               
               VVeigh it, and you will either thinke these weak,
               Or say that they doe out of enuy speake:
               Can none declare th' effect of Drunkennes,
               
               Vnlesse they vsed such-like bestlinesse?
               Are all men ignorant what comes by lust,
               
               Excepting those tht were themselues vniust?
               Or thinke they no man can describe a sin?
               
               But that which he himselfe hath wallawed in?
               If they suppose so, I no cause can tell,
               But they may also boldly say as well
               They are apprentices to euery trade,
               Of which they find they haue descriptions made,
               Or for because they see them write those things,
               That do belong to rule best, say th' are Kings:
               
               As though that sacred Poesie inspir'd,
               No other knowledge then might be acquir'd
               By the dull outward sence; yes, this is Shee
               That showes vs no
                     •
                   alone all things that be,
               But by her power laies before out view,
               Such wondrous things as Nature neuer knewe
               
                  
And then whereas they say that men are worse,
               By reading what these write, 'tis their owne curse,
               For is the flower faulty cause we see,
               The loathsome spider and the painefull Bee,
               Make diuers vse on't? No it is the same,
               Vnto the spider though she cannot frame,
               Like sweetnes as the Bee thence; But indeed
               I must confesse that this bad age doth breed,
               Too many that without respect presume,
               This worthy title on them to assume,
               And vndeseru'd base fellowes, whom meere time,
               Hath made sufficient to bring forth a Rime,
               
               A Curtaine ligge, a libell or a ballet,
               For Fidlers or some Roagues with staffe and wallet
               To sing at doores; men only wise enough,
               Out of some rotten old worme-eaten stuffe,
               To patch vp a bald witlesse Comedy,
               
               And trim it heere and there with Ribaldry
               
               Learn'd at a baudy house▪ I say theres such,
               And they can neuer be disgrac't too much,
               For though the name of Poet such abuses,
               Yet they are enemies to all the Muses
               
               And dare not sort with them for feare they will,
               Tumble them headlong downe Parnassus hill:
               Why then should their vsurping of it wrong
               That Title which doth not to them belong?
               And wherefore should the shame of this lewd, crew
               Betide them, vnto whom true honors due?
               It shal not; for how ere they vse the name,
               Their works wil show how they do merit fame;
               
                  
And though it be disgrac't through ignorance,
               The generous will Poesie aduance:
               As the most Antique Science that is found,
               And that which hath been the first root & ground
               Of euery Art; yea that which only brings
               
                  Content; and hath beene the delight of kings;
               
               Great IAMES our King both loues & liues a Poet,
               His bookes now extant do directly show it,
               And That shall adde vnto his worthy name,
               A better glory, and a greater fame
               Then Britaines Monarchy; for few but he,
               I thinke will both a King and Poet be;
               And for the last, although some fooles debase it,
               I'me in the mind that Angels do imbrace it:
               And though God giu't heere but in part to some,
               All shall hau't perfect in the world to come.
               
               This in defence of Poesie to say
               I am compel'd, because that at this day,
               
                  Weaknesse and Ignorance hath wrong'd it sore▪
               
               But what need any man therein speake more
               Then Diuine Sidney hath already done?
               For whom (though he deceas'd ere I begu
                     •
                  )
               I haue oft sighed, and bewaild my Fate,
               
               That brought me forth so many yeeres too late,
               To view that worthy; And now thinke not you
               Oh Daniell, Draiton, Iohnson, Chapman how
               I long to see you with your fellow Peeres,
               
               Matchlesse Siluester, glory of these yeeres.
               I hither to haue onely heard your fames
               And know you yet but by your workes and names:
               
                  
The little time, I on the earth haue spent,
               Would not allow me any more content:
               I long to know you better that is the truth,
               I am in hope you'l not disdaine my Youth.
               
               For know you Muses Darlings, Ile note raue,
               A fellowship amongst you for to haue:
               Oh no; for though my euer willing heart,
               Haue vow'd to loue and praise You and your Art;
               
               And though that I your stile doe now assume,
               I doe not, nor I will not so presume;
               I claime not that too-worthy name of Poet;
               
               It is not yet deseru'd by me, I know it.
               Grant me I may but on your Muses tend,
               And be enrould their Seruant, or their Friend.
               
               And if desert hereafter worthy make me,
               Then for a Pellow (if it please you) take me.
               But yet I must not here giue off to speake,
               To tell men wherein I haue found them weake,
               And chiefely those that cannot brooke to heare,
               Mention of Death but with much griefe and Fear
                        •
                     
                  
               
               For many are not able for to take
               That thought into them, but their soules will quake▪
               
               Poore feeble spirits, would you nere away,
               But dwell for euer in a peece of Clay?
               What find you heere wherein you doe delight,
               Or what's to seeing that's worth the sight?
               What? doth the heauens thy endeauors blesse
               And wouldst thou therefore liue for to possesse
               The Ioy thou hast? seek't not; perhaps to morro
                     •
                  
               
               Thoul't wish to haue di'd to day, to scape the sorro
                     •
                  
               
               
                  
Thou then shall see, for shame take stronger Hearts
               
               And adde mo
                     •
                  e courage to your betteer Parts;
               
               For Death's not to be feard, since tis a Friend,
               
               That of your sorrowes makes a gentle end.
               But here a qualitie I call to minde.
               That I amongst the Common-people finde,
               This 'tis, a weake one to; when they perceiue
               A friend neare death, and ready for to leaue
               This wretched life; and if they heare him say
               Some par
                     •
                  ing words, as if he might not stay,
               
                  Nay say not so (these comforters reply)
               Take heart your time's not come, ye shall not die;
               What man, and grace of God you shalbe stronger;
               And liue no doubt yet, many a faire day longer.
               
                  Thinke not on Death; with many such like words,
               Such as their vnderstanding best affoords:
               But where is now become this peoples wit?
               VVhat doth their knowledges esteeme more fit
               Then death to thinke on; chiefly when men be
               About to put off their Mortal
                        •
                     tie?
               
               Me thinkes they rather should perswade them then
               Fearelesse to be resolu'd, to die like Men.
               For want of such a resolution stings
               At point of Death; and dreadfull horror brings,
               
                  
                     •
                  e'ne to the soule; cause wanting preparation,
               She lies despairing of her owne saluation;
               
               Yea and moreouer this full well know I,
               He that's at any time afraide to die,
               
               
                  
                     •
                  s in weake case, and whatso'ere he saith,
               Hath but a wauering and a feeble Faith.
               
                  
But what need I goe farther to relate,
               The frailty I haue seene in Mans estate?
               Since this I haue already said makes cleere,
               That of all Creatures, God hath placed here,
               (Prouided we respect them in their kind)
               VVe cannot any more vnable finde;
               For of our selues we haue not power to speake,
               No nor to frame a thought, we are so weake.
               
               Against our bodies eue'ry thing preuailes,
               And oft our knowledge and our iudgement failes;
               Yea if that one mans strength were now no lesse,
               Then all men doe in generall possesse.
               Or if he had attaind to ten-times more
               Then all Gods creatures ioyn'd in one before;
               Yet would his power be eauen then so small,
               When he stands surest; he's but sure to fall;
               'Tis onely weakenesse that doth make vs droupe,
               And vnto Crosses and diseases stoupe:
               That makes vs Vaine, Inconstant, and Vnsure,
               
               Vnable any good things to endure:
               It brings vs to the seruile base subiection,
               Of all loose Passion, and vntam'd affection:
               It leads vs and compels vs oft to stray
               Both beside Truth, and out of Reasons way.
               And lastly we, and that because of this,
               Either doe Nothing; or do all amisse.
               Which being so, we may with Dauid then,
               Confesse that we are rather Wormes then men.
            
            
               
               OF PRESVMPTION.
               SATYR. 4.
               SOft heedlesse Muse thou no aduisement tak'st,
               Wast not of Men that last of al thou spak'st:
               It was: and of the weakness
                        •
                     
                   too of men,
               Come then with shame now and denie't agen,
               Reca
                     •
                  t: for so the matter rhou didst handle,
               Thou maist be curst fort, with Bell Booke & Candle:
               
               Is mankind weake? who then can by their powers,
               Into the Aire hurle Palaces and Towers?
               And with one blaste'ne in a moment make,
               Whole Kingdomes and braue Monarchies to shake.
               Or what are they that dare for toaspire,
               Into Gods seat; and if it might be higher:
               That forgiue sinnes as fast as men can do them,
               And make Iehouah be beholding to them?
               I'ue heard of such; what are they? would I wist;
               They can make Saints they say of whom they list:
               And being made, aboue the Stars cāseat them
               Yea with their own hands make their Gods & eat thē
               
               Ha? are they men; How dar'st thou then to speake,
               Such B
                        •
                     asphemy to say mankinde is weake?
               I tell thee this Muse, either Man is strong,
               And through thy babling thou hast done him wrong,
               Or else beyond his limits he doth erre,
               And for presumption puts downe Lucifer:
               
               
               Ist so? Nay then I prethee Muse goe on,
               And let vs heare of his presumption:
               
               For I doe know, cause I haue heard him vaunt,
               That he's a Creature proud and Arrogant:
               
               And it may be he is not of such might
               As he makes show for; but vsurps some's right▪
               
               There't goe's indeed, for though he be so base
               So weake, and in such miserable case,
               That I want words of a sufficient worth,
               To paint his most abhorred vilenesse forth:
               Yet such is also his detested Pride,
               That I suppose the Diuell is belide
               By euery man that shall affirme or say
               He is more proud; for doe but marke I pray:
               This Creature man; did Natures powerfull King,
               (God, that of nothing framed eu'ry thing)
               M
                     •
                  uld out of Clay; a peece which he had rent,
               E'ne from the Earth the basest Element:
               And whereas he might haue beene made a Thrall,
               
               Yea and the very Vuderling of all;
               That God with title of Chief Ruler grac't him,
               And as a Steward ouer all things plac't him:
               Gaue him a pleasant garden for to till,
               And Leaue to eate of eu'ry tree at will.
               Onely of one indeed he did deny him,
               And peraduenture of that one, to try him;
               But see his insolence; though God did threat
               
                  Death if he eate, and though that God was great,
               And so exceeding Iust, that he well knew,
               All that he threatned doubtles would ensue:
               
                  
Thogh God were strōg, & could, had mā bin prouder
               (Pore clay-bred worm) haue stampt him into pouder
                     •
                  
               
               Yet (not withstanding all this same) did he
               Presume to tast of that forbidden tree.
               A rash beginning, but he sped so ill,
               D'yee thinke he held on this presumption still?
               To heare he had left that offence 'twere newes,
               But Cain and Nimrod, Pharaoh and the lewes,
               Shew'd it continued; and grew much more,
               Rather then lesser▪ then it was before;
               
                  Caine in his murther, and his proud replie;
               
                  Nimrod in that he dar'd to build so high;
               
                  Pharaoh by boldly tempting God, to shew
               His sundry plagues to Egypts ouerthrow;
               And many waies the last; but what need I,
               Recite examples of Antiquitie?
               Or for to taxe old ages for that crime,
               Since there was nere a more presumptuous time
               Then this that's now; what dare not men to doe,
               If they haue any list or minde thereto?
               Their fellow creatures they doe much contemne,
               Vaunting that all things were ordain'd for them;
               Yea both the gladsome daies and quiet nights,
               Sun, Moone, & Heauen, with those glorious lights,
               Which so be spangle that faire azure roofe,
               They thinke were onely made for their behoofe:
               When as alas their poore and weake command
               Cannot extend so farre for to withstand
               The least Starres force; and them and their estate,
               Sunne, Moone, and starres too, do predominate.
               
                  
Before our fall indded we did excell,
               All other creatures that on earth did dwell,
               But now I thinke the very worst that be,
               Haue iust asmuch to boast vpon as we.
               Our soule's defil d; And therefore if in Sence
               We place our worth and cheefe prehemmence,
               Tis knowne that there be diuers Creatures then
               VVill haue the vpper hand; for they passe men;
               And though we still presume vpon't, tis vaine,
               To challenge our old Soueraingty againe;
               For when that we from our obedience fell
               All things against vs also did rebell,
               Lyons and Beares, and Tigers sought our blood
               The barren earth deny'd to yeeld vs food:
               The clouds raignd plagues, and yet dare we go on,
               We find such pleasure in Presumption.
               But for because there's some do scarcely know,
               How we do in that fault offend; Ile shew.
               First, when that they new worshippings inuent,
               And cannot hold themselues so well content
               VVith that which God doth in his word ordaine,
               As with inuentions of their owne weake braine,
               It seemes they think their fancies to fulfill,
               VVould please him better then to haue his will.
               Next I doe reckon them, that ouer-bold,
               Gods sacred Legend haue at will contrould,
               And maugre his grand-curse some places chang'd
               Added to some, and some againe estrang'd;
               Then those great masters I presumptuous deeme,
               That of their knowledge doe so well esteeme,
               
                  
They will force others, as the Papists doe
               For to alow of their opinions to,
               Yea though it be a meere imagination,
               That neither hath good ground nor iust foundation
               Some will be prying though they are forbidden,
               Into those secrets, God ment should be hidden.
               So doe some students in Astrologie,
               Though they can make a faire Apologie▪
               
               And so doe those that very vainely trie,
               To finde our fortunes by their Palmistrie;
               These doe presume, but much more such as say,
               At this or that time, comes the iudgement day.
               Or such as aske, or dare for to relate,
               What God was doing ere he did create
               Heauen and Earth; or where he did abide,
               How and by whom, he then was glorifide.
               But those that into such deep secrets wind.
               A slender profit in their labours find;
               For to make knowne how highly they offend,
               A desperate madnes is ofttimes their end.
               Yet such their nature is, theile not beware,
               But to be prying further still they dare,
               For sure that longing can no way be flaid,
               Which well the Poet seemd to know, who said,
               Man, what he is forbidden still desires,
               And what he is denide off, most requires.
               Rather then many will a man gainesay,
               They dare make bold with God, they thinke they may
               Because it seems they deeme him not so strong,
               Or so well able to reuenge a wrong.
               
                  
Some such great power to themselues assume,
               And on their owne strength doe so much presume,
               They seldome doe for Gods assistance craue,
               As if it were a needlesse thing to haue;
               Which is the cause that often the conclusion
               Proues their owne shame, their hindrance & confusion;
               In Praying, men presume, (Vnlesse they be,
               With eu'ry one in loue and charitie:)
               Or if in their Petitions, they desire
               Such things as are vnlawfull to require;
               
                  Death's their reward, we know, that break the law,
               But neither that, nor yet damnations awe
               Keeps vs from sinne; a thousand God-heads more,
               Then one we make, and dare for to adore
               Our owne hand-works; the Sabboth we disdaine,
               And dreadlesse take the name of God in vaine:
               If but by his Lords hand an Irish swere,
               To violate that oath he stands in feare;
               Least him of both his lands and goods he spoile,
               For making him the instrument of guile:
               And yet dare we (poore wormes) before his face,
               (Respecting whom, the greatest Lords are base)
               Both sweare, & forsweare; vsing that great Name
               At pleasure, without any feare of blame:
               Why should not we as well suppose that he,
               Who in our hearts would haue no fraud to be,
               Will miserable, poore, and naked leaue vs,
               Yea, of those Blessings and Estates bereaue vs
               We now hold of him, If we thus contemne,
               And still abuse his sacred name, and him?
               
                  
But men secure in wickednes per
                     •
                  ist
               As if they could please God with what they list;
               If they can, Lord haue mercy on them say,
               And mumble some few prayers once a day,
               There needs no more; nay, surely there be such,
               That thinke it is enough; if not too-much:
               But what's their reason? God made all the man,
               Why should he haue but part allow'd him than?
               He in their seruice nothing doth delight,
               Vnlesse it be with all their strength and might,
               With their whole heart, & soule, and that way toe,
               As he appoints them in his word to doe:
               Some men their are who hope by honesty,
               By their Almes-deeds, and works of Charity
               
               To win Gods fauour, and for to obtaine
               Saluation by it; but their hope's in vaine:
               Also, their's others cause they haue the faith,
               For to beleeue 'tis true the Scripture saith,
               Since they haue knowledge in Religion,
               
               And make thereof a strict profession:
               Or doe obserue the outward worship duly,
               Do think that their in they haue pleas'd God truely.
               Now these are iust as far as th'other wide,
               Or they Gods worship doe by halfes diuide,
               And for his due which is e'ne all the heart,
               Do dare presume to offer him a part;
               But th'one must know he will not pleased be,
               With a Religion that wants honestie:
               And th'other that as little good will doe,
               His honest shew without Religion toe;
               
                  
If this be so, (as so it is indeed)
               How then wil those presumptuous fellowes speed?
               Who thinke (forsooth) because that once a yeare,
               They can afford the poore some slender cheare;
               Obserue their Country feasts, or Common doles,
               
               And entertaine their Christmas wassaile boles,
               Or else because that for the Churches good,
               They in defence of Hock-tide custome stood;
               A Whitsun-ale, or some such goodly motion,
               The better to procure young mens deuotion:
               What will they doe, I say, that think to please,
               Their mighty God with such vaine things as these?
               Sure very ill; for though that they can mone,
               And say that Loue and Charity is gone
               As old folkes do, because their banquetings,
               Their antient-drunken-summer reuelings
               Are out of date; though they can say through teaching,
               And since the Ghospell hath had open preaching,
               Men are growne worse; though they can soon espy
               A little mote in their owne neighbours eye
               Yea though that they their Pater noster can,
               And call their honest neighbour Puritan;
               
               (How ere they in their owne conceits may smile,
               Yet they are presumptuous, weake, and vile;
               Also in this abhominable time,
               It is amongst vs now a common crime,
               To flout and scoffe at those which we do spy,
               VVilling to shake off humane Vanity;
               
               And those that gladly do themselues enforce,
               Vnto a strict and more religious course,
               
                  
Then most men doe; although, they truely know
               No men are able to pay halfe they owe (thought
               Vnto their God, (as though their wisedomes
               He migh be serued better then he ought,
               They count precise and curious more then needs,
               They try their sayings and weigh all their deeds:
               A thousand thinges that they well do shal be,
               Slightly past ouer as if none did see:
               But one thing ill done, (though the best does ill)
               They shal be certaine for to heare of still;
               Yea not with standing they can daily smother,
               Millions of ten times greater faults in other:
               VVho are so hated or so often blam'd?
               Or so reuil'd, or scorn'd? or so misnam'd?
               To whom do we now our contentions lay,
               Who are so much term'd Puritans as they
               That feare God most? But tis no maruaile men,
               Presume so much to wrong his children; when
               As if they fear'd not his reuengefull rod,
               They can blaspheme and dare to anger God.
               
               Now by these wordes to some men it may seeme,
               That I haue Puritans in high esteeme;
               Indeed, if by that name you vnderstand,
               Those that the vulgar Atheists of this land,
               Do daily terme so; that is such as are
               Fore-named heere; and haue the greatest care
               To know and please their maker: then 'tis true,
               I loue them well; for loue to such is due:
               
                  But if you meane the busie headed sect,
               The hollow crew, the counterfeit Elect:
               
                  
Our D
                     •
                  gmatists, and euer-wrangling spirits,
               That doe as well contemne good workes, as merits:
               If you meane those that make their care seem great
               To get soules food, when 'tis for bodies meate,
               Or those all whose Religion doe depend,
               
                  On this, that they know how to discommend
               A Maygame, or a Summerpole defie,
               Or shake the head, or else turne vp the eye;
               If you meane those, how euer they appeare,
               This I say of them (would they all might heare)
               Though in a zealous habit they doe wander,
               Yet they are Gods foes and the Churches slander;
               And though they humble be in show to many,
               They are as haughty euery way as any.
               What need I here the lewd presumptions tell
               Of Papists in these daies? tis knowne to well:
               For them there of each peasant now conuinces,
               In things as well concerning God as Princes,
               Other▪ I find toe, that doe dare presume,
               The Office of a Teacher to assume;
               And being blind themselues and gone astray,
               Take on them to shew other men the way.
               Yea some there be, who haue small guifts or spirit,
               No kind of knowledge, and as little merit;
               That with the world haue made a firme cōiunctio
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               Yet dare to vndergoe the sacred function
               Of Christ his Pas
                     •
                  or. Yea such is their daring,
               That neither for their Charge nor Duty caring,
               Insteed of giuing good and sound Instruction,
               They lead themselues and others to Destruction.
               
                  
We read that Ieremy and Moses both,
               To vndertake their charge were wondrous loth:
               (The greatnes of the same so much appal'd them)
               Yea though that God himselfe directly cal'd them:
               But our braue Clarkes as if they did condemne,
               The two much bashfull backwardnes of them:
               Or else as if themselues they abler thought;
               Those Diuine Callings, haue not onely sought
               Without respect of their Ability,
               A C
                        •
                     ristian Conscience or Ciuility,
               But being of old Simon Magus tribe,
               Purchase it often with a hateful bribe;
               VVhich showes that they such places do desire,
               Not for the good of others but their hire:
               But Patrons feare yee neither God nor hell?
               Dare ye the Churches patrimony sell
               For filthy lucre, in despite of Law
               Sacred or humane? Pedants dare yee? hah?
               Dare you buy't of them? by Gods help, vnlesse
               This villany ere long, haue some redresse,
               Ile find a meanes, or else let me haue blame,
               To bring some smart, or else eternal shame
               Vpon you for't; it may be you do sent it,
               But all your pollicy shall not preuent it:
               What do you look for Hell and your D
                        •
                     mnation?
               
               VVel you shall haue it by Impropriation;
               I know now you haue enter'd Simony,
               
               Youle double damne your selues with Periury.
               
               For, they as oft together may be seene,
               As is the chilling feauer and the spleene,
               
               
                  
But oh deare Countrymen be more aduis'd,
               Thinke what God is he may not be dispis'd.
               Could you well weigh his Iustice and his power,
               How many infinites it passeth ouer:
               And knew his iudgements we would not dissemble
               An outward fained reuerence; but tremble
               And shake with horror; you'd not dare to venter
               
                  Sanctum Sanctorum so vnfit to enter;
               His Churches good you rather would aduance,
               Then rob it thus of her inheritance;
               Or make the same (as men stil vnbeleeuing)
               
                  Like to a house of Merchandise and Theeuing.
               
                  You to whom deeds of former times are knowne,
               Marke to what passe this age of ours is growne,
               Euen with vs that strictest seeme to be,
               In the professing Christianity;
               
               
                  You know men haue been carefull to augment,
               The Churches portion and haue beene content
               To adde vnto it out of their estate;
               And Sacriledge all Nations did so hate
               That the meere Irish who seem'd not to care,
               For God nor Man had the respect to spare
               The Churches profits; yea their heed was such
               That in the time of need they would not touch,
               The knowne prouisions, they daily saw,
               Stor'd vp in Churches: in such feare and awe
               The places held them; though that they did know
               The thinges therein belonged to their foe:
               But now the world & mans good natures chang'd
               From this opinion most men are estrang'd;
               
                  
We rob the Church, and what we can attaine
               By Sacriledge and theft is our best gaine:
               In paying dues the refuse of our stock,
               The barrennest and leanest of our flock
               Shall serue our Pastor? whom for to deceiue
               We think no sin; nay further (by your leaue)
               Men seeke not to impropriate a part
               Vnto themselues: but they can find in heart
               T'engross vp all: which vile presumption,
               
               Hath brought Church-liuings to a strange consumption
               And if this strong disease do not abate,
               'Twil be the poorest member in the State;
               
               No maruaile though in steed of learned Preachers,
               
               We haue beene pester'd with such simple Teachers
               Such poore, mute, tong-tide readers, as scarce know
               Whether that God made Adam first or no:
               Thence it proceeds, and ther's the cause that Place
               And Office at this time incurs disgrace.
               For men of iudgement or good dispositions,
               Scorne to be tyde to any base conditions:
               Like to our hungry Pedants, who'le engage,
               Their soules for any curtold Vicarage.
               
               I say theres none of knowledge, wit, or merit▪
               
               But such as are of a most seruile spirit,
               That will so wrong the Church as to presume,
               Some poore-halfe-demi-Parsnage to assume
               In name of all; no, they had rather quite
               Be put beside the same, than wrong Gods right,
               Well, they must entertaine such Pedants then,
               Fitter to feed swine, then the soules of men:
               
                  
But Patrons thinke such best, for there's no feare
               They will speake any thing they loath to heare;
               They may run foolishly to their owne damnation,
               Without reproofe or any disturbation;
               To let them see their vice they may bee bold,
               And yet not stand in doubt to be contol'd:
               Those in their houses may keepe priuate Schooles,
               And either serue for Iesters or for fooles,
               And will suppose that they are highly grac't,
               Be they but at their Patrons table plac't:
               And there if they be cal'd but Priests in scoffe,
               Straight they duck down and al their caps come off,
               Supposing it for to be done in kindnes,
               Which shows their Weaknes & apparant Blindnes.
               Moreouer 'tis well knowne that former time
               Held it to be a vild presumptuous crime;
               Such men in sacred Offices to place,
               Whom they knew toucht with any foule disgrace:
               Or to allow those whom they did suspect,
               To haue an outward bodily defect:
               But be they now not only crooked, lame,
               Dismembr'd, and of the vnshapeliest frame
               That euer Nature form'd; though they be blind,
               Not in sight onely, but as well in mind,
               Though they be such who if they come to shreeuin
                     •
                  
               
               Might confess murder, whordom, slander, theeuing
               And all damb'd villany; yet these men will be
               Admitted to the sacred Ministry:
               
               But most of vs do now disdaine that Place,
               Accounting it vnworthy, meane, and base;
               
                  
Yea like to Ieroboams Priests, we see,
               They of the lowest of the people he:
               And though we know, the Israelites allow'd
               God the first-borne for his; we are so proud,
               Vnlesse they either do want shape or wit,
               Or seeme for worldly busines vnfit:
               Few thinke Gods seruice worthy the bestowing
               Their Child about it; or such duty owing
               Vnto the same; but rather that Vocation
               
               They count a blemish to their reputation.
               But where's your vnderstanding, oh you men?
               Turne from your bruitish dulnes once agen,
               Honour Gods Messengers for why tis true,
               To them both Reuere
                        •
                     ce and Honour's due;
               Think what they are and be not still selfe-minded,
               Suffer not reason to be so much blinded;
               If not for loue that you to Iustice beare,
               Yet follow her (although it be) for feare:
               And see that this presumption you amend,
               Or looke some heauy plague shal be your end.
               Then it is also a presumptuous act,
               With knowledge to commit a sinfull fact
               Though ne're so small; for sin's a subtill else,
               That by degrees insinuates it selfe
               Into our soules; and in a little space,
               Becomes too-huge a Monster to displace;
               Yea, it is certaine that one sinne, though small,
               Will make entrance great enough for all;
               And what is't but presumption to abuse,
               And without-feare and reuerence to vse
               
                  
                  Gods sacred Word; yet we that Christ professe,
               Thinke it no fault, or that there's no fault lesse:
               Else sure we would not in our common talke,
               Let our loose tongues so much at randome walke,
               We would not dare our Iests of that to make,
               At vttering whereof the Heauens shake;
               For if God had reueal'd his Gospel newes,
               To vs as heeretofore vnto the Iewes
               
               He did the Law; who heard him to their wonder
               Speaking through fearefull fiery flames and thunder,
               We would more dread in any euill fashon:
               To vse that sacred meanes of our suluation
               Our cursed Pagan vnbeleeuing foe,
               I meane the Turke, more reuerence doth show
               In those his dam'nd erroneous Rites then we
               In the true worship: for 'tis knowne that he
               Wil not so much as touch his Alcharon,
               
               That doth containe his false Religion
               
               With vnwasht handes; nor till he hath o'rewent
               All that his vaine and confus'd rablement
               Of Ceremonies vs'd; much lesse dares looke,
               On the Contents of that vnhallowed booke;
               But we in midst of all our villany,
               In our pot-conference and ribaldry,
               Irreuerently can the same apply,
               As if 'twere some of Pasquils Letany:
               
               But soft my Muse in her perambulation
               Hath hapt vpon an Excomunication:
               
               And though that her Commission she wanted
               Yet she made bold to search wherefore 'twas granted
               
                  
Which if you would know too, why it may be,
               Some were so pleas'd because they lack't a fee:
               For, had the Officers bin wel contented,
               They say the matter might haue been preuented▪
               
               But you that haue the wisdomes to discerne
               When abuse is; pray tel me, I would learne;
               Misuse we Excommunication?
               
               
                  You know it is a Separation
               
                  From God; and a most fearefull banishment,
               From the partaking of his Sacrament
               And good mens fellowship; a sad exile,
               (Perhaps for euer, at the least a while)
               
                  From the true Church; and (oh most horrid euill)
               A giuing of Men ouer to the Diuell.
               And therefore was ordain'd in better times,
               Onely for such who in their hainous crimes
               With hardned obstinacy did persist,
               As may appeare: but now we at our list,
               As if the same but some slight matter were,
               For euery trifle to pronounce it dare;
               And peraduenture to, on such as be,
               More honest far, and better much than we:
               But since my Muse hath her endeauour done
               To note how men into this fault do run;
               I will be bold to let you vnderstand,
               One strange Presumption noted in our land
               Worth the amending; and indeed 'tis this
               
                  Readers pray iudge how dangerous it is;
               We seeing God hath now remooued far,
               From this our Country his iust plague of war,
               
               
                  
And made vs through his mercy so much blest,
               VVe do in spight of all our foes yet rest
               Exempt from danger; by vs it appeares,
               Through the great blessing of these quiet yeares,
               We are so feare-lesse care-lesse and secure
               In this our happy peace and so cock-sure
               As if we did suppose or heard it sed,
               Oul
                     •
                   
                  Mars were strangled or the Diuel dead;
               Else can I not beleeue we would so lightly,
               Esteeme our safely and let passe so slightly
               Our former care of Martiall discipline,
               
               For excercises meerely Feminine:
               VVe would not see our Armes so soild in dust,
               Nor our bright blades eat vp with cankred rust,
               As now they be; our Bowes they lye and rot,
               Both Musket and Caliuer is forgot,
               And we lye open to all Forraine dangers
               For want of Discipline 'tis knowne to Strangers
               Though weel'e not see't; Alas will not our pleasure,
               Let vs be once in seauen yeares at leasure
               To take a muster and to giue instruction?
               No rather Pleasure will be our destruction;
               For That first caus'd the Law, that now preuents,
               And barres the vse of Pouder-instruments
               
               To be enacted; why? for to preserue
               An idle Game, the which I wish might sterue
               Amids our plenty, so that with their curse,
               The land and people might be nothing worse,
               Cause for that trifle to the Realmes abuse,
               The hand-gun hath been so much out of vse
               
                  
Scarce one in forty if to proofe it came,
               Dares or knowes how for to discharge the same:
               Oh valiant English we are like to hold
               The glory that our fathers had of old.
               But sure I think some vndermining hand,
               
               That studies for the ruine of the land,
               Is cause of this, in hope thereby at length,
               To weaken ours and let in forraine strength;
               What, do we think cause theirs a truce with Spaine,
               
               That we are safe? Alas that thought is vaine,
               Our dangers rather more; for while they dar'd,
               To proffer wrong they found vs still prepar'd;
               The profitable feare that we were in
               Preuented danger that might else haue bin.
               But now the cause of former feare is gone,
               We haue not only let all care alone,
               But also are so drunken with delights,
               And drownd in pleasure that our dulled sprites
               Are so o'reclog'd with Luxury; we droope,
               More fit for Venus then for Mars his troope;
               That if our foes should now so ventrous be,
               For to inuade the lan
                     •
                  , vnlesse that wee,
               With speed amend this error, heeres my mind,
               The way to worke our ruine thei'le soone find;
               For iust the Troians last nights watch wee keepe,
               Who then were buried all in 
                     •
                  ine and sleepe.
               We read when Cato should a Captaine chuse,
               For the Panonian fight, he did refuse
               His kins-man Publius, cause that from the war
               He often had return'd without a scar,
               
                  
And went perfum'd; but if such faults as these,
               Displeasd the Censor, sure then in our dayes
               He scarcely would in towne or country find,
               A man with vs according to his mind,
               Such is our daintinesse; Besides to strangers,
               (As if there were no cause to doubt of dangers)
               We do not only our great ritches show,
               (A shrewd temptation to allure a foe:)
               But we moreouer plainely do declare,
               By fond apparell, too superfluous fare,
               Much idlenesse and other wanton parts,
               That we haue weake effeminated hearts;
               Which being knowne are sure a great perswasion,
               Vnto our enemies to make inuasion.
               But we do say in God's our only trust,
               On him we do depend; well so we must,
               And yet we ought not therefore to disdaine,
               The lawfull meanes by which he doth ordaine,
               To worke our safety then, for thats a signe,
               We rather lou'd to tempt the powers deuine,
               Then trust vnto them; worthy Brittaines then,
               Leaue this presumption, once againe be men,
               Not weake Sardanapali; leaue those toyes
               To idle women, wanton Girles and boyes:
               Vnto your foes I wish you could betake them,
               Or vnto any so you would forsake them.
               Let Martialists that long haue beene disgrac't
               Be lou'd againe and in our fauours plac't:
               Count not them rogues; but rather such as can
               So much degenerate themselues from Man,
               
               
                  
In tire and gesture both, to womanize,
               Goc call a Parlament and there deuise
               An act to haue them whipt now; oh 'twere good,
               A deed well worthy such a noble brood,
               Meane while let's trim our rusty armes and scoure,
               Those long vn-vsed well-steeld blades of our:
               We shal not do the spiders any wrong,
               For they haue rent-free held their house-room long
               In Morians, Helmets, Gauntlets, Bandileres;
               
               Displace them thence, they haue had all their years:
               And giue it such a lustre that the light,
               May dimme the Mooncshine in a winters night;
               Away with idle Cithernes, Lutes, and Tabers,
               
               Let knocks requite the fidlers for their labours,
               Bring in the Warlike Drum, 'twill musicke make ye,
               That from your drousie pleasures will awake yee:
               Or else the hartning trumpet, that from farre,
               May sound vnto you all the points of warre:
               Let Dances turne to Marches; you ere long,
               May know what doth to rankes and files belong,
               And let your thundring shot so smoke and rore,
               Stangers may tremble to behold the shoare,
               And know you sleep not; But now to what end
               Do you suppose that I these words do spend?
               Beleeue me I'me not male content with Peace.
               Or do desire this happy time might cease,
               I would not haue you foule Seditions make,
               Or any vniust warres to vndertake;
               But I desire you leaue those idle fashions,
               That haue beene the iust fall of many nations;
               
                  
Looke well vnto your selues and not suppose,
               Cause theres a league with Spaine you haue no foes:
               For if VVarres euer make this land complaine,
               It wil be through some Truce it had with Spaine:
               
               But heere I bid you once againe beware,
               Delay not time but with all speed prepare,
               Repaire your forts againe, and manne them well,
               Place better Captaines in them; I can tell
               Some are growne Couetous and there's no trust
               To such as they; that vice makes men vniust:
               They pocket vp the wages of their men,
               And One poore soldier serues alone for Ten:
               
               Look to the Nauy-royall, wer't wel scan'd,
               I doubt it will be found but simply man'd:
               The Pursers study (if some not belie them)
               Onely which way they may haue profit by them;
               But see vnto it you to whom 't belongs,
               See the Abuses done, redresse the wrongs:
               And oh! renew the forces of this land,
               For there's a fearefull bloudy day at hand,
               Though not foreseene, a bloudy day for some,
               Nor wil the same be long before it come.
               There is a tempest brewing in the So
                        •
                     th,
               
               A horrid Vapor forc't from hell's owne mouth.
               'Tis spread already far into the VVest,
               
               And now begins to gather to the East;
               
               When 'tis at full once it will straight come forth
               To shoure downe all it Vengeance on the North:
               
               But feare not little Ile thy cause is right,
               And if thou hast not cast all care off quite,
               
                  
Nor art secure, why by that token then
               Thou shalt driue back that threatning storme agen▪
               
               Through Cods assistance for to ruine those,
               By, and amongst whom, first of all it rose:
               But if that still thou carelesse snorting lye
               In thy presuming blind security,
               Tak't for a signe that now thy sinnes are ripe,
               And thou shalt surely feele the death-full stripe
               Of that ensuing ill, vnto thy shame,
               And extirpation of thy former fame:
               But yet I hope this ouer-fight will end,
               And we shall this presumptuous fault amend:
               I hope I say and yet I hope no harmes,
               To see our English youth trick't vp in armes;
               And so well train'd that all their foes shall heare
               No newes from them but Horror, Death, and Feare;
               Yea and their march, like Iehues King of Iury,
               
               Shal shew they come with vengeance speed & fury,
               I would we could as easily forsake,
               Other Presumptions, and that we could take
               But halfe the care and dilligence to arme
               Our soules, in danger of a greater harme:
               Would we the holy weapons could assume
               Of Christian war-fare, and not stil presume
               To leaue our better parts all open so,
               For the aduantage of the greater foe
               Then Rome or Spaine: oh would wee could begin,
               To feele the danger of Presumptuous sinne!
               
               Which soon would be, if we would once be brought
               For to consider with an equall thought,
               
                  
Our base Beginning and infirmity,
               Our wauering and wondrous misery:
               And with this wretched poore estate of our,
               Gods infinite and al-sufficient power:
               His Iustice, with his hatred vnto ill,
               And threatnings if we disobey his will.
               Or else remember he did still behold
               And see vs when we sin'd; for who so bold,
               Vnlesse depriu'd of grace then to offend?
               But it should seeme we our endeauors bend
               To anger God, for we of sinne complaine,
               Yet with our will sinne in his sight againe.
               Say, wer't not a presumption very great,
               If comming to a King one should intreat
               A pardon for some murther, and yet bring
               The bloudy blade with which he did that thing
               He would haue mercy for? & whilst hee's speaking,
               Sheath it againe with bloud and gore yet reaking,
               In the Kings sonne before his fathers face,
               And yet stil bide as if he hop't for Grace:
               Should we not thinke him mad? sure yes; yet we
               Cannot that madnes in our owne selues see:
               For we dare come before th' almighty King
               To sue for pardon for our sinnes; yet bring
               The selfe same bad mind still, conceiuing murther
               Against his children to prouoke him further.
               And looke what ill is but in thought begun,
               With him's all one as if the same were done,
               It is no maruaile that no humane law,
               Can keepe our ouer-daring hearts in awe:
               
                  
Since that we do so little dread the rod,
               Of such a powerfull and so iust a God:
               And if in mans and Gods owne sight we dare,
               So searelesse sinne without respect or care,
               It seemes that we do little conscience make
               What mischeifes by our selues we vndertake:
               Or think it no Presumption to commit,
               Somthing alone in our owne sight vnfit;
               Oh grosle and ignorant! why thats the worst,
               Of all presumptions the most accurst
               And fulst of Danger. Silly man take heed,
               Do not before thy selfe an euill deed;
               For when God wil forgiue and man forget,
               Thy owne ill Conscience will oppose and set
               Her selfe against thee; tell thee thine offending,
               And keep thee back from euer apprehending
               Grace of forgiuenesse; neither wil affoord
               The smallest comfort of the sacred word:
               But rather to thy sad remembrance call,
               Each saying that may serue to prooue thy fall:
               And though that fire wondrous torture brings
               Vnto the body, yet when conscience stings
               Nor fire nor sword, nor hell it selfe can yeeld,
               Aworser to ment; God defend and shield
               Me from the like; and giue me grace to feare,
               So, that I may preserue my Conscience cleare
               In all my actions: And then I shall be,
               In better case a thousand fold then he
               That vnto wealth and honour hath obtaind,
               With a craz'd Conscience that is blurd and stain'd:
               
                  
Alas how easie wert to climbe or mount
               To worldly Reputation and Account?
               How soone could I if I had an intention
               For to contriue or plot a damn'd inuention
               Get golden heapes? yea and so priuily,
               That though twere done by craft and villany,
               I by the blinded World would yet be deem'd
               Perhaps more honest; but much more esteem'd
               Then now I am; But God forbid that I
               
               Such base vaine trash and dunghil stuffe should buy
               At such a rate; for there's no Iewell dearer,
               Nor any losse a man can haue goe nearer
               Then peace of Conscience; which for to be true,
               The ancient Poets very wisely knew,
               And therefore fain'd their F
                        •
                     ries, with intent,
               For to declare the inward punishment
               Of guilty mindes; which sure they might do well,
               For there is in them Diuels, yea and hell,
               With all her torture; what else was the cause,
               
                  Nero who knew no God nor feared lawes,
               When he had kil'd his mother tooke no rest,
               But thought he saw her comming to molest
               And plague him for't? What made him to surmise
               He was still tortur'd in such hellish wise
               That furies did to his appearance scorch
               His liuing body with a burning torch?
               Wast not his Conscience that had priuy beene
               Vnto the fact? was not the cause within
               His owne bad selfe? If twere let's to amending,
               Of our presumptuous sinnes, aud bold offending,
               
                  
If neither in regard of God nor men,
               Oh lets for feare of our owne Conscience then.
               Yet there's another thing which wert wel weighd
               Our rash presumption would be som-what staid.
               The End of life; with the ne're-ending paine,
               God for presumptuous sinners doth ordaine,
               Could we note that, with deaths vncertaine times,
               And how it takes men acting of the crimes
               Euen in the very nick of their offence,
               And beares them, ere they can repent them, hence,
               To such a place where nothing shall appeare,
               But all the Gastly obiects of grimme feare:
               Whereas each sense shall seuerally sustaine,
               The miserable smart of endlesse paine:
               The tender feeling shall in euery part,
               Be subiect to th' intollerable smart
               Of hellish flames, commixt with chilling cold,
               Tortures beyond conceit, not to be told;
               The dainty mouth, that had the Curioust tast,
               
               And of the choysest cates still made repast,
               Shall be fild vp, yea belly, throat and all,
               With filth more loath-some then the bitterest gall
               The once perfumed Nostrill, there shall drinke,
               Foule noysome smels: beside the sulpherous stinke
               Of choaking flames; and there the listning eare,
               Fed with the sound of pleasing Musicke heare,
               Shall change it for the wofull screeching cry
               Of Damned soules, that in hels torture lye;
               VVhose hydeous howlings can by no defence,
               Be kept from percing that amazed sence:
               
                  
And then while they shal trembling thinke to flye
               From those amazements that do seeme so nigh,
               To there the feareful'st obiects of the sight,
               Their quite despairing mindes shall more affright,
               For garish formes of foule mishapen fiendes,
               And vgly Bugs for euermore attends,
               To thwhart each looke. But if this do not make,
               Thy ouer hardened heart (oh man) to quake:
               If this relation be too weake to win,
               Or to reclaime thee from thy wonted sinne;
               
                  Reader, if this do no impression leaue,
               So that thou canst not any feare conceiue
               Through this description; thinke vpont at night
               Soone in thy bed when earth's depriu'd of light
               I say at mid-night when thou wak'st from sleepe,
               And lonely darknesse doth in silence keep
               The Grim-fac't night. And but immagine then,
               Thou wert borne all alone to some darke den
               And there set naked; though thou felts no paine,
               Yet seeing no way to get out againe,
               If thou shouldst in that naked loneness heare,
               Some yelling voyce, or some strange noyse drawne
                     ••
                  
               
               VVith threatning; or but calling on thy name;
               Oh with what Patience couldst thou bide the sam
                     •
                  
               
               But if withall, thy wandring eyes should marke,
               And now and then see pearing through the dar
                     •
                  
               
               Some monstrous visages, or vgly faces
               VVhich shold make proffer of some rude embr
                     •••
                  
               
               And smetime seeme as if they would begin
               VVith griping pawes to ceize thy trembling ski
                     •
                  
               
               
                  
Or, but suppose that in thy Chamber there,
               Where cannot be the hundreth part of feare:
               (Because to thee the place well knowne will be
               And thou must haue wherewith to couer thee)
               Yet there I say suppose thou shouldst behold
               Nor such grim obiects as are heere foretold,
               But Onely heare the dolefull voyce of men
               Complaining in the darke; And now and then
               Behold the ghastly shape of friends long dead,
               Wrapt in their sheetes as they were buried,
               Or else from out thy Chamber floore to rise
               A troupe of bony, pickt Anatomies
               
               Come pointing to thee, as if thou wert he
               That must ere long their bare companion be:
               Then thou wouldst feare I know, and think on him
               Whose might & fearful power thou didst contemn
               Thou wouldst consider better of the feare,
               And hellish horror I haue mention'd heare.
               That Dungeons estate thou would'st conceiue,
               And somewhat thy presumptuous actions leaue;
               Thou wouldst not so cast all thy care behind thee,
               But watch thy self for feare least death shold finde thee,
               Doing some il; nor wouldst thou thus delay,
               Times of repentance still from day to day:
               But oh! show should I hope that this I plead,
               Will worke in them that shall but barely read
               What I haue writ? Since I my selfe that know,
               And haue some inward seeling of that woe
               For get my selfe; I thought when I shall be
               From such, and such like cares and troubles free,
               
                  
Then wil I all my vanities forsake,
               A better course of life Ile vndertake,
               And only seeke the glory of his name
               By whom I liue; That day ere long time came;
               Then I had other lets; but if that they,
               As I did seeke they might were once away,
               I would indeed my duty better doe:
               Well, so it pleas'd God I orepast them too;
               Yet somthing hindred still that I could neuer
               In my intended Christian course perseuer.
               But euer found vnto my griefe and sorrow,
               That I was bad to day and worse to morrow:
               But oh! thou God that knowst my hearts desire,
               Do not; oh do not at my handes require
               My youthfull sinnes; though that my flesh be fraile,
               And my affections often do preuaile:
               Seeing thou knowest the weake estate of man,
               And what a little his small power can;
               Accept my will, and let thy blood suffice,
               To quit the rest of mine iniquities,
               But now, because I haue obseru'd such store,
               I needs must tell a few presumptions more.
               Some in contemning others wisdome, show,
               That they presume themselues do all things, kno
                     •
                  
               
               But that vile selfe-conceit nere raised any,
               Certaine I am it is the fall of many:
               Others (and they in this kind too offend,)
               On their owne Memories too much depend:
               Such I haue heard so confidently speake,
               As if they had no thought that men were wea
                     •
                  
               
               
                  
Yea those though twenty men haue all gaine-said
               What they affirmed, were not yet affraid,
               Their owne bare affirmation to out-face,
               With sundry oathes: such wondrous trust they place
               In their remembrance; yea my selfe ere now
               Haue beene oft-times more rash for to anow
               What I thought truth; then ere Ile be againe:
               For what I deemd to be so sure and plaine,
               That I not onely stood in't to my might,
               But would haue paun'd my life 'thad been the right
               That to my shame, I haue my selfe alone,
               Found to be false when all the rest were gone.
               VVhich greeu'd me so that Ile nere more rely
               Or trust so much to mine owne memory.
               But what may I terme those, who for a name,
               Or for to get some vile prepostrous fame;
               VVill desperately for the nonce begin,
               To put in action some vngodly sinne
               That all men loath; and only as they say,
               For to be talkt of. VVhat are such I pray?
               Presumptuous, vaine, or weake, or all that's bad,
               The last I thinke and ten-times more then mad;
               Yet we haue gallants, and great store of such,
               That in their great Brauadoes care not much
               VVhat villanies they doe; But 'tis their humor,
               Only to fill mens mouthes with idle Rumor.
               And cause they know the Vulgar sort do deeme them,
               Youths of great Spirit, and do much esteeme them,
               But amongst wise-men they are sure to gaine.
               Reprochfull shame and wel deseru'd disdaine,
               
                  
Yet for to adde some fame vnto this story:
               We will be queath them Erostratus glory.
               Nor haue our old men left that humor yet,
               For though through feeblenesse they are vnfit
               To put in practise their old tricks againe,
               Yet for to show they like them, and would faine,
               Thei'le often with a lie or two recite them,
               And the rememberance doth so much delight them
               That whereas they ought rather to repent,
               And with a grieued heart for to lament
               Their former follie; They with Ioy and Laughter
               Seeme to approu't in those that shall come after.
               Yet there's a crew the which my Muse wel knows,
               To them she here a Memorandum owes
               And yet no Commendations, for they are
               But busie fellowes that doe boldly dare
               Take on them in their comments, for to finde
               The secret meaning of each Authors minde.
               And to apply that in particular
               That should extend to all in generall:
               And in this little booke perhaps they can,
               Say here I ment one, there another man;
               And by their names they wil not stick to shew them,
               When as perhaps I nere so much as knew them.
               So from my honest meaning they will reare them
               A slander for some priuat grudge they beare them
               But though these are so bold, yet I beleeue,
               Or hope at least▪ no men of wisedome giue
               Credit to any such interpretations,
               That are but false imaginations;
               
                  
Since each of these what stile soere he craue,
               Doth show him a presumptuous foole and knaue,
               But heare all you that are quite voyd of care,
               VVhat you presume in: chiefly you that dare,
               Maugre Gods threates, go foreward to fulfill,
               Your naughty, rash, vnbridled hare-braine will;
               As if you thought that you your selues made all,
               And that indeed there were no God at al.
               Know this, ere long time it shall come to passe,
               That you shall houling sit and cry, alas:
               Cursing your births and miserable state,
               VVith sad repentance when it is too late,
               Vnlesse you now take time. Oh wormes! oh men!
               Forsake your sollies, oh forsake them then,
               VVhat wil you do else when that seiz'd by death,
               Ready to draw the latest gaspe of breath:
               VVhen as you are so weak that you would faine,
               But cannot mooue your tongues for to complaine?
               VVhat would you do if then their should appeare
               The Authors of most miserable feare,
               Your guilty Consciences, and there vnroll
               To your remembrances the dreadfull scroll,
               Of your Presumptions, and with all present,
               
                  
                     •
                   vision of th 'infernall punishment,
               
                  
                     •
                  repar'd for such? And if in that bad case,
               You should behold him you esteemd so base
               
                  
                     •
                  t with such power, that at each frown he makes
               
                  
                     •
                  he earth doth tremble and the heauen shakes:
               VVhat would you doe? Oh any thing I'me sure,
               
                  
                     •
                  o paine there is but you would then endure
               
                  
To scape his wrath if you do not dispaire,
               Then wil you beg, entreat, and promise faire;
               Or any thing, if so it were you might
               Returne to life againe; then you would quite
               Alter your doings, then forsooth you'l be
               A patterne vnto all posterity.
               You would be humble, meeke, deuout and chaste
               But now theres time, and then it may be past:
               Yet I my selfe haue heard those that haue vow'd,
               Much in their anguish, and God hath allow'd
               A longer time, yea hath vouchsaft to saue
               And giue them life againe e'ne at the graue:
               And yet haue these forgot their former paine
               And turnd vnto their owne ill wayes againe:
               Which hauing seene, this for vs men I'le speake,
               Not without griefe; though nothing be so weake:
               Yet we are in our owne conceits so tall,
               That for presumption we do out-passe all:
               And if so be that this same hardning sinne
               Do seaze vpon the heart once and get in;
               My mind is this 'twill nere be purg'd thence well,
               No not with all the feares and pangs of Hell.
               
            
            
               
               EPILOGVS.
               SO in some measure I haue now made knowne.
               What foule abuses Time to me hath showne
               And what man is: I haue explain'd some Crimes
               That I haue noted in these present times.
               Then though I haue beene stil accounted idle,
               This showes I haue not giuen time the bridle
               To run away vnmannag'd; But did vse it
               Then best, when I seem'd most for to abuse it?
               Here sinfull man thou maist behold in part
               Thy miserable state and what thou art:
               Thy Passions, thy vanities heere see,
               In part I say for all there cannot be:
               Thy wauerings and thy frailties I'ue explain'd,
               With thy Presumption, yet nothing fain'd;
               If thou hast read it, then I hope thou know'st,
               Though thou seem'st bad, thou art worse then thou show'st
               And I do trust thy wretchednesse espide,
               Will quell thy most intollerable pride;
               I mus'd a while thou wert so prone to sinning,
               But 'twas thy fault I see from the beginning:
               And as the Lord himselfe once said, so stil,
               T' immaginations of thy heart are ill:
               Thats one maine cause; then to performe an euill,
               Thou hast the pronenesse of the flesh, the Diuell,
               
                  
With bad examples of his instigation,
               Besides the worldes rash approbation:
               But yet would I not haue thee think, oh man!
               That I with Tymon the Athenian
               
               Desire to make thee so much feele thy woe,
               To goe and hang thy selfe; I meane not so,
               Or for to driue thee thereby to dispaire,
               'Tis not my purpose, my intent's more faire:
               This I would haue thee doe, since flesh is fraile,
               And Sathan will be busie to preuaile:
               With heed and care watch ouer thy affection,
               And in thy doings follow this direction.
               First see if't be thy flesh that mooues thee to
               Those thinges the which thou art about to doe,
               Next to consider well it doth behooue thee,
               What kind of men they are that do approoue thee:
               For true it is as I haue oft beene taught,
               What flesh desires, and most approoues is naught.
               And since they thrust thee forward vnto euill,
               Thou hast an ill heart, proud flesh, and the Diuill
               With bad example. Learne oh man to season,
               Thy hart with sacred, thoughts, with truth & reason
               Thy flesh with labour; and with fasting tame
               And twil not be so subiect vnto blame;
               Preuent the Diuels baits and his temptations,
               With earnest prayers and good meditations,
               And see thou heed to thy companions giu'st,
               Since thou wilt be as these with whom thou liu'st;
               Yea since thou art so subiect vnto sinne,
               Shun all occasions that may draw thee in,
               
                  
So when thy God shall see thou hast a will,
               And true desire for to amend what's ill,
               He will accept it for his sonnes deare sake,
               And thee more willing, and more able make;
               Yea should thy Sinnes more red then scarlet grow,
               Yet he would make them whiter then the snow.
               Thy now blacke soule, were it thrice more defilde,
               As innocent as is the new borne child:
               And thy most miserable body, farre
               More glorious then is the brightest Starre:
               But if thou, without care or heed, dost leane
               Vnto those lusts of flesh that are vncleane;
               If thou take pleasure and delight to doe them,
               Quite giuing ouer thy desire vnto them,
               They both in soule and body toe, will make thee
               So fowle a Leaper that God will forsake thee;
               His holy Angels and his Saints abhor thee,
               And onely Diuels make entreaty for thee;
               Yea thou must in Gehynnon waile with them,
               That are excluded new Ierusalem.
               
            
            The end of the second booke.
         
         
            
            
            THE SCOVRGE.
            MY Muse I purpos'd to haue rested heere,
            And so she should indeed, but that I feare
            A gentle warning wil not now suffice
            To make men leaue off their iniquities:
            Yea, I do know their negligence so great,
            Tis not enough for to perswade or threat:
            And therefore Ime resolued ere I part,
            To giue them a remembrance to their smart,
            And though full loath, cause their ill natures vrge
            Ile send abroad a Satir with a scourge,
            That to their shame for this abuse shall strip them,
            And being naked in their vices, whip them:
            And to be sure of these that are most rash,
            Not one shall scape him that deserues a lash,
            But some will kick, now let them kick & spare not,
            So he may come and Ierk them well I care not;
            For be they rich, or poore, or weake, or strong,
            Ile make him finde them that delight in wrong,
            Not in despight, to make reuengefull rumors;
            Rather in sport to mock the worlds base humors;
            But least I make my Prologue ouer-large,
            'Ile let my whipping-Satyr know his charge:
            First though he haue but little manners got;
            Bred in the woods; where many vse them not:
            
               
Yet will I send him to suruey the court,
            And dance the Witch to make his king some sport.
            Doe Satyr, goe, thou shalt not be disdain'd,
            Loue without merit hath bin entertain'd,
            And so many thine; that Progenies the most,
            Yea all indeed of which the world can boast,
            And that so worthy: ('tis a wondrous matter)
            Commend it how thou wilt thou canst not flatter.
            If thou maist get their fauour that's the best,
            There is no cause why thou should'st feare the rest
            The good will help but neuer hurt, then care not,
            Although the wicked would offend they dare not.
            First lash the great ones, but if thou be wise,
            In generall and doe not speciallize:
            Yet if thou do, so wisely let it be,
            None may except but those that faulty be.
            Now peraduenture some will rage or storme,
            But that's no matter thou art freely borne;
            And though their eies spark fire, and they look big
            Be thou as sterne, thou need'st not care a fig;
            And tell them plainely ' tis not all their shew,
            Can make them think them better thē they know;
            'Tis not great words, nor yet a large possession,
            Shall free them from the scandall of oppression,
            Thogh they can now, to get themselues a name,
            Build Babell vp a new, and quickly frame
            Such loftie Pallaces as if they ment,
            To threaten heauen from the batlement.
            Who wonders at it? none I thinke; and why?
            Who is so mad to tel them that, not I?
            
               
Yet Satyr looke that thou before thou part,
            Giue them one ierke to make their Honors smart,
            Their Stately houses say are things but vaine:
            An age or two shall rot them downe againe;
            And for their vice if there be none dare show it,
            Say I haue vow'd to make the world to know it,
            Then tis not toombes nor yet a heape of stones,
            Shall make men thinke the better of their bones,
            No, it shall speake their Auarice and pride,
            Which those they scorn'd and wrong'd, shall then deride.
            So let them go their Soueraigne to attend,
            And those that be not at the best, amend:
            Search on for more; but if thou hap to finde
            Any among them of the female kinde,
            VVomen or Angels, bad or good; thine eyes
            Shall not looke toward their infirmities.
            VVhat ere some say, no man will, or can,
            VVrong him (Ile warrant) that's an honest man,
            For they are good and surely would be still,
            VVer't not that men did often make them ill:
            Those that are angry with them let them show it,
            Ile say th' are Vertuous for because I know it.
            Mens faults I tell, so may he womens too
            That's plagu'd by whores, with whom he had to doe.
            These if thou hap to see, I charge thee skip,
            And search in euery office with thy whip;
            There, there are those that for their priuate store
            Make both th' exchequer & the commons poore,
            Extortion doth maintaine their brauery,
            Yet lay not open all their knauery,
            
               
But tell them they a new account must bring,
            That lash perhaps their guilty soule will sting.
            Thou shalt in Court another troope espy,
            Such as in show are full of honesty,
            Faire tong'd; but he that such fine followers wants
            Is happy; for they are but Sycophants,
            Dissembling▪ Villaines: do but note them well,
            And thou wilt say they are the brood of hell.
            For pluck away their fain'd fidelity,
            And they are e'ne a heap of villany:
            To make them smart these wordes to them commend
            That beggery and shame shall be their end.
            Yet thou shalt find depending on the Court
            Some that wil ieast to make their betters sport,
            But sift them, I durst pawne a brace of testers,
            If truth were known they are more fooles then Iesters
            And so they are suppos'd, although indeed,
            They are more knaues then fooles; but take thou heed
            Come not within the compasse of their Bable,
            Then call them knaues as lowd as thou art able;
            If thou come thither at some publike show,
            As there thou shalt be whether they will or no,
            Remember that thou make a shift to creepe
            Neere to the place where they the Re
                  •
               els keep.
            There stand a while vnseene, and do no more,
            But note those fellowes that do keep the doore,
            If thou perceiue some, as some will do then,
            Keep out a many worthy Gentlemen,
            And let a Laundresse or a Scoundrel passe,
            Giue him a ierk and tell him hee's an asse;
            
               
But least thou spy what may make thee asham'd,
            Or speake of that for which thou maist be blam'd,
            Leaue thou the Court if thy owne ease thou pitty,
            And come a while to walke about the Citty▪
            
            As soone as there thou ent'rest thou shalt meet
            Great store of Gallants pacing out the street:
            A part from dice, or fence, or dancing come,
            And peraduenture from a whore-house some,
            Those are goodfellowes that will frankly spend,
            While land will last or any man wil lend;
            And yet to see (more fooles the world had neuer)
            They are so proud as if't twould last for euer,
            And though these lightly cannot haue a worse,
            Or deadlier sicknes then an empty purse
            Which wil ensue, yet tell them they must meete
            At the Kinges-bench, the Counter, or the Fleet,
            Then step vnto the Lawyers, peraduentnre
            They'l by some VVrit command thee not to enter:
            Yet feare them not but looke and thou shalt spye,
            Vnder their gownes a messe of Knauery.
            Pluck off their mask of law that clokes their drifts,
            And thou shalt see a world of lawlesse shir
                  •
               s;
            But tell them theres a iudge wil not be feed,
            And that perhaps wil make their conscience bleed;
            Then tell the Scriueners as thou passest by:
            That they were best to leaue their forgery,
            Or else, why is't their eares do scape so well,
            The Diuell meanes to beare them whole to hell▪
            
            Tell the Phisitions if thou meet with any,
            Their Potions & their Drugs haue murther'd many
            
               
For which thou would'st haue lasht, but dost delay them
            Because the diuel means himselfe to pay thē;
            But if thei'l proue conclusions, bid them then,
            Try't on themselues and not on other men:
            Desire the Brokers that they would not yaune,
            After the forfeit of anothers pawne,
            It is their right by law theile say, tis true,
            And so's their soule, perhaps, anothers due;
            But sting them if their conscience quite be fled,
            Then shall they pay what they haue forfeited:
            Entreat the Tailor next, if that he can,
            To leaue his theft and proue an honest man;
            If that he think the matter be too hard,
            Knock him about the noddle with his yard,
            If he bee ritch and take the same in snuffe,
            Tell him his substance is but stolen stuffe
            And that the Iay would hardly brook the weather,
            If eu'ry Bird should take away her feather.
            So hauing whipt him, let the Priest go shrieue him,
            And if he haue authority forgiue him:
            Go warn the Crafts man that he do not lurke
            All day at ale-house, and neglect his worke,
            And then suruey the ware of euery trade,
            For much, I tell thee, is deceitfull made,
            Which if thou find I charge thee do not friend it,
            But call him knaue, and bid him go and mend it,
            Oh see if thou the Marchant-man canst find,
            For heele be gone at turning of the wind,
            Bid him keep touch, or tell his worship how
            His heart wil tremble when the Seas are tough,
            
               
Desire him to, if he doe trauaile thither,
            Where Conscience is, that he would bring some hither,
            Here's little; some wil haue it; if none will,
            He shall gaine by it though he keepe it still;
            If he bring none, 'twere Charitie, I thinke,
            To pray some storme might make his vessell sinke;
            Looke in their ships, for I haue knowne deceit
            Hath bin in both the Owner and the fraight,
            Yea note them well, & thou shalt finde their bookes
            Are ginns for wood-cocks made like tenter-hooks:
            Well they are ritch, the Marchant wealth obtaines
            And cares not how, so he encrease his gaines;
            Yet least his wealth may hap to make him proud,
            
               Satyr I pray thee, tell him this aloude
            To make him smart, that whilst he like a mome,
            
            Playes fast abroad, his wife pla
                  •
               es loose at home;
            Nor shall his ill-got masse of wealth hould out
            But he or his become a banquerout:
            Now to thy rest, tis night; but here approaches
            A troupe with torches hurried in their Coaches,
            Stay and behold, what are they? I can tell,
            Some bound for Shoreditch, or for Clarken-well:
            Oh these are they which thinke that Fornication,
            Is but a youthfull sportfull recreation:
            These to hold out the game, maintaine the back
            VVith marrow pies, potato-rootes and sack:
            And when that Nature hath consum'd her part,
            Can hould out a Luxurious course by art:
            Goe stop the horses quickly least thou misse
            And tel the Coachmans wanton carriage this,
            
               
They of their guide must be aduised well,
            For they are running downe the hill to hell.
            Their Venery will soone consume their stocks,
            And bring them to repentance with a poxe.
            So other crimes committed without light,
            Let such reueale as see like Owles by night:
            For many men a secret fault can finde,
            But in apparant rougeries are blind
            Or else they will not see; but thou wertst best
            Leaue whipping and betake thee to thy rest;
            If in an Inne it be, before thou sup,
            Will that the Tapster call his maister vp
            And bid him kindly, since he giues thee lodging,
            To vse plaine dealing and detest all dodging.
            Dissembling's naught, hard rekonings they ar wors
                  •
               
            
            Light gaines (they say) will make a heauy purse.
            And let them not (this fault is very rife)
            Make any guest familiar with his wife.
            For many men (they weare but what they should)
            Do make their wiues more wantō then they would.
            Thereby they gaine, their Innes are wel frequented
            But such ill courses are too late repented;
            So schoole him well and do thy whip refraine,
            And send him to his other guests againe.
            Then thou shalt see the nimble Tapster flie,
            Still yalling, here, anon sir, by and by,
            
            So dilligent, till thou thy selfe acquaint
            With his 
                  •
               ly tricks thou'lt 
                  •
               'take him for a Saint.
            But I suppose that they haue tane an oth,
            Neuer to 
                  ••
               ll a pot but halfe with froth;
            
               
And there's an old shift if they leaue it not,
            There must be something added to the shot.
            But wilt thou swagger with him for it? no,
            But take him as he is and let him goe,
            Now for most hostlers if thou hap to try them.
            Knaues thou maist say they are and not belie them,
            For they deceaue the poore dumb traueling beast,
            And for the same deseru'd a ierke at least;
            Yet do thou spare them, for there is no doubt,
            Some guest will finde a time to pay the lout.
            Well, hauing rested and discharg'd thine host,
            Ile send thee downe, into the country, Post;
            For I haue bus'nes, no man would beleiue,
            With whom d'ye thinke? e'ne with the vnder-Shreeue
            Tell him thou heardst (and that's a fault indeed)
            That in some causes he is double-feed.
            And that moreouer he deserues a Portion,
            With those that are indited for extortion.
            Yea and for other things as well as that,
            Tell him the country tearmes him he knowes what▪
            
            A
                  •
                which if he make light as if he care not,
            Whip him in conscience soundly for't, and spare not
            Now for our Knights; their much formality,
            Hath made them leaue their hospitality,
            Yet, le
                  •
               t they should be angry say no more,
            This age hath made a number of them poore;
            And that some toe (or else they are belied)
            Haue begger'd their posteritie with pride,
            And since thou art so neere them doe not cease
            Vntill thou see our Iustices of peace,
            
               
There try if thou canst get but so much fauour,
            To bind the Country to the good behauiour,
            And tell them how thou hast informed been,
            That they haue granted Warrants vpon spleene;
            Are partiall, and haue ouer-sway'd by might
            The poore mans cause that's innocent and right:
            If this thou finde be true, thou hast permission;
            To lash, or put them out of the Commission;
            The Cunstable if he were bid, I wiss,
            Be good in's office, 'twere not much amiss:
            For he, they say, a many meanes may haue,
            If so he be dispos'd to play the knaue;
            See how he deales and makes thy message known,
            For he hath stocks and whipping-posts of's owne:
            There are Church-wardens to, I shame to see
            How they runne into wilfull periurie,
            Partlie in fauour and in part for feare,
            They wink't at much disorder in a yeare;
            But if thou hap to take them in the lurch,
            Ierke them as euill members of the Church;
            If they reply, offenders are so friended
            Though they present, 'tis little thing amended,
            Yet tell them 'tis their duty to discharge,
            Their consciences in euery thing at large;
            VVhich if they doe, ill doers shall be sham'd
            Or the corrupted Visitors be blam'd
            And prethee tell the B. Chancellor,
            That thou art sent to be his counsellor:
            And will him if he meane not to be stript,
            And like a schoole boy once againe be whipt,
            
               
His worship would not so bad minded be,
            To peruert iudgement for a scuruy fee.
            Then next go tell the reuerent good maisters,
            Thou and the Clergy needs must fall at wasters:
            Faith thou shalt find their Doctorships perhaps,
            Disputing of their Surplesses and caps,
            About the holy Crosse, and Gowne, a Hood,
            Or some such matters for the Churches good,
            But tell them there are other thinges to doe,
            A great deale fitter to be lookt into.
            And if they please to go their Visitation,
            There's waightier matters looke for reformation,
            Yea say theres many an infirmity,
            Which they both may and ought to remedy.
            But touch them with remembrance of their place,
            And they perhaps will alter then the case,
            Then bid those Dunces in our Colledges,
            That they prouide them good Apologies:
            For 'tis reported lately they haue borh,
            Betooke themselues to Venery and sloth,
            And seek not learning only as they should,
            But are back friends to many a man that would
            'Twere fit they made a publike recantation,
            And were wel whipt before a Congregation.
            Sole auing them their wits for to refine,
            Thou shalt be bold to looke on the Diuine;
            They say, hee's growne more carefull of his stock,
            His profits and his tithes then of his flock:
            Now if thou find report hath not belied him,
            With a respect vnto his Calling chide him,
            
               
I had almost forgot our ciuill Doctors;
            I pray thee warne them and their lazy Proctors,
            They would not vse to make so many pauses,
            Before they do determine poore mens causes,
            And let them not suppose their fees are small,
            Since they at last wil get the Diuell and all,
            There be Court Barrons many in the way,
            Thus maist thou to the Guardians of them say,
            Their policy in raising fines and rents,
            Hath put poore men beside their Tenements:
            And tel them, let them answer if they can,
            Their false Court-roles hath vndone many a man;
            Say thou hast seene what to their place belong'd
            And knowst, ofttimes both Lord & tenāts wrong'd
            Yet spare thy whip; for why? the peoples curse,
            Already hath prepared them a worse,
            So when that thou hast punisht vices slaues,
            And roundly Ierk't the Country petty-knaues,
            Then march we to the Camp to bloody Nero
            
            And tel the ruftling shuffling Caualero;
            He whose hard-heart can brooke to rob or spill,
            His friend or foe, to ruine, wound or kil,
            Tel him, I say, there is a misery
            Must follow to reuenge his cruelty;
            And see that thou the Ruffaines courage quaile,
            Or lash him till the stock and whipcord faile;
            Walke but the round, and thou maist hap to catch,
            The carelesse souldiers sleeping in their watch,
            Or in a march perhaps theile goe astray,
            But if thou see them in their best aray,
            
               
And without leaue and warrant roming out,
            To fetch some desperate booty there about,
            Remember them; and for their stout brauado's,
            Let them be wel prefer'd with bastinadoes,
            Then bid the Captaines in their Garisons,
            Not lay to paune their rich Caparisons,
            Nor come vppon the score til they are forc't,
            To be disarmd for payment, or vnhors't,
            Nor keepe the soldiers hire, least they be faine,
            To make an insurrection or complaine,
            For that indeed prooues oftentimes the cause,
            They do so much transgresse the Martiall lawes;
            Yea tel him 'tis a scandall to be drunke
            And drowne their valour, or maintaine a Punk;
            Then if he mend not for to blot his fame,
            In steed of honor whip him for't with shame,
            Then lastly there are selfe-conceited wits,
            Whose stomacks nought but their own humor fits,
            Detractors, Critticks; who en'e at the best,
            Do bite with enuy or else snarle at least,
            And in thy progresse if discern'd thou be,
            'Tis out of question they wil snap at thee,
            To spight them then the waie's not to out-brawle them,
            But say thou car'st not, & that lash wil gaule them:
            Now Satyr leaue me to my selfe alone,
            Thou hast thy message and thou maist be gone,
            Whip any that shall offer to withstand thee,
            In executing that which I command thee;
            And yet so, ho, ho, ho, come back againe,
            Be sure that thou do vnderstand me plaine:
            
               
First note; I from my Scourge do here except,
            The Guard by whom the kingdomes peace is kept
            The vertuous Peeres: Alas! I nothing grutch them,
            And on my blessiing see thou do not touch them:
            And if in all our offices theres any;
            That is an honest man amongst so many;
            Him did I euer meane that thou shouldst spare,
            Because I know that such a one is rare;
            Physick and Law I honor both (God blesse it)
            With euery vertuous man that doth professe it,
            I do not ayme at such as they, nor when
            I flout our Gallants, meane I Gentlemen,
            Such worthy Brittaines as maintained be,
            According to their fashion and degree:
            No, those I loue; and what can I lesse doe,
            Since I of them am wel-beloued to;
            To blame all Marchants neuer was my will,
            Nor do I think all Trades-mens work is ill;
            My meaning must not so be vnderstood,
            For the last shooes I had were very good;
            Yea and so farre am I from such a thought,
            Thou shouldst against the vertuous doe ought,
            That if thou but an honest Tapster see,
            Tell him I wish we might acquainted be;
            And I'le that Hostler loue which in amends,
            Will vse my horse wel, that we may be friends;
            And to be breefe good Satyr vnderstand
            That thou maist not mistake what I command:
            'Tis not my meaning neither do I like,
            That thou at this time shouldst in speciall strike,
            
               
Because my hatred might appeare as then,
            Not to the vice, but rather to the men;
            VVhich is not so, for though some malice me
            vvith eu'ry one am I in charitie;
            And if that thou doe euer come to sight,
            And bring thy yet concealed charge to light▪
            
            I wish it might be tooke as 'twas intended:
            And then no vertuous man wil be offended:
            But if that any man doe thinke amiss,
            Vpon my life that partie guiltie is;
            And therefore lash him, so get thee out of dore
            Come what come will, I'le call thee back no more:
            So, now he's gone the way that I direct him,
            I wonder how the world will now respect him,
            If that she maruaile why he was not bolder,
            Perhaps he may be when that he is older;
            He hath too smooth a chin, a looke too mild,
            A token that he is not wholly wild;
            But may I reach the yeares of other men,
            If that this loose world be not mended then,
            Ile send a Satyr rougher then a Beare
            That shal not chide and whip, but scartch & teare.
            And so I'le teach him he shall be too strong,
            For all your Paris-garden dogs to wrong.
            This Satyr hath a scourge, (but it wants weight,
            Your Spanish whips were worse in eighty-eight,)
            That shall not onely make them howle for paine,
            But touse them, till they hold their peace againe:
            Now if the world, frowne vpon me for't,
            Shall I be sorie? No, 'twil mend my sport;
            
               
But what if I my self should hap to stray,
            Out of my bounds into my Satyrs way?
            Why then; and that's as much as I need doe,
            I giue him leaue to come and lash me toe.
            So now my Muse a resting time requires,
            For shee's or' wearied and her Spirit tires.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Certaine Epigrammes to the
Kings most excellent Maiestie,
the Queene, the Prince, the Princesse,
and other Noble and Honorable Personages,
and friends to whom the Author
gaue any of his bookes.
            
               To the Kings Maiestie.
               EPIGRAM. 1.
               LOe here 
                     •
                  read Sou'raign and great Brittans King
               First to thy view I haue presum'd to bring,
               These my Essaies; On which but ge
                     •
                  ly looke,
               I do not make thee Patron of m
                     •
                   booke:
               For 'tis not sit 
                     •
                  ur Faiths-Desender (still)
               Take the protection of each trifling quill;
               No; yet because thy wisdome able is,
               Of all things to make vse; I g
                     •
                  ue thee this:
               The Picture of a Beast in Humane shape,
               'Tis neither Monkey, nor Baboone, nor Ape,
               
               Though neere Conditioned; I haue not sought it brought it
               In Affrick Deserts; neither haue I
               
                  
Out of Ignota terra: those wild lands,
               Beyond the farthest Magalanick strands
               Yeeld not the like; the Fiend liues in this Il
               And I mu
                     •
                  'd that you spied not all this while
               That Man-like Monster. But (alas) I saw,
               The looke of Maiestie kept him in awe;
               He wil not, for he dares not before thee
               Shew what (indeed) he vses for to be;
               But in thy presence he is meeke, demure,
               Deuout, chast, honest, innocent, and pure:
               Seeming an Angell, free from thought of ill,
               And therefore thou must needs so thinke him stil.
               But for because thy Soueraigne place denies,
               The sight of what is view'd by meaner eyes:
               This I haue brought thee, with much care and paine,
               'Twas like to haue bin forced backe again:
               So loath the world was, that thou should'st view,
               The Portrature that I haue drawne so true;
               Yea yet, (I feare) she findes her selfe so gal'd,
               That some wil study how to haue't recal'd;
               But tis too late; for now my Muse doth trust,
               When thou hast seen't thou wilt approoue what's iust.
               And if I may but once perceiue, or heare,
               That this sounds pleasing in thy kingly eare,
               Ile make my Muse for to describe him fuller,
               And paint him forth in a more liuely cullour:
               Yea I wil to the worlds great shame vnfold,
               That which is knowne, but neuer yet was told;
               Meane while great King a happy Monar
                     •
                  h raigne,
               In spight of Rome, the Diuel, Hel, and Spaine.
            
            
               
               Another to his Maiesty.
               EPIGR. 2.
               AS he that feedes on no worse meat then Quailes,
               
               And with choice dainties pleaseth Appetite:
               Wil neuer haue great list to gnaw his nailes,
               Or in a course thin diet take delight,
               So thou great King that still dost ouerlooke,
               The learned workes, that are most deepe, most rare▪
               
               Canst not perhaps these my rude Satyrs brooke:
               Thou dost not for such sharp fang'd Critticks care:
               Oh do not yet thy selfe so much estrange,
               From wonted curtesie to others showne,
               A Country dish doth often serue for change,
               And something heere is worthy to be knowne.
               Sharpe sauce giues sweetest meat a better tast;
               And though that this to many bitter be,
               Thou no such sicknes in thy stomack hast,
               And therefore 'twill be pleasing vnto thee:
               VVhat though I neither flater, fawne, nor sooth,
               My honest plainenesse shall more truely praise thee,
               Then those that in Court language filed smooth,
               Striue vnbeleeuing Tropheis for to raise thee,
               My loyall heart cannot so well impart,
               The loue it beares your Maiesty as other
                     •
                  s:
               The want of Time, Encouragement and Art,
               My purpose in the Embrio still smothers.
               
                  
                  Obscurity, Grosse-Fates, and want of Meanes,
               
               Would haue made Romes great Maro harshly sing▪
               
               But if once Caesar to his musique leanes,
               His tunes through all the world will sweetly ring▪
               
               And why are English wits so perfect growne?
               But for because thy kingly hand peruses,
               Their wel tun'd Poems; and hath bounty showne,
               Yea it is thou giust light vnto their Muses.
               Oh! had I such a Star for Pole to mine,
               I'de reach a straine should rauish all the Nine.
               
            
            
               To the Queenes Maiesty
               EPIGR. 3.
               DAughter, Wife, Sister, 'Mother to 'In Posse. a King▪
               
               And Empresse of the North, enrich your Name;
               
               Yet do you chastity and wisedome bring,
               Bounty, and curtesie to make vp true fame.
               VVhich 
                     •
                  ince (faire Queen) my Muse hath vnderstood,
               She's bold into your presence to intrude,
               Assured, honest meanings that are good,
               Shall find acceptance there, though they seeme rud
                     •
                  ,
               Looke and hehold the Vanities of men,
               Their Misery, their Weaknesse, and their Pride,
               
               Daigne to suruey this booke (I say) and then,
               VVhen you haue each particular espi'de:
               Thinke with your selfe, how highly blest you be,
               For to enioy a Prince that both knowes how,
               
                  
To keepe himselfe, from such fell Passion free,
               And make so many mad-wild creatures bow,
               Indeed here's Vices tablet plainely made,
               Not veiled ouer, or obscurely drawne;
               Tis in a colour which shall neuer fade,
               That men may blush, on such a hag to fawne▪
               
               But if your Grace will fauour what I sing,
               Though Vertue be in durance Ile erpreeue her
               That now despised Nimph to honour bring,
               Set al her hidden beauties forth; and giue her
               So sweet a looke, and such a deft attire,
               Men shal grow loue-sick and burne with desire.
            
            
               To CHARLES Prince of Wales.
               EPIG. 4.
               SEE here faire Of-spring of the royall Stem,
               
               What all the world almost is subiect to;
               Behold it so, thou truely maist contemne,
               And from thy heart abhorre what others doe,
               Now is the fit and only time to season,
               That young, rare-vnderstanding breast of thine
               VVith sacred precepts, good aduise, and reason;
               
               But there's no doubt thou wilt to good incline,
               Inheritance, great Prince, will make it thine:
               And were Mans nature, yet more prone to fall,
               Soe to be borne, and so taught, helpes all.
            
            
               
               To the Princesse.
               EPIG. 5.
               SWeet Princesse; though my Muse sings not the glories,
               Of faire aduenterous Knights or Ladies loues:
               Though here be no Encomiastick stor
                     •
                  es,
               That tender hearts, or gentle Spirits moues,
               Yet in an honest homelie Rustick straine,
               She shews the Creature (such may you nere know)
               Forgiue her though she be seuere, or plaine,
               
                  Truth that may warrant it commanded so.
               Yea view it ouer with beleefe; but than,
               I am afraid you will abhor a man.
               And yet you need not; All deserue not blame,
               For that great Prince that wooes for to be yours
               If that his worth but equalize his fame,
               Is free from any Sat
                        •
                     r here of ours.
               Nay they shall praise him; for though they haue whips
               To make the wicked their offences rue,
               And dare to scourge the greatest when he trips,
               
                  Vertue shall still be certaine of her due.
               But for your sake; (if that you entertaine him,)
               Oh would he were (a man) as I could faine him
               Yet sweet Elizabeth: that happy Name,
               
               If we lost nothing else by loosing thee;
               
                  
So deare to Eng
                        •
                     and is, we are to blame
               If without teares and sighes we parted be;
               But if thou must make blest another Clime;
               Remember Our; and for that; though I vse,
               A crabbed subiect and a Churlish Rime,
               Daine but to be the Mistris of my Muse;
               
               And Ile change Theames, and in a lofty stile,
               Keepe thee aliue for euer, in this Ile.
               
            
            
               To the Lords of his Maiesties most honorable
Priuy Counsell.
               EPIGR. 6.
               
                  MOst Honor'd Lords; I heere present this book,
               To your graue censures, not to shew my Art:
               
               Nere did you on so rude a matter looke,
               Yet tis the token of an honest heart,
               I did it not to please, nor flatter any,
               Nor haue I made it for the thirst of gaine:
               For I am sure it wil not humor many,
               And I expect much hatred for my paine.
               Here somthing you may see that now requires,
               Your care and prouidence to haue't amended:
               That's the maine poynt to which my Muse aspires,
               And whereto I haue all my labour tended:
               It may be there be some out of their hate,
               Will mis-interpret what is plainely ment;
               
               Or tax me as too saucy with the State,
               
               In hope to make me for the Truth be 
                     •
                  hent,
               Yet know Great Lords, I do acknowledge heere,
               It is your wisdomes that next God maintaines,
               This Kingdomes good; And from my heart I beare
                     •
                  
               
               A reuerent respect vnto your paines.
               I do not, as such faine would haue it seeme,
               Presume to teach your wisedomes what is best,
               I do not my owne knowledge so esteeme,
               Vile selfe conceit I from my heart detest.
               But for because I know the percing'st eye,
               Can neuer into all abuses see;
               And since the greatest in Authority,
               May not behold some-time so much as we:
               What therefore I haue thought to be amisse
               And worth amending I haue told it heere:
               I know your Honors wil be pleas'd in this,
               Though some (it may be) cannot rage forbeare.
               But if there's any take this writing badly,
               Had it told all, it would haue vext him madly.
            
            
               To Henry Earle of Southhampton.
               EPIGR. 7
               
                  SOuth-hampton; since thy Prouince brought me forth
                     •
                  
               
               And on those pleasant mountaines I yet keepe
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  ought to be no stranger to thy worth,
               Nor let thy Vertues in obliuion sleepe.
               Nor wil I; if my fortunes giue me time:
               Meane while read this, and see what others be;
               
                  
                     •
                  f thou canst lik't, and wil but grace my R
                        •
                     me,
               
               
                  
                     •
                  wil so blaze thy Hampshire springs and thee,
               Thy Arle, Test, Stowre, and Auon shal share Fame,
               
               Either with Humber, Seuerne, Trent or Thame.
               
            
            
               To William Earle of Penbrooke.
               EPIG. 8.
               THou whom respect of kin makes not vniust,
               True Noble Spirit free from hate or guile;
               
                  
                     •
                  hou whom thy Prince hath for thy care and trust,
               
                  
                     ••
                  ac't for to keepe the entrance of this Ile,
               
                  
                     •
                  e heere th' abuses of these wicked Times,
               
               
                  
                     •
                  haue expos'd them open to thy view:
               
                  
                     •
                  hy iudgement is not blinded with like crimes,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   therefore maist perceiue that all is true.
               
                  
                     •
                  Take't, though I seeme a stranger, yet I know thee;
               
                  
                     •
                  nd for thy vertues Penbrooke, this I owe thee.
            
            
               
               To the Lord Lisle, Lord Chamberlaine
to the Queene.
               EPIGRAM. 9.
               BEing a Sidney and so neere allied,
               To him whose matchlesse rare immortall pen
               Procur'd of Fame to haue him deifide,
               And liue for euer in the hearts of men:
               The loue my soule hath euer borne that name,
               Would certainely perswade me for your sake;
               In honest seruice to aduenture blame,
               Or any open dangers vndertake,
               Yet shall not that your titles, nor your place,
               Your honours, nor your might, nor all you haue,
               Cause me to flatter for reward or grace▪
               
               Fortune shall neuer make my mind a slaue,
               But seeing that your Vertue shines apparant,
               And honorable acts do speake your praise:
               Since Good Report hath giuen forth her warrant,
               Which none so much as by himselfe gaine-saies,
               That (and naught else but that) compels my Muse,
               
               To sing your worth and to present her Owne,
               
               If this imperfect issue you'le peruse,
               Ile make her in a better forne be knowne,
               And teach her, that is now so rude and plaine,
               To soare a pitch aboue the common straine,
            
            
               
               To the Lady Mary Wroth.
               EPIGR. 10.
               MAdame, to call you best, or the most faire,
               
               The Vertu'st and the wisest in our daies:
               Is now not commendations worth a haire,
               For that's become to be each hus-wifes praise.
               There's no degree, below Superlatiue,
               
               VVill serue some soothing Epigrammatists:
               
               The Worst they praise, exceeds Comparatiue,
               
               And Best can get no more out of their fists.
               But, Arts sweet Louer; (vnto whom! know,
               There is no happie Muse this day remaines;
               That doth not for your Worth and bounty owe,
               Euen himselfe, his best and sweetest straines.)
               Vouchsafe, to let this booke your fauour finde,
               And as I heare haue Mans abuses showne,
               Ile with like iust, and vncorrupted minde,
               So make your true vnfained Vertues knowne,
               While others false praise, shall in one's mouth be,
               All shall commend you, in the high'st degree.
            
            
               
               To Sir Thomas Ridgeway, Knight Barronet,
Treasurer of Ireland.
               EPIGR. 11.
               SIR, you first grac't and gratifi'd my Muse,
               
               Which nere durst try til then what she could do
               That which I did vnto my selfe was newes,
               A matter I was little vs'd vnto:
               Had you those first endeauours not approou'd,
               I should for euer more haue silence kept;
               But now your good encouragement hath moou'd
               And rous'd my Spirits, that before time slept;
               For which I vow'd a guift that should be better:
               Accept this for't, and ile be still your debtor.
               Here you shall see the Images of men,
               More sauage then the wildest Irish kerne:
               
               Abuses whipt and stript, and whipt agen,
               I know your Iudgement can the Truth discerne,
               Now so you will thinke well of this my Rime,
               I'ue such a mind yet to Saint Patrickes Ile,
               That if my Fate and Fortunes giue me time,
               I hope for to reuisit you a while,
               And make those sparkes of honour to flame high
               That rak't vp in obliuions cinders lie.
            
            
               
               To his Father.
               EPIGR. 12.
               OThers may glorie that their Fathers hands
               Haue scrapt together mighty summes of gold
               Boast in the circuit of new purchast lands,
               Or heards of cattell more then can be told.
               God giue them ioy; their wealth Ile nere enuy,
               For you haue gotten me a greater store,
               And though I haue not their prosperitie,
               In my conceit I am not halfe so poore.
               You learn't me with a little to content me,
               Shew'd how to bridle passion in some measure;
               And through your meanes I haue a Talent lent me,
               VVhich I more valew then all Indies treasure;
               For when the al-most boundlesse patrimonies,
               
               Are wasted; those by which our great ones trust
               To be eterniz'd: when their Ceremonies
               
               Shall be forgotten, and their toombes be dust;
               Then to the glorie of your future line,
               Your owne and my friends sacred memorie,
               This litle, poore, despised, wealth of mine,
               Shall raise a Trophee of eternitie,
               Which fretting enuy, nor consuming time,
               
               Shall ere abolish or one whit offend:
               
                  
A toplesse Statue that to starres shall clime,
               Far greater then your Art shall comprehend:
               But I must needs confesse tis true, I yet
               Reape little profit in the eyes of men:
               My Tallent yeelds small outward benefit,
               Yet Ile not leaue it for the world agen,
               Though't bring no gaine that you by artful sleight
               Can measure out the earth in part or whole;
               Sound out the Centers depth, and take the height,
               Either of th' Artick, or Antartick pole:
               Yet tis your pleasure, it contentment brings,
               And so my Muse is my content and ioy,
               I would not misse her to be ranckt with Kings,
               How euer some account it is a toy,
               But hauing then (and by your meanes) obtaind▪
               
               So rich a patrimony for my share:
               For which with linkes of loue I'me euer chaind,
               VVhat duties fitting for such bounties are?
               Moreouer Nature brought me in your debt,
               And still I owe you for your cares and feares:
               Your paines and charges I doe not forget
               Beside the interest of manie yeares:
               VVhat waie is there to make requitall for it?
               Much I shall leaue vnpaid doe what I can:
               Should I be then vnthankefull? I abhorre it,
               The Will maie serue when Power wants in man:
               This booke I giue you then, heere you shall finde
               Somewhat to counteruaile your former cost;
               It is a little Index of my mind;
               Time spent in reading it, will not be lost▪
               
               
                  
Accept it and when I haue to my might,
               Paid all I can to you; if powers diuine
               Shall so much in my happi
                     •
                  es delight,
               To make you Grandsire to a sonne of mine:
               Looke what remaines and may by right be due▪
               
               I'le pay it him as 'twas receiud from you.
               
                  Your louing Sonne.
George Wither.
                  
               
            
            
               To his mother.
               EPIG. 13.
               VNgrateful is the child that can forget,
               The Mothers many paines, her cares, her feares,
               And therefore though I cannot pay the debt,
               Due for the smallest drop of your kind teares;
               This Booke I for acknowledgement do giue you,
               Wherein you may perceiue my heart▪ my mind;
               Let neuer false report of me more grieue you,
               And you shall sure no iust occasion find,
               
                  
Loue made you apt to feare those slanders true,
               Which in my absence were but lately sowne:
               It was a motherly distrust in you,
               But those that raisd them are false villaines known
               For though I must confesse I am indeed,
               The vilest to my selfe that liues this time,
               Yet to the world ward I'ue tane such heed,
               Theres none can spot me with a hainous crime.
               This I am forct to speake, you best know why,
               Wherer's that man liuing that dare say I lye.
            
            
               To his deare friend Maister
Thomas Cranly.
               EPIGR. 14.
               BRother, for so I call thee, not because
               Thou wert my Fathers, or my Mothers sonne,
               Nor consanguinity, nor wedlock lawes,
               Could such a kindred twixt vs haue begun,
               We are not of one blood, nor yet name neither,
               Nor sworn in brotherhood with ale house quarts
               We neuer were so much as drunke together,
               Twas no such slight acquaintance ioynd our harts
               But a long knowledge with much trial did it
               (Which for to chuse a friend are good directions,)
               And though we lou'd both well at first, both hid it,
               Till 'twas discouered by a like affections.
               
                  
Since which, thou hast ore-gon me far in showing
               The Office of a friend; do't stil and spare not,
               Lo heere's a Memorandum for what's owing;
               But know for all thy kind respect I care not,
               Vnlesse thou'lt show how I may seruice do thee,
               Then I wil sweare I am beholding to thee.
               
                  Thine G. VV.
               
            
            
               To his louing friend, and Cousen-German,
M. WILLIAM
WITHER.
               EPIGR. 15.
               IF that the Standerds of the house bewray,
               What Fortunes to the owners may betide:
               Or if their Destinies, as some men say,
               Be in the names of any signifi'd;
               Tis so in thine for that faire antique shield,
               
               Borne by thy Predecessors long agoe,
               Depainted with a cleere pure Arg
                        •
                     nt field,
               The innocency of thy line did show.
               Three sable Crescents with a Cheueron gul'de
               Tel's that black fates obscur'd our howses light;
               Because the Planet that our fortunes rul'd,
               Lost her owne lustre and was darkned quite:
               
                  
And as inded our aduersaries say;
               The very name of VVither showes decay.
               But yet despaire not, keep thy white vnstain'd,
               And then it skills not what thy Crescents be
               What though the Moone be now increas't, now wain'd
               Learne thence to know thy lifes inconstancy,
               Be carefull as thou hitherto hast beene,
               To shun th' abuses Man is tax't for heere,
               And then thy soule, that's now ecclips'd with sin,
               When Moone and Sun are darkned shal look cleere
               And what soer'e thy English name may threat,
               The a 
                  Haruests sonne the Greekes entitle thee,
               Ere thou shalt wāt, thya H
                     •
                  re wil bring thee meat,
               And, to kill care, her selfe thy make-sport be,
               Yea yet (though Enuies mists do make them dull)
               I hope to see the wained Orbes at full.
               For the better vndersta
                     ••
                  ing of this Epigram, note
that his Armes are in a field argent a Cheuron, Gules
betwixt three crescents sable, his name accord
                     •
                  ng to
the Greekes is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and his Crest is a Hare with
thre
                     •
                   wheat eares in her mouth.
            
            
               
               To his Schoole-maister, Maister
Iohn Greaues.
               EPIGR. 16.
               I Feuer I doe wish I maie be rich,
               (As oft perhaps such ilde breath I spend;)
               I doe it not for any thing so much,
               As for to haue wherewith to pay my friend.
               For trust me, there is nothing grieues me more
               Then this; that I should still much kindnes take,
               And haue a Fortune (to my mind) so poore,
               That (though I would) amends I cannot make:
               Yet for to be as thankefull as I maie,
               Snce my estate no better meanes affords,
               VVhat I in deed receiue, I doe repaie
               In willingnes, in thankes and gentle words.
               Then though your loue doth well deserue to haue
               Better requitals then are in my power;
               Knowing you'l nothing vltra posse craue,
               Here I haue brought you some Essaies of our:
               You may thinke much, perhaps, since ther's so many
               Learn'd Graduates that haue your pupils beene;
               I who am none, and more vnfit then any,
               Should first presume in publike to be seene:
               But you doe know those horses in the teeme,
               That with their worke are ablest to goe through,
               Seldome so forward as blind Bayard seeme,
               (Or giue so many twitches to the plough)
               And so though they may better; their intent
               Is not, perhaps, for to be fooles is print.
            
            
               
               To the captious Reader.
               VVHat thou maist say or thinke, it is no matte
               But if thou busily imagine here,
               Since most of these are mighty, that I flatter;
               Know, sacred Iustice is to me so deare,
               Did not their Vertues in my thoughts thus ra
                     ••
                  ther
               To get an Empire by them I'de not praise the
                     ••
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   