
      
         
            
            
            
               THE Fore-runner of Bels Dovvnefall,
            
            Wherin, is breisely answered his braggnig offer of disputation, and insolent late challenge: the particularties of the confutation of his bookes, shortly by goddes grace to be published, are mentioned: with à breife answere, to his crakinge and calumnious confutinge of Papistes by Papistes them selues: and lastly à taste.
            Giuen of his rare pretended sinceritye, with som few examples.
            
               
                  Ierem. 51. v. 44.
               
               I wil visit Bel vpon Babilon, and cast forth of his mouth, that which he hath swallowed vp: and the gentils shal no more flocke vnto him and that because the wall of Babilon shall fall downe,
            
            
            
               ANNO M. D C. V.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE FORE-RVNNER OF BELS DOVVNEFAL.
            
               
                  
                     The vaine and foolishe title of his booke, with a note of a quadruple deuise, which he vseth to winne him self credit, and to endomage the Catholike cause.
                  
               
               CHAP. I.
               
                  THERE came lately to my handes, a certaine booke presented the last Easter tea
                     •
                  me to the viewe of the worlde, by one Thomas Bell, long since à Minister, after that a Preist, and for some yeares past, and at this present, Sicut erat in principio: as it was in the begininge: a Minister againe: in which state he meaneth constantly to continue, vntil the Lord by new reuelation shal otherwise dispose of his person. The title of his booke looketh bigge as

though it had eaten buls-beife, and accordinge to the comon sayinge, as the Deuile lockt ouer Lincolne, and is readie to quarrel with any Papist whatsoeuer: this it is. The Downefal of Poperie proposed by way of a new challenge, to al Englishe Iesuites, and Iesuited, or Italianized Papistes: daringe them al ioyntlie, and euery one of them seuerally, to make answere thereunto, if they can, or haue any truth on their side: knowinge for truth, that otherwise al the worlde wil crye with open mouthes, Fye vpon them, and their patched hotch-potch religion. 
                  Faire and soft for dashing: what will this man be in the fight, that is so hot and eager before he is yet entred the f
                        •
                     elde. This name of his booke by al probabilitie, was giuen by the godfather, when he was in the ruffe of his roperye, and came hastely into the kitchin, from some homely place, where a bad sent had intertained his smellinge instrumēt (daungerous in these times of infection for an emptie stomake) and not findinge there any meate meete for his ministerships mouth, but only an odd hotch-potch, fel into some cholerike pange, in which distemperature returninge to his studye, the title was begotten; for otherwise why him self, being à patched minister, created of two recantations, should cal our religion à patched hotch-potch I

cannot see, nor I thynke him self, hauing yet the eies of two ministres, and one Preist. Our church hath not stoode simperinge in a close pot, or poore pipkin, no man can tel where, for I know not for how many hundred yeares together, as their cōgregation hath (which though falsely pretended, is the best cloake they can finde to couer the shame oft hir naked continuance) but hath alwayes borne saile in the sight of the worlde, maugre the malice of the deuile, and al the tempestes of persecution, that the furies of hell could raise: Neither is our religion patched together S. Epiphanius haeres. 75. and S. Austen haeres. 53. Se S Hierō. contra Vigilantium. Ciril. 6. cōtra Iulian. Cedrenus in Heraclio. S. Alcoranus Mahumet. cap. 15. & 16. of many mamockes of olde stinkinge heretical assertions, as their faith is, where denienge of prayers for the dead, and the appointed fastes of the Church, borowed from Aerius: scorninge of reliques, scoffinge at inuocations of Saintes, reiectinge voluntary pouertie, and allowance of Preistes, taken from Vigilantius, raylinge at the holy Crosse, and sacred Images: receiued from Iulian the Apostata, and miscreant Mahumetanes: and diuers other such like fragments, scraped together, be in their congregatione entertained for heauenlye

articles: and so whether it may not truly be tearmed, à patched hotch-poch religion, and godles galimamphorye of a new gospel, I leaue to indifferent iudgment. Diuers other bookes in former times, hath he also diuulged, (for he had rather be ill occupied then idle) each of them, one so like another, that any man may easely knowe them to be puppies of one litter, & sundrie puddles stewinge from one sincke. In al which the principal scope he outwardly aymeth at, is the ouerthrowe of Poperie, as he speaketh, and the aduancement of the truth: but whether any Pharaisaicall makinge broade his phylacteries, and enlarging 
                  
                     Matt. 
                     
                        •
                     3. v. s
                   
                  his fringes, the loue of the first places at suppers, and the first chayres in the Sinagoges, and salutations in the market place, and to be called of men Rabbi, hath also his share, and diuide stakes, that is councel to any, and a mysterie so secretlye carried, that it is without the compasse of al humane diuination: for the happie effecting of these his designements, and to procure credit with his readers, (for I thinke he hath litle with his hearers) like an olde soldiear and beaten Captaine he vseth many stratagems, but especially fower.

The first is, to prouoke, to challenge, to dare al learned men, to the combat. for would any man in his wittes, make such an offer, were he not moste assured of victory, and to triumphe ouer the Romans, that haue so often triumphed ouer others? The second is, with great sorrowe of sowle to lament, that he can get no answere to his bookes, and vtterly to dispaire euer to see any such thinge effectually attempted: an euident demonstration, that they be of rare erudition, and truth in his side. The third is an inuection (if we liste to beleue him of his owne, as Thraso said in Terence) Enuche. and that is to ouerthrowe papistry, by papistry it self, and to ruine our saith, by the principal professors and patrons of our religion. Mary god blesse vs from this Bell, for neuer was there such à peale runge in our dayes, or in the dayes of our forefathers. The fourth and laste is, his saint-like protestation of sincerity, vpright dealinge, and hādlinge al thinges accordinge to equitie and conscience. These be the mayne bulwarkes of his bookes, framed by this excellēt engenite, both to defend them selues, and to batter vs: Al which not withstandinge, are

nothinge els but skearcrowes, & painted paper walles, seeme they neuer so terrible to simple soules: Spiders webbes are strong ynoughe to make bootye of flyes and gnattes, weake nettes to catch swalowes and greater birdes. And I wil not deny, that he might with some pretie credit, haue tampered amonge litle ones, who are soone scandalized, but when wich phantastical conceit he supposeth, that he can contriue the ruine of gods Church, or confounde al learned Catholikes whatsoeuer. Sutor vltra crepidam the Cobler is beyond his shoe, and he doth walke (as the Prophet saith) in great and wonderful thinges aboue him self. His malice is great, but his power nothing 
                     Psalm. 130. v. 2. corespondent. He is a curst cowe, but with short hornes: wherfore let him striue againste Catholike veritie, struggle with God and Church, war against heauen: repentance (god graunt that not fruitles) wil be the end of his labours: and perpetual disgrace, (without diuine amendinge grace) the iust rewarde of his vvorkes. If any ouerswaied with a false weeninge, thinke otherwise, let him haue a litle patience, voutsafe the reading of this smale treatise,

and he shal see his fower forts (by one that acknowledgeth him self inferior to thousands in Gods church) fiered about his eares: let vs breifly runne them al ouer.
            
            
               
                  
                     Bel seemeth wonderful desirous of disputation in wordes, and yet in deedes refuseth the same. With an indifferend offer of trial.
                  
               
               CHAP. II.
               MVch ianglinge hath the minister kept since his laste reformation, & like a Ffleet-streete hackster iustileth at Iesuits, showldreth Seminaries, braueth al the learned men of christendome; so desirous is he to manifest his manhoode, to exercise his talent, and to shew the worlde some tricke of his 
                     In the preface speciall, and pag. 35. and 36. To the Seminary. Preists in vvisbich castle, &c. Pag. 57. and 65. cuninge. This humor of his he discouereth in his motiues: The same vauntinge vaine hunteth him in his Surueye: In his huntinge of the Romishe fox, though it be but a petty pamphlet, yet is he once or twice harpinge on the same stringe: And in his Counterblast, with in solēt wordes & opprobrious tearmes, he dareth Iesuites, and Seminaries, to answere his bookes. And lastly in his

late Downefalle, he proclaymeth à new challenge, couragiously castinge out his daringe dartes: and in the end of his preface; and euery seueral chapter, as though he had bene apprentice to some ballad maker, the foote of the songe runneth after this manner: Answere o Papistes if you can, if ye cannot so doe, then repent for shame, and yeelde vnto the truth: And at the heeles of one of them followeth this fearful, and formidable adiuration. I challenge you, I prouoke you to 
                  
                     pag. 80. 
                  the combatte, I adiure you al ioyntlie, and euery one of you seuerally, for the creditt of your cause, for the honor of your Pope, and the life of Popish doctrine, which now lieth bleedinge, and wil shortly yeelde vp the ghost, if some soueraigne remedie be not speedely prouided for the same. The minister may take care for his winding sheete, gods church is in no daunger, the more she bleedeth out such corrupt, and pestilent humors as he is, the better is hir estate. He muste pardonvs, we relie more vpon Christes promise for hir perpetual continuance, then vpon his lyinge lippe, for hir shorte yeeldinge vp the ghost. we make no dout but that he mightely enuieth her felicitie, and greedely thirsteth after hir

destruction. But as litle doe we doubt, but that she shal stil liue and endure, rumpantur vt ilia Codro, although he frett out his bowelles with greife and enuie. Desiderium peccatorum peribit, the desier of 
                     Psalm. 111. v. 9. sinners (such as he is) shal perishe. Thus the minister braggeth & braueth others to disputation, either by worde or writinge, and like à desperate cowarde, feareth not to fight with any, prouided alwayes that they be far ynough of, and him self out of al daunger: and so he sheweth him self of as resolute a courage, as the coliar of Croidon, who litle fearinge the Maior of Londons authoritie, out with his purse, and like a liberall gentlman, gaue him that liuerie which would better haue beseemed some body els: but yet not before he was six miles out of towne. Yf he take him self for such à silogistical swashbuckler, that nothinge but present death, to approache the sphere of his disputant actiuitie, why did he neuer vouchsafe to visit Wisbiche, where he might haue wonne him self imortal fame, if he could by his learninge and force of arguments, either haue transformed them from Papistes to ministers (as by special reuelation he

hath chaunged him self) or els by his potent proofes, so set them agrounde, that their fauorable auditors should haue condoled their dismolle misfortune, seing them so battered with Bell bullets, and put to so disgratious confusion: was he doubtful of findinge them at home? it cannot be, their busines lay alwayes within doores, and he might haue bene as sure of them, as though they had bene fast shut vp in a Castle. was he vnwillinge to take so longe à iorney? no iuste cause of any such suspition, when he offereth about the like busines, with a safe conduct to repare into any parte In the speciall preface of his Motiues. of Christendome. why did he not also whett his wittes vpon Master Wrighte his countryman, who was longe time prisoner in the Clinke, and for his learninge wel knowen to the whole realme, hauinge bin assaulted by the flower of our Cleargie chiualrie: but as for this challenger, neuer could I heare that euer he durst come nere him: by which the gentle reader may gather, that the heauenly influēce of his coniuringe, worketh not any rare effect, but where none is present to entertaine him (for there he shameth, disgraceth, and confoundeth al,

be they neuer so learned, and none can be founde that dare take vp the bucklers againste him) and that vpon the dunghille of his owne parishe, he ietteth vp and downe like à cocke of courage, vvith his bigge barbles, and threatninge cox-come, crowinge moste fearefully: marry where any occation is offered of blowes, or knockinge cheere, there he creepeth pittifully, like à poore par'd capon, with a thinne paier of gylles, that came lately from Katherin cutter, or like a mungrille curr of the countrie, that with his tayle clapt betwixt his legges, and cringled backe, sneaketh away as faste as he can trudge, for feare of such a breakfaste as he list not to come at.
               This is the magnanimous spiritt of worthie Sir Thomas, or els why hath he not repaired to these places, where his longinge might haue bin satisfied: or if he desiered to manifest him self to the world, or to seeke for the common good of many, why did he not procure by that great grace & fauour which his desartes hath purchased him in court, wherof In the epistles dedicatory of his Motiues and Suruey. him self to his comfort, maketh mention, that he might in publike audience, haue scufled with these ignorant Iesuits,

and curried ouer the coates of these sillie Seminaries. And be it spoken in a good hovver, if his longinge be not gone, nor his disputinge heate cooled, there is no time yet past: for not long since, an humble supplication vvas exhibited to his Maiestie, vvherin vvith dutifull respect, the fauour of an indifferent disputation vvas sued for. Mistris Suctliffe as the bruite goeth, beinge quicker of hir fingers, and more nimble of conceiptes, got the start of hir husband, and so hath had the glorie of the first ansvvere, Sir Mathevv hir mate, like a kinde com
                     •
                  ade, hath seconded hir, and set forth an other: and so bootelesse to vvrite any more: The only course that Bell for his creditt can take, is to make earnest suite, that he may haue the honor of the disputation; novv let him speake, or for euer hould his peace. Is disputation vvith him novv out of request, and his minde chaunged, as it may vvell be, seinge he hath made greater mutations then that, and had he rather shevv his valor in an indifferent conference: if so: then vvill I offer him faire playe, and that is, if he please to be the defendand of his ovvne bookes, vvith

vvhich he should be best acquainted, and in all reason ought to defend, I vvil be the opponent, and take vpon me notvvithstandinge all his protestation of sinceritie, to conuince him of many coseninge trickes, sundrie notable lies, and diuers grosse corruptions, Let him therefore proue his frendes, and procure that it may be obtained, vvith those equall cōdicions vvhich vvere graunted to the Protestants in the presence of the French kinge. And if any intreaty vvil farther so honest a suite, vvhich to him, if his harte and pen agree together, can not but be grateful, and imbraced vvith all the povvers of his soule, then I request him of all curtesie, and for that comon good vvhich may redound to many, earnestly desire him, that he vvil straine his creditt (if it be not at the highest and in danger of breaking) that vve may meete in the listes and make experience quid possit vterque, vvhat either of vs offensiuely and defensiuely can performe. If he stande vpon his punctoes, and disdaigne all humble kinde of proceedinge, as nothing fittinge his braue braggarie, nor

his mountinge and ouerlookinge humor, thinkinge it smale reputation to combatt with abase peticioner: then to keepe proportion to answere his vaine, and also not to giue one inche of ground in the quarrel of gods truth, for who is this vncircumcised Philistian, that hath dared 
                  2. Reg. 15. v. 16. 
                  to rayle vpon the armye of the liuinge god? I challenge this challenginge cowarde, dare and redare, this daringe dastard, that he wilfor the honor of his cause, the creditt of his learninge, and defence of his braginge and insolent bookes, labour effectually, that we may in manner aforesaid grapple together.
               Yf he refuse this condicion, so reasonable, so iuste, so indifferent, no remedy but I muste come vpon him, with à lawe case of nouerint vniuersi. Be it knowen to all men, that the date of his learninge is out, his great and flowinge courage daunted, and drawen drie: proclaime him cōtemptible, and banckrout, hauinge broken with his owne dependants and creditors, and expose him for a iestinge stocke to all Christian people, from generation to generation world without end.
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     That Bels bookes haue longe since receiued their answere, with the particuler contents of the same, and though vpon iust occasion it hath hitherto bin suppressed, yet shortly by gods grace to be set forth.
                  
               
               CHAP. III.
               VVHeras Bel hath passed hitherto vncontrolled, and vvithout ansvvere, partly for that by some of iudgmēt not any vvas thought necessary (of such course stuffe be they made) partly for other iuste reasons, hereafter more at lardge to be handled; the minister maketh his comoditie thereof, and vvould haue the vvorlde to thinke, that not lack of good vvil, but vvant of skill, hath made Catholikes so longe silent: and all this to alienate mens mindes from the faith of their forefathers, as a religion that cannot stande in feilde againste him, and for that cause hath bin vtterly left destitue of all defence. And albeit he had intelligence by a Catholike booke (as him self confesseth) sett out in then'de of the yeare 1602, that the confutation of his vvorkes vvas vndertaken, and to be published if it should be

thought conuenient (and one parricular point in the same touched, vvhich did not alitle vvringe his mastership on the vvalles, though he set agood face on the matter, and for the ease of his stomake, entertained the said booke vvith the eloquent flovvers of Shameles pamphlet, 
                  
                     In his Counterblast pag. 45. 
                  Sourrilous libel, and a rude lyinge hotch-pot of omnigitherum: reuelleth also at the author, him self, tearminge him in the lenity of his spiritt, Swaggeringe diuine, Shameles calumniator, sowle-mouthed swaggeringe diuine, impudent lyer, and brasen face) yet by no 
                     pag 44. pag. 49. meanes vvill he beleeue, that there vvas euer any such thinge intended indeede: Iust as the false Prophetts persvvaded 
                     Ierem. 37. v. 18. the Ievvs, that the kinge of Babilon vvould not come vpon them, nor their countrye: and therfor to haue it giuen out that there is any such confutation, he reputeth it but for adeuise, to dazell (as he saieth) the eies of the simple readers, 
                  
                     pag. 45. 
                  and of others, that shal heare thereof, that they may stil be scduced with popish legierdemaine, from time to time, and not behould the sun shininge at noonetide, who all in the end must receiue the iust rewarde of their follie, euen the slapp of a fox tayle.
               
               Thus the minister is pleasant,

recreateth him self and his readers with his merry conceites, but if in conclusion the confutation doe come forth, as by gods grace it shall, with that conuenient speed, which the time, and other occurrents will permitt, is he not then like those that leremie speaketh of, proued a false Prophett, and doe not they that beleeue him (as I thinke there be very few, let him prattle what he liste) shew them selues very sillie sheepe, to follow such a bel-weather; and that they must in the end receiue the iust rewarde of their folly, euen the blessinge of an Asse tayle. Agayne in the very same place, 
                     Pag. 45. dispairinge euer to see the effect of any such attempt, he lamenteth, his distressed case, in this dolefll manner. No no my dearest they meane nothinge lesse. They wil neuer while I liue, publish any such confutation: their owne consciences condemne them, they knowe they are not able to performe it, I would most gladly (I protest before god and the worlde) once see any such confutation duringe my life. Surelie he is much to blame to discomfort him self without all cause. He may very wel liue to see it, and yet die sooner much then he would. Let him not be dismayed, for I can assure him

of myne owne knowledge that our consciences doe not condemne vs, neither doe wee knowe that we are not able to performe as great a matter as that. To giue the more creditt to my wordes, and somwhat to reuiue his dead spiritts, I will here giue him a note of the nomber of the bookes, and their particular contents. They be in all Fiue, written againste his motiues, and Surueye fiue yeares agoe. The first booke contayneth many of his notable vntruthes, corruptions, and falsifications. The second presenteth a gallant and desperate fraye, betwixt the reformed minister of Bascall, and Thomas Bel preacher of the worde: all the clubbes in London being not able to part them. For such a grace he hath in writinge, that he falleth into grosse contradictions, and what he saieth in one place, not feldome he vnsaieth in another. The third handleth a couple more of extra. ordinary, and choice contradictions, worthie for their dignitie, to haue a speciall place by them selues. In the first (which hath diuers proofes) he condemneth him self, and his owne congregation (the defence whereof he hath

vndertaken) for the maintayners of false, hereticall, and blasphemous doctrine. A pointe worthie to be considered of by his bretheren, for he giueth them moste iuste cause, to suspect him of playinge bootye, and that his hart is still an harbourer of Poperie, or at leaste not replenished with the liuely liquour of the new gospell: And though he laboureth to purge him self of that suspition, 
                     In his suruey to the christiā reader. Mat. 26 v. 73. and sweareth deuoutly, yet may they come vpon him as those caterpillers did vpon S. Peter vvith a loquela tua te manifestum facit, thy speech doth bewraye thee. In the second (fortified also with diuers reasons) he acknowledgeth our faith (which with might and maine he would seeme to oppugne) to be the truth, and that very religion which Iesus Christ god & man, brought from the bosome of his father, and planted in the worlde: so that the Protestants haue againe iuste cause to complaine of him (as Balec did 
                     Num. 25. of Balaam) for blessinge those whom they expected he should haue cursed: and worthelie to haue him in iealousie as being fled to them with the same 2. Reg. 15. v. 34. e
                           •
                         cap 17. v. 15. minde, that Chusai Arachites did from Dauid, to the campe & seruice of Absalō.
               
                  
The fourth entreateth of the weake groundes of his vvorkes, to vvitt, vvhat deceites he vseth in reasoninge, with exsamples, for more perspicuitie and light: what treacherous trickes also he practiseth, concerninge Doctors and Fathers, Councells and Scripture: so that the reader shal haue a perfect Anatomy of the corrupt body of his bookes, with their manifolde maladies and diseases: and with all behould all his foundations and ground workes vndermined, and his fortifications blowen vp.
               The fifth and last, shall answere the recapitulation of his Suruey or as he partlie speaketh, the Perioch: in which he would shew at what time, diuers points of our religion came in. And although what hitherto hath bin written, concerneth only his first two bookes, yet will I now take the paynes, to veiw ouer those also, which came out after: as that terrible tooth-lesse bitinge beagell, called the huntinge of the Romishe Fox: the naturall ympe of his motiues and Suruey, begotten by them in sinne and iniquitie: it resembleth the parentes so liuelie, as though it had crept out of their mouthes: his

                  Goulden Ballance also, with the yoakefellowe. The Counterblast: and lastely his late Downefal, and what in them I shall thinke meete accordinge to the order propounded, by rancke in his due place. Yf ought els be added, for exsample a more particular reply to the challenge of his Downfall, that must be counted for a worke of superarogation: what reason hath he now to feare that he shall die before he see his confusion. Tender boughes and younge leaues as scripture saith, and experience teach, 
                     Mat. 24 v. 32. are a token that sommer is at hand, the particularities likewise before mētioned, as buddes shootinge forth, are a signe of more plentifull blosomes shortlie to followe, if the colde easterne winde of pouertie, doth not hinder the growinge, and keepe back the springe. My principall hope is in our good Lord, that as he hath giuen me a minde to write, polishe, and set forth the worke, so he wil asiste me, not only with health and libertie, but also furnishe me with all those thinges, which for such an exploit be necessarie. Yf his diuine wisedome, which reacheth from end 
                  
                     Sap. 8. v. 1. 
                  euen to end mightely, and disposeth all thinges
                  
                  sweetlie shal othervvise ordanie, his name be blessed: humaine councels, must with al obedience yeald to heauenly prouidēce: only I would haue the curteous reader to vnderstande, and Bell to knowe, that there shall be no fault in me, for performinge of what soeuer is promised, more then which, neither can I in reason assure, nor any with equitie euer expect.
            
            
               
                  
                     That Papistes doe not oppugue papistes as Bel vainely vaunteth: with the discouery of a double slight, which concerninge this point he practiseth.
                  
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               THe principall thinge wherein Bel would be thought to out runne his fellowe ministers (if any he hath) and to vvin the bel from them al, is a certaine singular gift, and superexcellent dexteritie, of confoundinge our religion, by the professors of our faith, and setting one Papist together by the eares with an other. This new inuention of his in the epistle dedicatorie of his motiues, dedicated to the right Honorable lords of the Councell, him self calleth A rare
                  
                  methodical discourse, such is the rare humilitie of the reformed order, and the memorie therof is so gratefull, that he is often twanglinge vpon this stringe. to omitt other places in his late Downfal (though long since a fowle downefall brake the neck of his soule) he obserueth, That popish religion hath alwayes beene condemned of great learned papistes, that liued 
                  
                     pag. 18. 
                  in the popes church. and in another place his margent telleth vs, that The Papistes graunt as much as they desier: which I would 
                     pag. 7 
                        •
                     . willingly confesse to be true, were not he in sayinge so a notable liar. How then cometh it to passe, will some say, that vsually he alleadgeth Catholike authors againste chatholicke doctrine? The question is quicklie answered; it is not their default, but his fraude, not his great learning, but litle conscience that is the cause thereof. The scriptures are daylie for diuers mad purposes vvrested and wroung, cleane a gainst the heate, and cōtrarie to their true sence & meaninge, as all knowe, and yet no blame to be laid vpon the sacred text, but vpon those crooked Apostles that depraue them, to their owne and others perdition. Yf the word of god may be

peruerted, mens writinge haue no such priueledge, but that they may meete with false fingers, such as Bels bee; and therfore I giue him to vnderstand that he abuseth gods church, deceiueth his ignorant reader, and iniureth Catholike authors, whē he would make the vvorld beleeue, that our owne Docters doe wounde our religion: They are cleere from the crime obiected: al the suspition which is grovven, taketh roote from his malice, and not from any desert of theirs, they carry not tvvo faces vnder one hoode, nor blovve hoate and colde out of one mouth (as some doe euery way as honest as Thomas Bel, and yet bad inoughe) as I intende more breiflie to let the reader to vnderstand. Tvvo slightes he vseth to dazell the eies of vnlearned men, persvvading them that the spirituall souldiars of the Catholike church, haue turned their vveapons to their mutual destruction. The first & that moste grosse, shamefull, and common, is, to falsifie, or by one vvay or other to depraue such sentences as he produceth: for proofe vvhereof, I referr the reader for a litle triall to the next chapter, vvhere he shall finde some fevv

exsamples: more choise of such vvares, he shall finde at the next mart, vvhere his foule fardle shal be laid open to the veivv of all. The second is, Whereas Catholike vvriters haue diuersitie of opinions, vvith vnitie of religion, dissenting in smale matters, as namely those, vvhich vvee cal schoole-questiōs, but neuer disagreeing in any artickle of faith, no one euer formally opposinge him self, against any thinge defined in generall councell, for no such president can he bringe forth, yet he maketh his tounge to vvalke, and vvould haue the vvorld to thinke, that one Papist doth massacre another, and that vve had varietie in artickles of faith (as though the lunasie of the Protestants had infected vs:) Plentifull exsamples hereof vve haue in his booke of motiues, I vvill breifly cite one: Many papistes (quoth he) 
                     Chap. 8 artic. 12. 
                  as Aquinas Richardus &c. doe hould, that a simple Preist, by vertu of the Popes dispensation, may lawfully and effectualy, minister their Sacrament of Confirmation. We vvillingly graunt it, as being the moste receiued and common opinion: vvhat of all this? But this opinion (saith he) is stoutly impugned by other great papistes, to witt, Bonauentura,
                  
                  Alphonsus, Durandus, Scotus Maior, &c. Be it so, what then? such dissention as this, is without any violation of faith at all. O (saith he) what gteater and more important dissention can be then this? for Confirmation is a 
                  In the former place. 
                  Sacrament with the Papists. If he knewe not, and be content to learne I wil teach him. A far greater dissention it were, euen in this verie point of Confirmation, if some hould it to be à Sacrament, and others did denie it: the disagreemēt was of the extraordinary minister of the Sacrament (which is no such important matter as he would inforce) of the Sacrament it self they made no question. doe not we knowe that the Protestants them selues allowe, and prescribe the signe of the crosse in Baptisme, and that the Puritanes detest it: that they in necessitie permitt lay people to baptise, and these thinke it such a prophanation of that sacred misterie, that they had rather suffer infants to die without baptisme (so great a zeale they haue to pack them to hell warde) Should I come vpon him for this varitie, and crie out after this manner: what greater and more important dissention can be then this, for Baptisme is a Sacrament with them:

would he not condemne me for a notable wrangler, seinge they contend not whether Baptisme be a Sacrament or no, but obout other questions, to vvitt of a certaine ceremonie, and the extraordinary minister, which they make no great account of. Let him then queitly take him self by the sleeue, and see whether the measure will not serue (and much better) to make for his ministershipp a liuery of the same cloath. Were the dissentions in the Protestants congregation, of no more fundamentall points then ours bee, it should not daily be shaken with such terrible earthquakes, and to the great disgrace of a new timbered gospell, for lack of good worke manshipp, be in daunger of fallinge: but alas they are continually brawling like beggars, and lie lugginge together by the eares, about the verie sinnowes and soule of their religion, in endles quarrells and contentions. Luther and Zwinglins are proclaimed by M. Iewell, that Patriarchal In his Apologie of the Church of Englands. challenger, for moste excellent men sent of god to giue light to the world. and yet did Luther defend till death, the true, reall, and substātiall presence of Christes bodie in the Sacrament, giueinge his black

blessinge to all those that taught otherwise. Zwinglius for all that, hauinge the spiritt no lesse then Luther, vtterly denied the reall presence, contemninge his curse, and disdayninge to followe the light of his lanterne: such svveete agreement there vvas betvvixt these tvvo moste excellent men sent of god. Can Bell deny this to be true, or that this point of religion is materiall, as vpon vvhich dependeth saluation or damnation: I knovve him to be a braue minded man, and one that dare venture as far for the credit of the gospell as an other: Yet I suppose he vvill neuer stand vpon any tearmes, but queitly admitt both the one and the other for knovven truthes: and then must I be so boulde as to demaunde, hovv he can defend one of these heauenly prophetes, from being an heretike and damnable doctor; and so vvith the candle of false doctrine, to haue shevven his follovvers the vvay to euerlastinge darknes. The minister is quick sighted to behould a mote in our eie, but he cannot see a beame in his ovvne. May vve not iustly say to him vvith our Sauiour, Hipocrite cast out 
                  
                     Mat. 7. v. s.
                   
                  first the beame out of thine owne eie, and then
                  
                  shalt thou see to cast out the mote of thy brothers eie. To leaue Germanie and speake of the professors of our owne contrie: Doe not the Protestants thinke the dignitie, & superiority of Bishopps and Archbishopps agreable to gods vvord: and yet doe the Puritanes in the name of the lorde (by their champion Martin Mar-prelat and his mutinous make bates, that band vnder his colors) crie out (as Thomas Rogers saith, and it is no councell to any) that their callinge is vnlawfull, that they be ministers of Antechrist, 
                  
                     In his sermon printed by Iohn Windet 1590. pag. 13. 
                  worse then friars and monkes, deuiles bishoppes, and diuelles incarnate. netheir as I suppose will he say that this is a triflinge question, for feare of scandalizinge litle ones. Aerius of vvhom vve spake before, vvas condemned of heresie for equallinge Preistes vvith Bishopps. Could Bell haue the luck to finger an Ouerseer ship (to vse his ovvne phrase, that he may the better knovve my 
                     Suruey Pag. 516. Goulden Ballance pag. 31. meaninge) then vvere the matter cock sure, and a flatt heresie indeede to mainteine any such assertion: mary till then great vvisdome to proceede vvith deliberation, to runne vvith the hare, & hould vvith the hounde: flatter on the

one side, and faune on the other. Can he not reade ridles, Dauns est non Oedipus. By the next post he shall knowe more of my meaninge, in the meane time let him feede in his hart vpon this by faith and be thankfull.
            
            
               
                  
                     Bel pretendeth great sinceritye like à true Apostle, and yet like à false Apostata vseth it not, with some few exsamples of his malitious and corrupt manner of proceedinge,
                  
               
               CHAP. V.
               VVHere deceipt is intēded, there the Protestacion of sincerity, vpright dealinge, and a tender conscience, as a necessary preparation must be pretended. for this is the goulden baite to angle ignorant soules, and the cōmon cloake of coseninge companions. Iuglers tuck vp their sleeues, open their handes, and make shew of the plainest dealinge in the worlde: False 
                     Mat. 7. v 15. 2. Cor. 11. v. 14. 3. Reg. 
                     
                        •
                     1. v. 9. Rō. 16. v. 18. Prophetts put on sheepes cloathinge, and the deuill transformeth him self into an Angell of light. Iesabell proclaimed afast, when she sought the blood of innocent Naboth, and the Aposte assureth vs, that certaine false teachers

and belly gods did by Sweete speeches and benedictions, seduce the hartes of innocents. Bell as though he were made of no other elements then sincere dealinge, and had not so much as the skill to foist in a lie, or to mangle and mayme a sentence, speaketh often of conscience, and honest proceedinge, and of his owne free motion and liberality, entereth into a bande of subscribinge, and forfaiture of his creditt, if he can be conuinced of the conrrarie. In the epistle of his Downefall To all englishe Iesuites, 
                  
                     Motiues. 18. 
                  seminary preistes, &c. thus he writeth. In my firste booke published in the yeare. 1593. I premised to yeelde if you could conuince me, either to haue alleadged any writer corruptly, or to haue quoted any place guylefullie, or to haue charged any author falesly. Yea and in the same place he addeth, thath he will neuer require creditt at the readers hand, ether in that booke or any other to be published hereafter, if any such thinge can be proued against him. Vpon this foundation dependeth all the reputation of his workes, and that litle creditt which he hath gotten with his simple followers: for if he be such a sincere writer, as he protesteth, and

so consideratiue and respectiue in the peninge of his bookes, that no suspicion of misreportinge, or corruption, can be iustlie fastned vpon him, then doth it euidently followe, that we haue greate dissentions, in matters of faith, and that our Doctors, be the bane of Catholicke doctrine, and then no marueil if he make challenge vpon challenge, and remayne vnanswered, when as not only our enimies, but also those that we take for our frendes, and relye vpon, stande in open feilde againste vs, and haue as it were sworne our destruction. But if on the contrary plaine euidence shall conuince, that he maketh no scruple of lyinge, no conscience of falsification, is not his hopocritical sanctitie double iniquitie, and Bel proued the sonne of Belial, and is not the maine piller that beareth vp al his braue buildinge, and glorious turretts ouerthrowen, and him self with his applaudinge mates, in the midest of their pastime, crushed, and stroken dead as the insultinge Philistians were by the seruant of god Sampson? 
                     Iudg. 16. v. 30. whether this be so or no remayneth now breifly to be handled: to iustifie mine accusation, I will runn ouer afew

passages of his late challenge, because that is of latest date, and therfore of al likelyhoode moste grateful to the reader: of whom I desier not any extraordinarie fauour, but that which none can denie to be indifferent and reasonable: and that is, as vpon my bare wordes I would not haue him to discredit Bel, and beleeue me, for that sauoured, either of partialitie, or of indiscreet kinde of proceedinge: so nether vpon his affirmation, to condemne vs, and to commend him, for that were also opposite to all equitie: but as they haue longe lent the plantife one eare, so now a litle to afforde the defendant the other; and seriouslie to to examine our depositions, and take some panies to trie the truth of our relations, and then a gods name let them thinke as the very force of proofes and allegations shal induce them, and freely speake what they thinke: and so haue a crashe at his challenginge Downefall.
               
                  I.
                  
                     PAg. 40. Thus he cometh ouer the 3. Part. tit. 1. cap. 11 prop
                              •
                            finem.
                      Pope. Antonius (quoth he) a man of no
                     
                     smale creditt (for he was an Archbishop of the Popish stampe, and by the Pope reported for a Saint) hath these wordes. Reperiturtamen Martinus quintus dispensasse cum quodam qui contraxerat & consummauerit matrimonium cum quadam eius germana. Neuerthelet it is knowen that Pope Martin the fift, did dispence with one who had contracted, and consummated matrimonie, with his owne natural and fulsister, of the same father, and same mother, fot so much the word (Germana, doth import. Behould here gentle reader, the excellency of holy Poperie, and if thou desierest more of such melodie, thou maiest finde it in my booke of Motiues, but this is here a sufficient antepast for all our English Iesuites, and Iesuited popelinges. none are so ignorant but they knowe that only god can giue licence, to marrie a mans owne natural sister. This place he bringeth to proue (as his wordes goinge before import, and these now cited insinuate as much) that te Pope taketh vpon him that power, which is proper to god alone: and the matter as he handleth it seemeth so odious, that some no question condemne vs highlie vpon his reporte, and my self was since the cominge forth of his booke, assaulted with this very question, so markeable it is in eueri mans

eie. But as it is nothinge preiudicial to the Catholike faith, were it true, so beinge moste false, it cannot but launce the ministers reputation, and goare the very intralles of his best creditt. First therfor I say that it is nothinge preiudicial to the catholike faith were it true: For we defend not al the particular factes of any, though Popes: we knowe that they may erre, either by wronge informacion, yea or of wilful malice. Their vniust actions (for which they must render account to god) hurte them selues, and their owne soules, catholike religion no reason it is they should hurt though weaklinges may be scandalized. Glorious S. Augustin hauing reckned vp al the bishopps of Rome, from S. Peter to Anastatius, thereby to cōfounde 
                        Epist. 165. ad generosum.
                      the Donatist heretikes, because as he saith. In this order of succession, there is none founde a Donatist bishop, straight wayes to stop the mouthes of any, that leapinge from faith to manners, might truly or falselie haue obiected the bad life or fact of some Pope, he addeth these wordes for a salue: If in these times any traitor should haue crept into that order of Bishopps, which is deriued from Peter him selfe euen to Anastasius,
                     
                     who now sitteth in the same chaire, it should haue bin no preiudice to the church, and innocent christians, for whom our lord prouiding said whatsoeuer they shal say doe yee, but doe not 
                     
                        Mat. 23. v. 3. 
                     those thinges which theye doe, for they say, and doe not. A certaine Prelats daughter in this realme, and wel affected to the worde, by the countenance and assistance of hir father, turnd of hir olde husbād a grasing, and betooke hir selfe to à new, Is Bel content that this detestable fact should disgrace their religion, or that vpon this we infer, that Superintendent to haue taken vpon him the power proper to god alone, or rather more (seing god cannot geue leaue to a woman to haue two husbandes, neither can any such president be showen, but of brothers that married their sisters we haue in Adams children) Yf not: because he may truly say, that such exorbitant actions proceede not infallibly or vsually, from any such luciferian conceit, but rather from passion or malice, which, doe not seldome, peruert the iudgment of men in authoritie, and make them runn headlonge in to grosse errors: then might he very wel haue spared his winde, and odious declamation against Martin the fifth. I

would not here wishe him to come to fiercely vpon me, for that I touch the matter so lightlie, and threaten me the bastinado, for standeringe an Ouerseear of the gospel, for if he be so liuely and pert, let him not thinke, but that I wil stand vpon my lawful defence, and be readie to entertaine him, with Stafford law, and by S. Chad, that good Bishopp of Lincolne, I hope to make my partie good.
                  Secondly I tell him, that his lippes haue lashed out to lustilie, and that he hath wickedly slaundred Pope Martin, and moste perfidiously corrupted Antonius. The very title of the chapter might haue taught him, that he was in error: or at least haue giuen him a greater caueat better to consider the matter, for it is De affinitate: of affinitie: and therfore had the Pope giuen one licence to marry his owne natural sister; he had dispensed in consanguinitie, and so nothinge fittinge the matter intreated of in that chapter. But what doe I speake of error: when as monstrons malice, and extremitie of hatred againste the church, and Sea Apostolicke, made him set a broach this shameles vntruth, for

otherwise he would neuer haue smothered the wordes followinge, the witnesses of his false doctrine; nor euer haue giuen a false glose and translation, to those which he doth cite. The truth is this: Martin the fifth dispensed not with one, to marry his owne naturall and full sister, of the same father, and the same mother (as Belle ambleth in amplification, and troteth alyinge pace with out all moderation) but only to continue still with hir with whome he had married, and with whom he had consummat matrimony, notwithstandinge he had before his mariage committed fornication with hir naturall sister: So that S. Anthonius speaketh not any one worde of the mans owne naturall sister, but of his wife, and hir naturall sister. For proofe and perspicuitiee of this point, let vs alleadge the Docters whole sentence. It is founde (saith he) that Pope Martin the fifth did 
                     3. part. tit. 1. cap. 11. ss. 1. 
                     dispense with à certaine man who had contracted and consummated matrimony with a certaine naturall ssster of hir, with whom he had comitted fornication; yet with great difficulty, and because the matter was secret, and the man not fit for Religion, or to remoue into any other contrie, and so scandal would haue followed of the diuorce
                     
                     if it had beene made. Let any that is desierous of truth, by this one place, take a scantlinge of Bells holie sinceritie. Because he found S. Antonius to speake of a dispensation granted to one after he had married, and consummate matrimony with hir, whose sister before his marriage he had knowen carnallie: and so a dispensation only in affinitie, contracted by vnlawfull copulation: (for which the Minister had he bin consulted would rather haue laughed at him for his simple scrupulositie, then thought it needfull to sue for any such fauour or grace) which did nothinge fitt his purpose; and therfore meaninge to make it in spight of all honestie to serue his turne, he hath firste corrupted the sentence by false translation, sainge with his natural sister, in steede of these wordes with hir naturall sister, or the naturall sister of hir: and although euery one can not espie his cunninge conuayance, because he suppressed the other parte of the sentente followinge, yet is it apparant ynoughe to any Gramarian: for were the latin as he turneth it, then should it not be, cum quadam eius germana, but, cum quadam sua germana: But not only such as knowe latin, but euen

those also that haue any skill in pewter, might haue espied the grosse vntruth, had he cited the whole sentence as it is in Antonius before alloadged: and therefore to healpe out a lye, he ventured vpon corruption, and chopt away all those wordes which might haue marred the market of this Geneua marchant. For had one married his owne naturall sister, as Bell not so confidently as impudently affirmeth: then should it not haue bin truly said, that he had committed fornication, but incest, a sinne distinct in nature, and far more odious in the sight of god: nether could the matter haue bin secret as Antonius saith it was, nor yet the seperation scandalous, but rather offensiue to haue suffered them to continue together in filthie pretensed matrimony. To conclude therfore he had not dispensation in respect of his owne naturall sister, but to remaine still in matrimony with that woman, whose naturall sister he had before mariage carnally knowen. Hauinge tolde so notorious a lie, and holpen it out with foule falsification, he could not containe him selfe but crie out in the seale of his soule Behoulde here gentle reader the
                     
                     excellencie of holie Poperie, and if thou desierest more of such melodie, thou mayest finde it in my booke of Mottues. But may not I with far more reason desier him to note the basenes of his ministerial iniquitie, that after such à shamefull prancke of lyinge and falsification, setteth such a braue face on the matter as though he were innocent and no way to be touched: And as for the melodie he speaketh of, to giue him his iust deserts I cannot deny but that not only his Motiues, but also his other bookes, be full of such harmonie, lyinge, and corruption, being the ordinary musick which this fidling minister scrapeth to those that daunce after his pipe. And wheras he calleth this a sufficient antipast for all english Iesuites and Iesuited popelinges (such is the modestie of this refined ropelinge) we willinglie graunt it, to be verie sufficient for all Catholikes, and his deuoted dependants: for vs, to take him for a whetstoue docter, and pollinge preacher: for them to discarde him, as being the shame, disgrace, and confusion of the new gospell, and a corrupt member of their congregation.
               
               
                  
                  II.
                  
                     PAg. 50. S. Austen (quoth he) proueth at lardge in sundrie places of his workes that voluntarie motions of concupiscence are sinne indeede, and trulie so called: In his first booke of Retractations he hath these wordes. That 
                     
                        Aug. lib. 1. Retract. cap. 13. pag. 13. 
                     which in infantes is called originall sinne, when as yet they vse not free arbitrement of wil, is not absurdly called voluntarie, because beings contracted of the euil wil of the firste man, it is become in sorte hereditarie: It is not therefore 
                     
                        Aug. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 15. pag. 16. 
                     false which I said, sinne is an euil so voluntarie, that it is no way sinne, if it be not voluntary. Whether Bell fathereth not a notable vntruth vpon S. Austen, when he citeth these wordes of his to proue that voluntarie motions of concupiscence be sinne indeede, and truly so called, I reporte me to the wordes by him alleadged: for no such thinge is in them to be found, nay either my braines are not in good tune, or els S. Austen proueth the cleane contrarie. It is a constant doctrine with that holie father; that sinne is voluntarie otherwise no sinne, and for as much as some dout might be made of originall sinne, because it seemeth wholy inuoluntarie;

he affirmeth also that sinne to be voluntarie and so concludeth generally all sinne to be so: Marry a man of the ministers learninge, may quicklie ouerthrowe vs with our owne Doctors, if by that rare skill which he hath in lyinge, when they say one thinge, he can without all blushinge maintayne them to say the contrarie. Let the reader peruse the sentence and speake his minde freelie.
               
               
                  III.
                  
                     PAg. 69. Disputinge againste the condigne meritts of workes he citeth this sentence of a Catholicke writer Iosephus Angles. Eodem etiam modo, &c. As 
                     
                        In 2 lib. Sent. pag. 130. 
                     other holie Doctors also consideringe after the same maner the natural valew only of good woorkes, and perceiuinge that it is exceedinge far distant, from the valew and iust estimation 
                     Loe the Frier granteth that al the holi
                           •
                         fathers are a gainst the Papists. 
                     of eternal life, said wisely: That our workes are not meritorious nor worthie of eternall life, yet for the couenant and promise made vnto vs, the good workes of man, with the helpe of grace, are worthy of eternal life, and equall with it, which for all that, that promise of god which is frequent in scripture, set aside, were altogether
                     
                     vnworthie of so great a rewarde. In theese wordes although nothinge be contained hurtfull to Catholike doctrine: Yet Bell by his Achymistical arte of chaunginge truth in to falsehoode, can gather out matter sufficient against vs. But before I passe any farther, I muste note one thinge breiflie, and that is, whereas Ioseph is dedicatinge his bookes to the Pope, speaketh of kissinge his holines feete, this minister not only out of all season mencioneth it in this place, but is at it againe and againe, as some wise folke there be, which if they get a worde by the end, will hardlie let it goe, but like a bell still iangle the same tune. Doth not him selfe confesse that 
                        Suruey pag. 487. Genebrardus in Chrō. Anni Christi 32. De verbis Apostoli Sermo 18. Iustinian the Emperour nine hundred yeeres agoe kissed the Pope Constantiue feete: and is it not well knowen, that Alexander the great, fell downe at the feete of laddas high Preiste of the Iewes: and S. Austen reporteth how the people in his time did the like before the feete of bishopps. all which considered (to omitt what adoration is giuen to temporall princes) I maruell that it should seeme so straung a thinge to one of Bells readinge and learninge, that a religious

bishop should submit him selfe to kisse the Popes feete: Ynoughe of this: Let vs now see what he gathereth out of Iosephus wordes against vs. In the margent of his booke this wholesome note is painted. Loe this Frier graunteth that all the holie fathers are against the Papistes. It should haue bene long ynoughe before a man of ordinarie capacitie, could euer haue obserued any such point in Iosephus discourse. But take heede whilst yee liue, when such a turn-coate as he is cometh to tosse and turne ouer a sentence: for he can not only inferr, that which is true, but with as great facilitie gather that also which is false: Be it knowen to him, that he belieth Iosephus, for no such thinge as he noteth can be wroung, racked, or coniured out of his wordes: Let them be viewed and pondered by the discreete reader, and I leaue it to his iudgment whether he graunteth any such thinge, or no. The fathers saith Bell, out of the testimonie of Iosephus confesse that good workes accordinge to their naturall valew, be not meritorious of eternall life. What is this against vs? Doe not all Catholikes graunt as much, when they acknowledge

that they receiue all their efficacie of workinge from gods grace: which doctrine of ours he may learne out of the councell of Trent, where it is handled at lardge: False therfore it is that ether the fathers be against vs, or that Angles granteth any such thinge.
               
               
                  IIII.
                  
                     PAg. 115. Our petye Pygmie will needes be wrastlinge with Hercules club; that is, Bell bicker with Bellarmine, impar congressus Achilli; The poore man might doe far better and vviser, to keepe his teeth to be agents for his bellie vvhich he loueth vvell, then to endanger them vpon so roughe a file. And vvhat a gods name is his quarell againste that learned prelate. Marry (quoth he) These are his expresse wordes: But in the new Testament 
                     
                        De verbo Dei lib. 3. cap. 2. tom. 1. 
                     because Christ had fulfilled the figures and the prophecies, althoug he many doe not vnder stād the sentences of the scriptures, yet doe they vnderstand the mysteries of our redemption, euen the common countrie fellowes and the verie women. Thus writeth our Iesuit, affirming that euen women and the verie rustickes of the countrie, doe vnderstand the scriptures, so far forth as
                     
                     pertaineth to the misteries of their redemption. Yf the minister doe no better keepe his handes from pickinge and stealinge, then he doth his tounge from euill speakinge, lyinge, and slaundringe, to vse the phrase of their cathechisme, he might far more justly be called in question, for the vnlavvfull vse of his fingers, then he did the seruinge man at Thirske about suspition of Seminary affaires: For I giue him to vnderstand (though no great nevves) that he belieth Bellarmin: He saith not that vvoemen and rustickes doe vnderstand the scriptures so far forth as pertaineth to the misteries of their redemption. Nay he saith the contrarie in the vvordes by him alleadged, Although many (quoth he) vnderstand not the sentences of the scriptures. In vvhich number, I thinke rustickes and vvomen must be contayned. Yf then they vnderstand not the sentences of the scriptures as Bellarmin affirmeth hovv doe they vnderstand the scriptures so far forth as pertaineth to the misteries of their redemption. Was there euer knovven a more gallant gospeller, that dareth thus to practise his godles occupation though all the tovvne looke on. Yea but Bellarmin saith that contrie fellovves

and vvomen vnderstand, the misteries of our redemption: vvhat then? is there no meanes to attaine that knovvledg, but but by readinge and vnderstandinge of the scriptures? yf so, vvoe be to them that can not reade at all, no smale part of the christian vvorld. vvho knovveth not that ignorant people learne better the misteries of their redemption, by the instruction of their Pastors, dilligence of parents, and helpe of good cathechismes, then by fishinge for it by their ovvne labour, out of the profound sea of sacred scripture, vvhere they may sooner for lack of skill be drovvned in the depth of errors, then by them selues finde out the liuely vvaters of true doctrine; vvould to god to much experience in these vnrulie times, taught vs not this to be too true a lesson, The lamentable storie of Hacket that quintissentiall Puritan and a great bible beater, may vvarne all to be wise vnto sobrietie as. S. Paul 
                        Rom. 12. v. 5. vvisheth; and also vvhat ruine of soules, and daunger to common vveales, doth arise, by generally sufferinge, yea and animatinge all sortes of people, tag and rag to learne the misteries of their redemption out of the scripture, and to

examin the doctrin forsooth of Fathers, & councells, by that rule & touchstone, as Iohn Caluin prescribeth.
               
               
                  V.
                  
                     PAg. 130. Many Papistes (quoth he) are so blinded and besotted with vnsauorie traditions, and superstitious illusions, that they deeme it a greater sinne to eate fleash in Lent, then to commit adulterie, murder, or periurie. Seinge moste certaine it is that these fowle sinnes of adulterie, murder, and periurie, be forbidden by the law of god, no necessitie occurringe or circumstance what soeuer, giueinge any leaue to commit any one of these sinnes: and that the fast of Lent ordained only by a positiue law of the Apostles, from which many for age, sicknes, and other causes, may be iustly excused; and this so well knowen, that no dout can be made thereof, what a creature is Bell, that vttereth so notable an vntruth, bringinge not so much as any colourable ground to support it, but his bare word, and the emptie blast of his owne mouth. Should I tell him that certaine reformed Protestants, otherwise called

willet) vnder the letters of E. O. gaue him but a litle item by the way, notinge a certaine palpable contradiction in his Surueye: to wit that he saith in one place, that the bishops of Rome, vntil the 
                     
                        Suruey pag. 193. 
                     dayes of S. Austen, and long after, were very godlie men, and taught the same doctrine that S. Peter had done before them, and yet in an other place mainteineth, that Pope Siricius 
                     
                        Suruey pag. 228. & 230. Suruey pag. 488. 
                     was seduced by Sathan, published wicked doctrine, and taught the flat doctrine of the diuells: and Pope Sozimus falsified the decrees of the Nicen councel: so to mainteine the vsurped primacie of the church of Rome. seing both these Popes liued in S. Augustins time. To deliuer him selfe from this disgracious shakell which much hindereth his goinge, he fetcheth many crosse capers, tumbleth like a pig in a poke, but he is so hampered, that the more he strugleth the more fast is he caught, the holes are so straight and him selfe so big that there is is no creepinge out, well may he thruste his head forth, as his brother Eaton the minister by Hounslowe, did vpon the pillerie in London, for teachinge his daughter a wrong lesson, but no possibility of escapinge appeereth. Many soueraigne

solucions forsooth, and diuers plaisters of I-sayes, are applied to cure the wounde, but all in vaine, for it festereth more and more, without all hope of amendment. Bad tinkers stop one heale, ad make an other. Bell is so cuninge a worke man, that he hath both left the olde leakinge stil, and made diuers new. I touch this point now breiflie, better oportunitie hereafter will be offered further to examin this matter, when god willinge all his bucklers of defence, shall be beaten vpon his owne face. At this present I will giue the reader a short viewe, of the great dexteritie he hath in answeringe; and the wonderfull facilitie in lyinge and the great pleasure he seemeth to take in that occupation, insistinge so much vpon that, and amplifienge it at lardg, as if he had either conscience in his soule or blood in his cheekes, he would neuer for shame once haue mentioned. I will cite all his wordes at full, that no iust cause of complaint be giuen: In his third chapter the title wherof is. Of the notorious lies of E. O. thus he declaimeth. Pope Siricius (as Thomas Bell affirmeth) was seduced by Sathan, published wicked doctrine, and
                     
Precisians, came daylie to a winter morning lecture, where after other preparatiue discourses, when the mot was giuen by the preacher, and the text of Multiplicamini proclaimed, candles were put out, and that they frequented this exercise, fare more dilligently then they obserued the Lenten fast: and brought nothinge to iustifie my relation, how would he take me vp for halting. Yea I am verily perswaded, that albeit, I should say that such a thinge hapned in a principall towne in Barkshire, addinge also that the minister vpon the breakinge forth of the matter fearinge persecution for the testimonie of a good conscience, fled a way towardes Oxford, and venturinge with his horse to take the water, because he had haste in his way, and could not expect a boate, was there drowned, that he would not make any great scruple notwithstandinge these particularities to giue me the lie. Let him then with far more reason quietly disgest it him selfe. His odious tearmes of blinded, and besotted, vnsauorie traditions, and superstitious illusions, must be pardoned: Some haue such a defect of nature, that they can not speake vnles thy stammer:

and Sir Thomas such an imperfection of grace, that except he rayle and lie he can write nothinge. S. Hierom calleth the Lenton fast a tradition of the Apostles. 
                     Epist. ad Marcellum adversus Mont
                           •
                        
                        num. though it pleaseth him to call it an vnsauorie tradition so litle doth it like him, and to say truth, the old tradition commandinge so longe abstinence from fleashe, can not but be to the ministers mouth sower and vnsauorie: and the new Geneua fashion that geueth leaue by the libertie of the gospell to eate fleash at all times, is far more sauorie, tothsome, and pleasant.
               
               
                  VI.
                  THus much out of the Downe fall: now for a packinge blowe one bout more and so an end. In this booke of his which he published the last yeare 1603 (and coupled it together with his Goulden ballance) the good man seemeth to be much netled, and the waters of his patience so troubled, and shaken, that they be not yet queit and cleere: for a certaine Catholike author (in a booke intituled A Detection &c. written against Master Sutcliff, and Master

                     taught the flat doctrine of the diuel: These are the expresse wordes of E. O. whom (as it seemeth) the diuel did euen then posesse when he vitered them. For not one of these wordes (TAVGT THE FLAT DOCTRINE OF THE 
                     But they are found. 
                     DIVEL) can be found in my Suruey, in the place which E. O. hath quoted, but these wordes which of purpose he did omitt (prohibited mariage as an vnlawful thinge) This therefor is a notorius, and a most malicious lie, It is a lye in grame, and that a knocker (to vse his owne wordes else where) adorned with the name of the diuell, to giue the more grace vnto it; And that worthelie, because the diuel is the Architect and thiefe worckman in that art and occupation. Here is a greueous complaint put vp against E. O. for that he hath slaundred the minister, and vttered a notorious and moste malicious lie, a lie in graine and a knocker, adorned with the name of the diuell, &c. and the lye consisteth in this point, because E. O. chardgeth Bell as though he should say that Siricius taught the flatt doctrine of the diuele, none of which wordes as he affirmeth can be found in his Surueye in the place which E. O. hath quoted: and this inturie he reputeth for a fault of no smale qualitie when he writeth that the
                     
                     deuile as it seemeth did euen then posesse him when he vttered them. A greuous crime doutles, that in his seeminge opinion deserued so suddaine and seuere a punishment, or els he presumeth much vpon the diueles friendship, when he is readie to conceiue that for a trifelinge iniurie offered to his ministership he tooke the matter so hotely, as to prosecute it in such terrible reuenging maner. But now nothwithstandinge all this bitter and fearfull exclamation, what if these wordes be found in his Surueye and in that verie place which E. O. hath noted vpon whom them doth the notorious and malicious lye fall, whose coate is died and marked with the lye in graine, whose credit doth the knockinge lye batter and beate, and whose tenement moste like to giue the diuele intertainment? That the said Siricius was seduced by Sathan, and published wicked doctrine he denieth not: why I beseech him is there any such great difference betwixt these wordes which he graunteth and those other which he doth not graunt, that he should mount vp into such extrauagant tearmes, let them be indifferently pondered, and

they expresse the verie same meaninge
                        •
                      for is it not trulie verified of him that he doth teach the flatt doctrine of the diuele, of whom it is confessed that, he was seduced by Sathan and published wicked doctrine. Put them into an equall ballance, and a dram of difference in sence and true construction, wil not be found, for Bell is no nere allied to the rineged minister of Baschall then Sathan is to the diuile. These are vaine shiftes, idle vagaries, & a cuninge wheelinge from the matter, cries out Sir Thomas: To the point, shew the foresaid wordes, or els E. O. remaineth cōuicted of notorious lyinge, and I in the back house ditch for takinge his parte: seeing he is so short and so cutted, to take away all cauilles, and to chamber the clapper of his runinge red rag. I tell him that for the wordes wherewith Bell is chardged, two places of his Surueye are quoted: to witt pag. 228. and 230. and in the first quotation of 228. be those wordes found which he admitteth, and in the next of 230. is that sentence registred which he denieth vtterlie euer to haue spoken. for reuellinge at Siricius for callinge, not holie wedlocke as he saith (he must

take an heare from his beard which had he done so often as he hath ouerreached, he had bin a balde minister longe since) but the filthie yoakinge and pretensed mariage of Preistes the pollution of carnall concupiscence: he exclameth against him in this manner. I add hereunto that this is the flatt doctrine of the diuele, and S. Paul is my verie witnes herein. I report me now to his deuoted dependants whether his witts were at home, when he medled, with such hot and dangerous edge tooles, as haue pitifully hurt and scaled his owne fingers, or what discretion, shame, or modestie he had, to pursue his aduersarie with so full mouth and strong a crie of wordes in vvhich the diuele also had his part: so vainlie to vaunt of his sincere proceedinge, so desperatly to deny any of these vvordes taught the flatt doctrine of the diuele, to be in the place quoted: and confidently to chardge his aduerfarie vvith a notorious lye: vvhen he had more reason to haue commanded his tounge silence seeing it hath found out his ovvne confusion, neuer to haue preached of sinceritie, vvhen he plaide the cunny catchinge companion: nor

euer to haue called an other in question for lyinge, him selfe in that very place not only venturinge vpon an vntruth, but also in that verie same thinge, which as a notorious lye he obiecteth to an other. As for S. Paul where he vvould haue his vvitnes, he may talke is pleasure and say vvhat he list, but he may sooner spend all his pensions in Sub-penas, then euer bringe that blessed Apostle to depose in his side for the lawfull mariage of vowed Preistes and religious persons. The testimonie of their owne corrupt conscience yea and of their cōcupiscence they may haue: the authoritie of any Apostle, or authenticall auncient writer, they are neuer able to produce.
                  And thus much breiflie for a sample cutt of as it were from the mayne webbe intended. No difficultie had it beene to haue ranged more plentifully, after the same maner both in these and other his bookes. But my purpose was only at this time to giue a tast not to furnishe a formall bankett: these few passages, shall I hope for this present giue the gentle reader desierous of truth, sufficient content: being as it were the two messengers Chusy and Achimaas to bring 1. Reg. 
                        
                           •
                        8.
                     
newes of the ouerthrowe of this glorious Absalon, who hath as shamefully apostared from his vocation, and waged war against his mother the church, as euer did that graceles impe reuolte from his naturall alleigaunce, and tooke armes against his father the kinge: the mayne battayle heauenlie grace asistinge me shall with conuenient speede followe after. God that willeth not the death of a sinner, put into the hartes of all such Protestaunts as loue truth and detest falshoode: desier saluation with Christ and his Sanites, and tremble at eternall damnation with. the diuele and his angelles, carefully to seeke for the knowledg of the pure, auncient, and Aposto like faith, Zealously when it is found to keepe and imbrace it, and constantly to liue and dye in the profession of the same. B. C.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   