
      
         
            
            
            A
VIEW OF THE MARGINAL
NOTES OF THE
Popish Testament, translated
into English by the English fugitiue
Papists resiant at
RHEMES in
France.
By George Wither.
            
            
               Psalm. 19. vers. 7.
               The Law of the Lord is perfect, conuerting
the soule, the testimonie of the Lord
is sure, and giueth wisedome
to the simple.
            
            
               Augustine in epistolam Iohan. tract. primo.
               Iohannes maluit se ponere in numero peccatorum,
vt Christum haberet aduocatum: quam ponere
se pro Christo aduocatum, & inueniri
inter damnandos
superbos:
               Iohn had rather place himselfe in the number of sinners,
that he might haue Christ to be his aduocate:
than to let himselfe in steed of
Christ to be an aduocate, and
so to be found amongst
damnable proud
men.
            
            Printed at London by Edm. Bollifant
for Thomas Woodcocke.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST-REVEREND FAther
in God, IOHN Archbishop of Canterburie,
Primate and Metropolitane of England,
GEORGE WITHER wisheth abundant
increase of all heauenly and
spirituall blessings.
            
               IT is the manner, vse, and custome of all that set
foorth any thing to be seene and read of others, to
set downe some reasons that mooued them to take
such pains, and to publish their labors. In the yeere
of our Lord, one thousand, fiue hundred, eightie
two, a testament trāslated into English, at Rhemes
in France, was published in print, by the English fugitiue
Papists resiant there. The censure, view, and
examination whereof, hath euer since been hartily
looked, or rather longed for, of all both rich and
poore, high and low, that feare God and loue his truth. But by what occasion I
cannot tell, it hath been hitherto delaied. Whereupon I thought it would not
be amisse, neither misliked, if some thing in the meane space might be done,
toward the satisfaction of the well affected, and the repressing of the triumphes
of the contrarie. Therefore at my returne from London, from Michaelmasse
terme last past, I tooke in hand to discouer the loose, corrupt, vniust, and vntrue
dealing of our Rhemists in their marginall notes. Which if I could effect,
and bring to passe afore an answer to their whole worke came foorth, I did suppose
that it would somwhat diminish the griefe of manie good men, and make
them the more patiently to expect and wait for the censure of the whole work.
And againe, if it should happen, that by reason I tooke it in hand so late, that I

                  •
               ould not compasse it, or bring it to passe, afore the censure of the whole worke
were in presse, yet I did thinke, that bicause that worke could not be but verie
great, and therfore chargeable; that it would not be thought amisse of, if some
part were answered by it selfe, which the poorer, and those which either were
vnable, or vnwilling to be at charges with the other, might attaine and haue
with small cost. Now hauing by the fauor of God gone through it, I thought
that I could not choose a better patron for it, than your Grace, whom God
hath aduanced to the highest Ecclesiasticall place and dignitie in our Church
of England. For some make the dedication of their works, testimonies of old
friendship and familiaritie, and as it were monuments of their old long continued
loue. Which cause if there were no more, were sufficient, considering the
loue, wherewith you haue imbraced me these thirtie yeeres and vpwards. Others
do it to witnes their mindfulnes of their dutie to them that be in honorable
place and calling. And why should not I heerin also imitate them, sith it
hath pleased God, leauing me in a meane place, so highly to aduance you? Others
to get the fau
                  ••
               able patronage and defence of their works by high dignitie
and authoritie, against all maleuolous cauillers and backbiters, whereof
this wicked world is alwaies full. And heer of both I stand in great need, hauing
the whole band of Popish sophisters in this against me, and also none can better
protect and defend me, than you, either for learning and iudgement, or for

power and authoritie, wherewith God hath indued you. Their whole worke
consisteth altogither of lieng, fraud, and deceit, which I thought not vnmeete
in some part to touch, disclose, and make manifest in this mine Epistle. First in
their Preface, then in their Translation, after in their collected and concluded
Annotations: lastly, in their thicke and threefold allegations of the fathers.
In which I will vse all possible breuitie and shortnes; for that my purpose is but
to giue a little small taste of their foule and shamelesse dealings, whereby the
sinceritie of their dealing in the rest may be the easilier and better gessed at.
The first part of their Preface maintaineth against the whole course of the
Scriptures, and against all authoritie of the ancient primitiue Church, that it
is not necessarie for al Christians to haue, and read the Scriptures in a knowen
vulgar toong.Deut. 6. vers. 7. 8 9. Which if it were true, why are all men commanded continually
to talke of them, and to write them vpon the doores, wals,Psal. 1. vers. 
                     •
                  . and posts of their
houses, and how should they meditate in them day and night? How should fathers
teach them to their children,Psal. 78. v. 
                     ••
                  . and they againe to their children?Psal. 19. ve
                     •
                  . 7. The
Scriptures giue wisedome to the simple, why then shall not the simplest seeke
in them to waxe wise?Iohn 5. v 39. If life be to be found in the Scriptures, why shall not all
search them that looke for life?Rom. v. 1
                     •
                  . v. 
                     •
                  . If they be written for our learning, why should
it not be as lawful to learne by reading, as by hearing? The Cōstitutions which
they sundry times alledge,Cleme
                     •
                  . l. b. 1. cap. 
                     •
                  . as ordeined by the Apostles, do appoint Laie men
to read the Law, the books of the Kings,Epistla ad Marcellam. the Psalmes and the Gospell. Saint
Hierome commendeth poore plough men, bicause at the plough taile in their
worke and labor, they could sing the Psalmes. Our Rhemists adde of their owne
(beleeue them if you list) to salue the matter withall, that they sang in a language
they vnderstood not, and wherein they could not read those Scriptures.
Saint Chrysostome exhorted the common people to get them Bibles,In the homilie▪ quoted in their epistle. and Testaments,
and refuted the same obiections, which the Papists at this day make
to the contrary. But our Papists tel vs that he dealt like a pulpit man, and therfore
his rules must not be generall, but serue for his owne people, which he
preached vnto. As who should say the pulpit were not as meet a place, to deliuer
the rules of religion, and a generall truth in, as the schooles. They adde,
that euery artificer dealeth in the hardest, and deepest matters of religion,
omitting the more easie, that they presuppose no difficulties, that they aske
for no expositor, that they feele no depth of Gods science in Scripture, that
maners, and life are nothing amended, that priuate fantasies, and not the
sense of the Church, and doctors thereof, in interpreting the Scriptures is followed.
And whosoeuer knoweth the state, and condition of the Church of
England, knoweth all this to be an beape, and dunghill of lies packed togither.
If their commendation of their Churches moderation, in not wholy condemning,
nor forbidding generally vulgar translations, be not a lie▪ then Master
Harding,In the fift part of his answere to the apologie, Chap. 16. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . and such other like of their side, haue abused vs, in telling vs, that the
malepartnesse of Heretikes made the Church altogither to forbid the vulgar
translations. Their accusations of our translations, haue alreadie been so well
answered by Master Doctor Fulke to Martinius, that I neede not to touch
them. Their reasons likewise being both many, and friuolous, whereby they go
about to prefer their vulgar latin version, before the text in the toongs, wherein
they were first written, I leaue to him, or them, which shall answere the whole
preface in order as it lieth: onely three things, I will admonish men to consider
of, in them. First that they tend not so much to giue credit to the vulgar

text, as to discredit al texts whatsoeuer, to the end that either men might haue
nothing to ground their religion certainlie on, or else to make their Church
of Rome their only stay. Secondly, that they confesse the Fathers in this point
to be against them, namely whose opinions are that the Latin text should
yeeld to the Greeke, and Hebrue: but they thinke to avoid it with a slie shift,
that they meant the true, and vncorrupted text, as it was in their daies, and
times. But Lodouicus Viues a learned man, liuing in the daies of Henrie the
eight, in his annotations vpon Saint Augustine de ciuitate Dei,
               Iib. 14. cap. 8. telleth vs, that to
his time (a fewe vnlearned dolts excepted) all men preferred the texts in
their original toongs,Lib. 15. cap. 13. before the others translated out of them. Therefore either
our good Masters of Rhemes must tell vs of some great corruptions that
haue crept in of late yeeres into the Greeke, and Hebrew texts, or else they
can not blame vs for not crediting them against the learned of all ages afore
vs, old and new, one, and others. Thirdly, that the Councel of Trent goeth not
so far as our new Masters of Rhemes: For they preferre it onely before all Latin
translations, making it amongst them the onely autenticall texte: In which
it is plaine that either the Pope, or the Councell might, and did erre. For Erasmus
dedicated his translation to Pope Leo, and vnder his approbation manie
men tooke it for autenticall, and now your Councell iudgeth it not autenticall,
therefore either Leo, or they iudged amisse, take whether they will. Thus much
for their Preface. Their Translation (how much soeuer they brag of paines,
care, and conscience to deale sincerely) is fraudulently framed to make poore
men thinke the Scriptures to be more obscure and darke a great deale, than
they are, and so to fray them (as much as in them lieth) from taking paines to
read them. I note this onely, not bicause it is not full of other corruptions, and
partialities, but bicause leauing them to the censurer, or censurers therof, I
take that which euery blind man may see, that they haue studied therin for nothing
lesse, than perspicuitie, & plainnes. For they haue both hunted for words
of purpose, which the people do not vnderstand, as superstantiall, didrachmes,
cense, stater, scandall, scandalized, Corbanah, euangelized, scenopegia, paraclete,Iohn 2. v. 4.
prepucie, Neophyte, depositum, gratis, and such like: And also left
their sentences vnperfect,Iohn. 21. vers. 22. halt, maimed, and without sence, and all to strike
simple persons in a maze, As what is to me & the woman? and this man what?Rom. 5. vers. 18.
As by the offence of one vnto al men to condemnation, and such like, which in
English haue no sence. Their collections, and conclusions how weake and friuolous
they are, though it will sufficiently appeare in mine answeres to their
marginal notes; yet I hope it wil not be amisse, if some also be noted down here.
These shall be of two sorts, one so grosse that euery simple man may see the vanitie
of their collections: the other more cunninglie, but yet deceitfully gathered.
The deceit of the later sort is also double, either grounded vpon wilfull,
and slaunderous misreporting of our assertions, or else vpon aequiuocations,
and ambiguitie of words, wherewith it seemeth they delight them selues
greatly, and thinke it a wonderfull peece of learning to deceiue their poore,
simple & credulous followers. The first sort void of all shew of probable consequence,
are throughout their Testament very many. But to auoide tediousnes,
I will content me here with a very few.Vers. 23. In the first of Matthew. Our Sauiour
Christ borne in mariage, yet of a Virgin, honoreth both states, and withall
teacheth vs that virginitie, and continent life are preferred before mariage.
In the second of Matthew vpon the murdering of the children,Vers. 16. by this we learn,

what credit is to be giuen to the Church in canonizing Saints, and celebrating
their holydaies,Vers. 8. &c. In the third Chapter, vpon those words. Yeeld therefore
fruit worthy of penance. Iohn preacheth satisfaction by doing worthy fruits, &
works of penance.Vers. 2. Both in the third & fourth chapter, vpon Iohns preaching in
the desart, & Christs going into the desart, to be tempted of the di
                  •
               ell, they gather
a warrant for popish Heremites, that make a profession to liue out of the
societie & companie of men continually,Vers. 21. and so to end their daies. In the sift of
Matthew vpon these words, except your iustice do abound, &c. whereby we see
(say they) saluation, life and iustification not to come of onely faith, or imputation
of Christs righteousnes.Vers. 13. In the sixt chapter, vpon these words, Leade vs
not into temptation, they saie that Beza according to the Caluinistes opinion,
saith that God leadeth into temptation, therefore he maketh God the author
of euill.Vers. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . In the seauenth chapter vpon these words, Lord, Lord. These
men haue faith, otherwise they could not inuocate, therefore to beleeue is not
enough. I could haue drawne out a great number as bad, or woorse than these,
but I will heere stay. For I haue giuen a sufficient taste, what might be done in
the most part of their Testament, almost in euerie chapter. Now concerning
their double deceit afore spoken of, whereof the first is grounded vpon malice,
which blindeth them, and maketh them wilfully against their owne conscience
and knowledge to mistake and misreport our assertions. One common
cauill, is the finding fault with our translating of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , repentance,Vers. 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
and to repent, and amend, Mathew. 11. and repeated in many other
places, which is grounded vpon this slander, that bicause we do not allow
that the fruits of repentance be works satisfactorie for sinne, therefore we do
not teach at al those testimonies of harty, and vnfeined repentance. Another
cauill very cōmon also riseth vpon that, bicause we confesse (as the holy Ghost
hath taught vs in the Scriptures) that God is the author of euerie act, therefore
they gather also that he is the author of euerie sinne, or euill. Which malicious
collection, though it haue been ten thousand times answered, and
that fully, yet they cease not still odiouslie to obiect it. And bicause we denie
that Christ after his death went into Limbus Patrum,Actes 2. vers. 
                     •
                  7. as they without al warrant
of the word imagine, therefore they maliciouslie giue out that Caluin
and his followers denie an article of the Faith,1. Peter. 3. ver. 19. and therfore conclude them to
be infidels. In all their notes touching iustification by faith, they deale with
vs, as though we ascribed iustification to an idle faith, which worketh not by
loue, and vpon that false ground, they gather many things against vs, as shall
appeere in mine answere to their notes. But all that are wise, and haue eies to
see, do perceiue, that in this maner of dealing, they do but vtter their owne
shame, in making no conscience of cogging, lieng, and slaundering, & in steede
of battailing with their enimies, they make themselues sport with their owne
shadowes. Now to their amphibologies, and aequiuocations; which are also to
long to pursue. The Rhemists vpon the fift to the Galathians confesse, that
Paule when he ascribeth iustification to faith, speaketh of such a faith as worketh
by charitie, and yet in all their notes against iustification by faith, they
dallie, and play, and dazel the eies of the simple with the ambiguitie of the
word, being diuerslie in diuerse places taken. The like dealing they vse about
the words of iustice, and iustification, which when they know them to be diuersly
taken, and in sundry senses, yet they delude with the sound of the words
those, who for simplicitie are not able to discerne the diuersitie of the sense. I

wil not heap vp here more of these examples, a number will offer themselues
in reading of mine answers. The alledging of the Fathers thicke and threefolde,
is for two fraudulent respects. One is, that those which are doubtfull to
what religion they may encline, and to which side to cleaue, may continue
doubtfull, and without resolution still, whiles both our aduersaries, and we alledge
Fathers, and accuse one another of corrupt dealing in them, and they
poore soules not able to repaire to the Fathers to see whether side dealeth
truely. The second is to continue the false perswasion of their credulous followers,
in thinking that all antiquitie maketh for poperie. To these two ends it
is, that their allegations are so many. First therefore to auoid this their fraud,
it is to be noted, and obserued, that a maruellous number of their allegations,
touch no point, nor matter in controuersie betwixt vs. As for example,Mat. 2. ver. 16. they
alledge Origen to prooue that the innocent children murthred by the commandement
of Herode,Mat. 3. ver. 10. haue beene honored for martyres. Augustine to
prooue that not to do good is damnable.Mat. 3. vers. 8. Hierome to prooue that fasting,
praier, and almes are fruits of repentance, or as they terme it, penance, Cyprian
to prooue that they are false martyrs,Mat. 5. ver. 10. that suffer not for iustice. Chrysostome
to prooue that by the church the gouernors thereof be vnderstoode.Mat. 18. vers. 17.
Ambrose to prooue that God hath left to his church authoritie aswel to loose,Mat. 18. vers. 18.
as to binde. Which kinde of proofes for matter not denied, if they had beene
omitted, and left out, the great glorious shew of Fathers had beene blemished,
and their campe verie nigh halfe dissolued. Next is to be marked, that if they
catch any thing that maketh for them in any Father, they neuer looke how
rightly the Father collecteth it, and by what good reason he warranteth it, it
is with them sufficient that he saith it.August. epist. 19. But Augustine teacheth vs to giue that
reuerence onely to the canonical Scriptures, to beleeue. whatsoeuer they say.
And for others of what learning or holines soeuer, not to beleeue bicause they
speake, but bicause they prooue that which they speake, either by the word it
selfe, or by good reason grounded vpon the same word. And here also bicause
they are woont to triumph that we make this a colour to reiect the Fathers,
when they make against vs, it is to be remembred that they themselues do not
without exception admit the Fathers.Hos. de side & symbolo ca. 19. But they appoint an other rule to trie
them, and their saiengs by, that is, the decrees, and determinations of their
owne church. Thirdly it is to be noted that they alledge those bookes very often,
wherin they know that the Father which wrote them, was far ouercarried
with heate of contencion, that they themselues will not, nor dare not defend
many things that passed them, as Hieroms bookes against Iouiuian, and Vigilantius.
Fourthly it is not to be passed ouer, how they abuse Augustine in leauing
those bookes which he wrote against the heretike Pelagius,Retract. lib. 1. cap. 23. concerning
the question of Freewill, and alledging testimonies out of other books, wherein
he himselfe did confesse, that he did erre of ignorance. Fiftly they force diuers,
and sundrie to serue their turnes, whether they will, or no. Sixtly to make
the greater shew, they furnish out their number with such as they know to
haue beene burnt on the face for forgerie, and cite them vnder the reuerend
names of Clemens, and Dionisius Areopagita, and such like. Finally it is not
to be passed ouer, that they for the corroborating, and proouing of the vsurped
primacie of the bishop of Rome, they hunt for speeches of the Fathers spoken
in extolling Peter, or in commending the faith, then professed at Rome, or els
the excellent learning, and vertue of some notable bishops there, which then

gouerned that church, and them they racke, and set on the tenters to prooue
that, which they neuer thought of, that is, the vniuersall power, and authority,
which the bishop of Rome now claimeth. The practise of the primitiue church
doth best declare, both what the Fathers ment, and also what power and authoritie
he had. In that it is manifest that he was a bishop as other bishops,Hieronimu
                     •
                   Euagr
                     •
                  o. Nicenum concilium canone 6. afterward
by consent of men a patriarch limited as other patriarches, a subiect
to the Emperour in commission vnder him as a delegate, that men might appeale
from him, and that the Emperour might, and did appoint in such cases
of appeale delegates to affirme, or reuerse the bishop of Romes former sentence
and iudgement.August nus ad Epistola Parmemam libro pr
                     •
                  mo cap 5. & contra literas Petiliam lib. 3. cap. 25. So far was he from that vniuersalitie of power, which
he hath heertofore vsurped, and yet challengeth. But why should I dwel so long
in these matters, & exceede the length of an Epistle, seeing they haue brought
nothing of anie weight, in anie matter of controuersie, but it hath beene (and
that they know well enough) often, and fullie answered by diuers, and sundrie
alreadie? But bicause being fugitiues, and hauing no honest ordinarie vocation
to occupie themselues about, they neuer make an end of writing, wherein
they do nothing but set new colours on old matters, to make their sencelesse
followers beleeue, that they bring in new allegations, neuer before answered:
Therefore (vnder your Graces correction be it vttered) I would wish that our
controuersies being drawen into a sum, might by your authoritie be deuided,
to so many learned men, as your Grace shall thinke conuenient and competent
for that purpose, to examine, and to reduce and bring into the best frame
and forme they can, all the arguments of the aduersaries, and to ech seuerall
argument the answere, as plainely and briefly as it can be comprised, which
being done, and compiled into one, or two volumes, whatsoeuer they write
hereafter, except they bring (which I thinke impossible) some newe thing
heretofore vnheard of, to be referred to those volumes for answer, and so to
cease troubling the world with more bookes. Touching mine answers to their
marginall notes (I hope it will appeere) that I haue studied with as much breuitie,
and plainnes as I could possibly, to discipher their vanitie, and trifling,
wherewith they haue blotted, and blurred their margents of their Testament.
Their translation, and larger annotations, though many times great occasions
are offered to carpe at them, yet as neere as I could possiblie, I haue left
them vntouched, to him, or them (whosoeuer he or they be) that of purpose
shall deale with that matter. To the end that my truth, and simplicitie of dealing
may the better appeere to the Reader, of what sort soeuer he be, I haue set
downe the text, wherevpon their notes are gathered, according to their owne
translation, and their notes, word, forword, and then mine answers. By which
doing, I hope it will well appeere, that when out of their most partiall translation,
which they of purpose haue framed for their best aduantage, the things
which they gather, will not follow▪ nor be confirmed: that they are vtterlie
destitute of all helpe of the scriptures, how soeuer they labor to wring them to
their purpose. But concerning mine owne doing this shall suffice. If this which
I haue done, shall by you (most reuerend father) be iudged to be profitable
for the church and people of God, I haue that
which I desire. The Lord God blesse, keepe,
and preserue you. At Dunburie
the xij. of Aprill.
1588.
         
      
      
         
            
            A view of the marginall notes of the Popish Testament,
translated into English by the English
fugitiue Papists resiant at Rhemes
in Fraunce.
            
               Matt. 1. ver. 2
                     •
                  
               
               
                  The text.
                  ANd she shall bring foorth a sonne: and thou shalt call his
name ⸫ Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Iesus an Hebrew word, in English Sauiour.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you would assigne vs none other Sauiour, neither in part
nor in whole, our controuersies were at an end, we should not
neede to fill the worlde with our pamphlets.
               
            
            
               Matt. 2. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  Then Herode perceiuing that he was deluded by the Sages,
was exceeding angrie: and sending, murdered all the ⸫ men
children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof,
from two yeeres olde and vnder.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The martyrdome of holy Innocents, whose Holy-day is kept the 28.
of December.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You studyed (no doubt) harde for this note, or els so learned a
matter coulde not haue passed your penne. That these children
were murdered for Christes cause, I well perceiue, and yet because
their death was not a voluntarie testimonie to the trueth,
I see not any iust reason to accompt them Martyrs: Howbeit it
is not a matter woorth the contending about.
               
            
            
               Matt. 3. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  Euery tree therefore that doth ⸫ not yeeld good fruit, shall
be cut downe, and cast into the fire.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is not onely damnable to doe euill: but also not to doe good. Aug.
Sermone 6
                        •
                     . de temp.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You doe well to cite Augustine for this, and we beléeue it, not
bicause he sayeth it, but bicause this text doeth enforce it. And
you must either tell vs what euill doing is smaller, then not doing
good, or els your veniall sinnes must be quite banished the
countrey.
               
            
            
               
               Matth. 5. 26.
               
                  The text.
                  Be at agreement with thine aduersary betimes whiles thou
art in the way with him: least perhaps the aduersarie deliuer
thee to the Iudge, and the Iudge deliuer thee to the officer,
and thou be cast into ⸫ prison.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This prison is taken of very auncient Fathers for Purgatorie: namely,
Saint Cyprian epist. 52. ad Anton. nu. 6.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And what néede Fathers for this? Is it not ynough that your
holy father of Rome taketh it so? The fathers might erre, he can
not erre. If this prison be purgatorie, then no man can passe out
of it without paying the last farthing. And if that be so, the sale
of pardons, and such pelte is marred. For howe can pardon take
place where payment is so peremptorily required? But Cyprian
taketh it for purgatorie, I haue looked into the place by you quoted,
and find it not so: onely he toucheth there this present place,
but neither his wordes, nor the circumstances of the place afore,
nor after doe enforce any meaning of your purgatorie that I can
sée.In quest. ex nouo & veteri testamento, cap. 70. Therefore it argueth either great negligence in you, in not
searching, or great penurie of fathers so applying this place:De salutaribus documentis cap. 64. if
you searching could find none more plaine for your turne than
this. Augustine expoundeth this place of hell plainly and flatly.Eusebius de preparatione Euangelica. lib. 11. cap. 20.
As for your purgatorie, Plato the Ethnicke philosopher of great
fame, was the first founder thereof that I haue read of.
               
            
            
               Matth. 5. 43.
               
                  The text.
                  Thou shalt loue thine neighbour, and ⸫ hate thine enemie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So taught the Pharisees; not the lawe.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  So say we to them that turne precepts to counsels, so teach the
papistes, and not the Gospel.
               
            
            
               Matth. 5. 
                     •
                  5.
               
                  The text.
                  Who maketh his sunne to rise vpon good & bad, and raineth
vpon iust and ⸫ vniust.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We see that the temporall prosperitie of persons, and countries is no
signe of better men, or truer religion.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Therefore the Popes long continued rolle of succession, is no

good argument to approoue his religion, nor his present prosperitie,
his goodnesse, and holinesse.
               
            
            
               Matth. 6. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  Giue vs to day our ⸫ supersubstantiall bread.
               
               
                  The note.
                  In Saint Luke the Latine is, panem quotidianum, daily bread, the
Greeke being indifferent to both, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You do in this according to your common custome, that which
is most obscure, farthest from the peoples vnderstanding, and
may best serue you to dally withall, that you make choise of.
               
            
            
               Matth. 6. 31.
               
                  The text.
                  Be not carefull therefore, saying what shall we eate, or what
shall we drinke, or wherewith shall we be couered? For all these
things the ⸫ heathen doe seeke after.
               
               
                  The note.
                  They seeke temporall things onely, and that not of the true God, but of
their idols, or by their owne industrie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To contend with you about the heathen it were but a follie.
It is manifest that many of them looked for immortalitie of the
soule, and felicitie after this life, as their Elisij campi doe testifie.
But for séeking either by your owne industrie, or by them which
are no gods, you and they may be coupled together. For you be
right cousin germaines, and therein you giue them not place an
inch.
               
            
            
               Matth. 7. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  If you then being naught, know how to giue good giftes to
your children, how much more will your Father which is in
heauen, giue ⸫ good things to them that aske him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  These good things are graces and all spiritual giftes, and whatsoeuer
pertaineth to the health of the soule.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If al these things be giuen vs of God, and so are of his franke
and free liberalitie, then with what face teach you, that your own
merites must get vs heauen, and gaine vs the saluation of our
soules.
               
            
            
               Matth. 9. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus ⸫ seeing their faith, said to the sicke of the palsey,
&c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We see that the faith of one helpeth to obtaine for another.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  It is very true that there is mutuall helpe giuen by the faithfull
whiles they liue one to another,
                        
                           •
                        am. 5. 15, 16. Rom. 1. 1
                           •
                        . both by prayer to obtaine
good things at Gods hand, and also to comfort and confirme one
another mutually in faith, and all goodnesse: but what maketh
this for that which you teach fooles to looke for, that is, helpe by
them which are dead and gone.
               
            
            
               Matth 9. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  But the dayes will come when the bridegrome shall be taken
away from them, and ⸫ then they shall fast.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ signifieth that the Church shall vse fasting dayes after his
Ascension. Epiphanius in Compend. fid. Cath. August. epist. 80.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Christ doeth not prescribe any certaine day, or dayes euery
wéeke to fast in, howsoeuer occasions doe fall out: neither doeth
he appoint men when they fast, to abstaine from one kinde of
meate, & to fill their bellie with another: your fathers you might
haue spared.As Thursdayes. The fasting dayes there set downe by Epiphanius
vnder the name of Apostolicall tradition, for verifying and fulfilling
this place,August. epist. 
                           •
                        6. your church obserueth not. As for Augustine, he
knewe of no such tradition that is of any daies appointed by
Christ, or his Apostles to fast in.
               
            
            
               Matth. 9. 32.
               
                  The text.
                  But Iesus turning and seeing her, said, haue a good heart
daughter, ⸫ thy faith hath made thee safe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Loe, her deuotion to the hemme of his garment, was not superstition,
but a token of greater faith: so is the deuout touching of holy
relikes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that her deuotion was not superstition, but a token
of faith mixt with many infirmities, which infirmities it pleased
Christ (for such is his mercie toward his) not to impute, but to
forgiue. And where you draw from this example an approbation
of your superstitious touching holy relikes, you doe amisse. For
her acte is not set downe for a common rule for others to follow,
and though it were, yet it could not serue, but where the principall
things to be considered of are alike, which wil farre disagrée
in any relike that you can name vsed in Poperie.
               
            
            
               
               Matth. 9. 34.
               
                  The text.
                  But the Pharisees said, ⸫ in the prince of diuels he casteth out
diuels.
               
               
                  The note.
                  In like maner say the heretikes, calling all miracles done in the
Church, the lying signes of Antichrist.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is but vaine to quarell with you, for giuing vs the odious
names of heretikes, and vsurping to your synagogue of Satan
the glorious name of the Catholique church. We doe not call all
miracles done in your synagogue lying signes, for God diuers
times by miracles hath disclosed the impietie, and hipocrisie of
your Antichristian captaines of Rome, as the miraculous discouerie
of sixe thousand infants heades afore murdered by adulterous
priestes,Huldericus Augusta. episcopus in epist. ad papam Nicholaum. Nicholaus Clemangis. constrained to single life in the dayes of Gregorie
the great, and the appearing of an owle in a councell holden at
Rome, by pope Iohn the xxiiii. after the masse of the holy Ghost
solemnly song at the beginning of the councel, and such like. But
those which either by the illusion of the diuell haue bene done, or
by your auncestors fained to be done, to vphold popish corruptions
contrary to the manifest trueth of the word, whereof some
are babish, some ridiculous, some so foule and filthie as that they
would loathe any honest eare to heare, we do, and may well call
lying signes of Antichrist. Of these whosoeuer vouchsafeth to
waste some time in your legenda aurea, or in promptuario exemplorum,
or in mille miraculis beat. Mart. or such like bookes,
shall find store to your shame.
               
            
            
               Matth. 10. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  Into the way of the ⸫ Gentiles go ye not, and into the cities
of the Samaritans enter ye not.
               
               
                  The note.
                  They haue here commission to preach onely in Israel: the time being
not yet come to call the Gentiles.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Whereby we sée the depth of the counsell and wisedome of
God to be such, as no man can render a reason of, and that in his
wisedome he sometime withdraweth the light of his Gospel, and
communicateth it in comparison but to a 
                        •
                     ewe, and sometime againe
he causeth it to shine foorth brightly, and the knowledge of
it to spread farre abroad.
               
            
            
               
               Matth. 10. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  Be ye therefore ⸫ wise as serpents, and simple as doues.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Wisedome and simplicitie both necessarie in preachers, Bishops, and
priestes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But you ioyne wisedom and double dealing together, & hold it
for a principle, that you are not bound to deale simply and truely
with your aduersaries,Concilium Constantiense sessione 19. as both that conclusion of the councell of
Constance, that faith giuen to heretikes is not to be kept, and also
the continuall practise of your church doeth very well testifie.
And you doe well in reckening bishops and priestes beside preachers,
because skant the tenth or tithe of your bishops and priests
were wont to preach.
               
            
            
               Mat. 10. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ feare yee not them that kill the bodie, and are not able
to kill the soule.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A goodly comfort for christians and catholikes, and all good men, in
the persecutions of Turke, of heretikes, of all wicked men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Which comfort did animate and encourage all those, whom
you haue burnt and killed for religion, to testifie the truth against
you, with losse of their liues, and shedding of their blood.
               
            
            
               Mat. 10. 41.
               
                  The text.
                  And he that receiueth a ⸫ iust man, in the name of a iust man,
shall receiue the reward of a iust man.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The reward for harboring and helping any blessed iust person suffering
for his iustice and conscience.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To this we agrée, but your meaning we are far from. For
your meaning is, that wheresoeuer reward is expressed, there also
merit of worke should be vnderstood. As if it were not possible
for God to be more bountiful in rewarding, than we are meritorious
in deseruing. Otherwise it were a simple sillie rewarde,
that a cup of colde water could deserue.
               
            
            
               Mat. 12. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  And if you did know what it is, I will mercy, and not ⸫ sacrifice:
you would neuer haue condemned the innocents.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  See the annotation chap. 9. vers. 13.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You are loth your note should passe vnuiewed, and therefore
you make this reference. Well we haue séene it, and finde that,
which any yoong schooler with verie small studie would haue set
downe. The best commendation it deserueth, is, that it sauoreth
not so much of your vsuall corruption, as commonly your notes
do. Other thing it hath not woorth the nothing downe.
               
            
            
               Mat. 12. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  Euerie kingdome ⸫ diuided against it selfe, shal be made desolate:
and euerie citie or house diuided against it selfe, shall
not stande.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Therefore the kingdome of heretikes can not possibly stand, bicause
it is alwaies full of diuision and dissention.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If all heresies and sects in the whole world be raked out, and
al their contentions, and strifes numbred, yet neither in number,
nor in weight can they excéede the strifes that haue béene, and are
among our popish heretikes themselues. Wherefore as their
kingdome hath alreadie begun to fall, so it is not like to endure.
               
            
            
               Mat. 12. 33.
               
                  The text.
                  Either ⸫ make the tree good, and his fruite good: or make
the tree euill, and his fruit euill.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is a mans owne free will, and election, to be a good tree, or an ill tree,
to bring foorth good fruits or bad. So Augustine vpon this place. Lib. 2.
cap. 4. de Actis cum Foelice Manichaeo.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I maruell not that péeuish papists hold this, for their own consciences
do testifie to them, that the best ground they haue for being
such trées, as papists may be, is the corrupt motions of their
owne will, and choise. But we know that no man commeth to
Christ,Iohn 10. 29. but whom the father draweth,Iohn 15. 16. and he hath no shéepe but
those whom his father hath giuen him, and of them he pronounceth
they make not choise of him, but he of them. As for Augustine
he wrote scant aduisedly of fréewill, till Pelagius did awake
him.Retract. primo, cap. 23. For till then as he himselfe confesseth, he had not diligently
sought nor yet found, what the election of grace ment. Therefore

in the matter of fréewill, if you bring any thing, that Augustine
wrote afore he wrote against Pelagius, you do but abuse men
with his name against his minde, which in this shall appéere
thus. The question betwéen the Manichées and Augustine was,
what was the originall cause of euil? The Manichean maketh
two eternall, incommutable natures, one good, the other euill,
one the author of good, the other the author of euill. On the contrarie
part, Augustine maketh freewill the originall cause of euil.
The Manichean amongst other scriptures, wrested to his purpose
to prooue his two natures, vseth this of the two trées good
and bad. Augustine to take away his application of this text answereth,
that it was the wil of man that made him a bad tree, and
that it was in his choise whether he would be good, or bad. After
this ariseth Pelagius, of whom the papists haue learned their
freewill: he for his defence catcheth at spéeches vsed by Augustine
against the Manicheans. Augustine replieth, that though some
spéeches vsed against the Manicheans might séeme to fauor the
error of fréewill, yet other spéeches of his, euen in those his books
against the Manicheans, will sufficiently cleere him from any
such meaning,De natura & gratia cap. 67. and therefore giueth men this rule, that that,
which in those bookes, and in that question he spake of will to do
well, he spake of the will of man in which man was first created,Retract. lib. 1. cap. 9.
and not otherwise. Thus we sée that our Rhemists learned this
of their captaine Pelagius; and that they go about by Augustine
to prooue that which he ment not, that is, the freedome of our
wils now.
               
            
            
               Matt. 13. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  Therefore in parables I speake to them: bicause seeing, they
see not, and ⸫ hearing they heare not, neither do they vnderstande.
               
               
                  The note.
                  When Gods word is preached they properly haue eares to heare, that
haue harts to obey, and they hearing do not heare, which heare by sense
of their bodie, and obey not by consent of their harts. August. de done
perseuerantiae, cap. 14.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We like Augustines exposition verie well, and praie to God
most hartily for you, that he in mercy wil vouchsafe to withdraw
from you, that his heauie iudgement, which most manifestlie
hath lien vpon you, and to giue you now at length eares to heare,
and eies to sée withall, which hitherto you haue most dangerouslie
wanted.
               
            
            
               
               Matth. 13. 39.
               
                  The text.
                  And the enimie that sowed them is ⸫ the diuell.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not God then, but the diuell is the author of all euill.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In this we consent, sauing that we know you haue a malicious
meaning, to make your blind ignorant followers beléeue
that we holde God to be the author of euill, which assertion we
and euerie one of vs do with all our harts abhorre, and detest, as
most wicked, and blasphemous.
               
            
            
               Matth. 13. 
                     •
                  8.
               
                  The text.
                  Which when it was filled, drawing it foorth, and sitting by
the shore, they choose out the good ⸫ into vessels, but the bad
they did cast out.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Here also are signified good, and bad in the church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  No man doth denie but that in the outward account of the
church so long as it is in this vale of miserie, many hypocrites
are, and yet in truth, and in the iudgement of him that cannot be
deceiued in discerning his, neuer of the church.
               
            
            
               Matth. 14. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And the king was stroken sad: yet bicause of his ⸫ oth, and
for them that sate with him at table he commanded it to be
giuen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A wicked and a rash oth, and more wickedly fulfilled: bicause an
vnlawfull oth bindeth no man.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That a wicked rash oth bindeth no man to performance, we
easily consent. But this can be no cloke for the manifold periuries,
which your companie haue committed many waies: but
most specially in breaking the lawfull oth of obedience to their
lawfull prince, not rashly, but with good aduise and deliberation
made by the most part of them.
               
            
            
               Matth. 14. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And his disciples came and tooke the bodie, and buried it,
⸫ and came and told Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Iohns disciples at this time had wel learned their dutie toward
Christ.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Two things commendable in Iohns disciples are héere set
downe vnto vs: Their expressing of their loue toward their master
and teacher in burying his bodie, and their repaire to Christ.
But how much, and how greatly they had pr
                        •
                     fited in the doctrine
which their master had taught them, that appéereth not.
               
            
            
               Matth. 14. 31.
               
                  The text.
                  And incontinent ⸫ Iesus stretching foorth his hand tooke
hold of him, and said vnto him, O thou of little faith.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Notwithstanding the infirmities of them that gouerne the Church,
yet Christ sustaineth them and holdeth them vp yea and by them, whatsoeuer
they are he vpholdeth, and preserueth his Church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Far fetched, and déere bought is good for ladies. Christ saued
Peter from drowning, notwithstanding the weaknes of his
faith: Therefore he must néedes saue the Pope, whatsoeuer infirmities
be in him. Other, or better consequence than this, out of
this place I am sure you can make none. For that you do not
meane all that gouerne any part of the Church, I gather, both bicause
you reason from Peter, and also bicause you grant that any
particular bishop may erre. Now if your consequence be true,
then tel me how Christ vphold your pope Iohn against the councel
of Constance,Session 12. who deposed him. And if he were not afore that
Councell the chéefe gouernor of your Church, tell me who was.
And if Christ did not vphold him, and by him your church, tell me
when you gat againe restitution of your supposed priuilege, once
broken. This example therefore serueth more aptly to encourage
men to follow Christ, to do whatsoeuer he commandeth, with
whatsoeuer dangers it be accompanied, bicause Christ will not

                        •
                     aile them that walke in holy obedience to his will, how weake,
fraile, and full of infirmities soeuer they be, but as at the pinch
he aided Peter, so will he them.
               
            
            
               Matth. 14. 36.
               
                  The text.
                  And they besought him, that they might touch but the ⸫
hemme of his garment, & whosoeuer did touch it were made
whole.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See before cap. 9. v. 20.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You trouble vs with your references, your note hath béene already

considered of, and receiued answer in his due place.
               
            
            
               Matth. 15. 28▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  Then Iesus answering said to hir, (o woman) ⸫ great is thy
faith, be it done to thee as thou wilt: and hir daughter was
made whole from that hower.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It were a strange case that Christ should commend in this woman a
sole faith without good works, that is to say, a dead faith, such as could
not worke by loue, and which Saint Iames doubted not to call the faith
not of Christians but of diuels. August. de fide & operibus. cap. 16.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It were a very strange case if papists should leaue lying, fraud
and deceit. For who séeth not, that the end and purpose of your
note is, to make men thinke, that your aduersaries attribute
much to a dead faith, that cannot worke by loue: And if there be
any that doth so, name him. And if in truth you cannot name any,
then what are ye? Bicause we say that faith onely iustifieth,
must it néedes therefore be a dead faith? Bicause the eie onelie
séeth, must it néedes be pulled out of the head, and be without all
other organs and instruments of the bodie? Who séeth not the
folly of this? We with Augustine affirme, that Christ sawe in
this woman whose faith he praised, a woonderfull worke of loue.
               
            
            
               Matth. 15. 36.
               
                  The text.
                  And taking the seauen loaues and the fishes, and giuing
thanks, he brake, and gaue to his disciples, and the ⸫ disciples
gaue to the people.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere we see againe that the people must not be their owne caruers,
nor receiue the sacraments or other spirituall sustenance immediately of
Christ, or at their owne hands, but of their spirituall gouernors.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This collection is very loosely gathered. The disciples gaue
bread and fish to the peole, ergo it is not lawfull for the people to
receiue any spirituall sustenance immediately from Christ, but
onely from them, that are their gouernors vnder Christ. I thinke
if we make a consequence from bodily sustenance to the sustenance
of our soules, that then it followeth better thus: That as
this people when they were at home prouided themselues for
their bodily sustenance, and héere being abrode they receiue it
prouided for them, at the hands of the Apostles: so also it is lawfull

for men at home to receiue spirituall sustenance by their diligent
reading, and abroad to receiue it at the hands of their ordinarie
pastors and teachers in their open méetings, by hearing
the word preached and taught.
               
            
            
               Matth. 16. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  And I say vnto thee, that thou art ⸫ Peter, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is a rocke.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your reasons drawen from this place, to stablish the tyrannie
of Antichrist, haue often béene answered.1. Cor 
                           •
                        . 11. And bicause héere no
reason is framed, we say with the holy Apostle Paul, that we
know none other rocke or foundation to build Christs Church
vpon, but Christ himselfe.
               
            
            
               Matth. 16. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  Who turning said to Peter, goe after me ⸫ Satan, thou art a
scandall vnto me.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This word in Hebrew signifieth an aduersary, as 3. Regum. 5. v. 4.
and so it is taken heere.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We will not impugne your qualification of the word: and lessen
Saint Peters rebuke, as much as you can, yet this we may
sée euidently, that men are but vnstaied, and vnstable rockes to
build the Church vpon: and except the Pope be better priuiledged
than Peter was, sometime he may be an aduersarie and a

                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ I will not 
                        •
                     ay a deuill.
               
            
            
               Matth. 17. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  And when they were come to Capernaum, there came they
that receiued the Didrachmes vnto Peter, and said vnto him:
your master, doth he not pay the ⸫ Didrachmes?
               
               
                  The note.
                  These didrachmes were peeces of mony, which they paied for tribute.
               
            
            
               Matth. 1
                     •
                  . 27.
               
                  The text.
                  And that fish which shall first come vp, take, and when thou
hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a ⸫ stater: take that, and
giue it for me and thee.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This stater was a double didrachme, and therefore was paied for two.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  To these two notes, I giue but one answer, for they reserued
these strange words in the text, bicause English eares are not acquainted
with them, and other matter there is not in these notes
worth the obseruing.
               
            
            
               Matth. 18. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  Whosoeuer therfore shal humble him selfe as this litle ⸫ child,
he is the greater in the kingdome of heauen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Humilitie, innocencie, simplicitie commended to vs in the state and
person of a child.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But none of them embraced by you, as appeareth. Your Pope
can abide no péere, he must be aboue all, you puffe vp your selues
with the proud pharisie, in confidence of mens merits; what innocents
you are, a number of you executed for confessed treason,
doo declare: simplicitie cannot stand with the continual practise of
your Church, which of long time hath loued nothing lesse, then
plaine dealing, as both our eies haue séene, and all stories doo testifie.
               
            
            
               Matth. 18. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  And if he will not heare them ⸫ tell the Church.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is (as Saint Chrysostome heere expoundeth it) tell the prelats,
and chiefe pastors of the Church, for they haue iurisdiction to bind, and
loose such offenders by the words folowing, vers. 18.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We agrée with Chrysostome bicause the circumstances of the
place, and matter doo require it so to be expounded, that héere by
the Church the gouernors thereof are meant, and that they haue
power to bind and loose, and therefore is a good warrant for our
Church discipline against Papists, and all other scornefull contemners,
and despisers of the same.
               
            
            
               Matth. 18. 19
               
                  The text.
                  Againe I say to you, that if two of you ⸫ consent vpon earth,
concerning euery thing whatsoeuer they shall aske, it shalbe
done to them of my father, which is in heauen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All ioyning togither in the vnitie of Christs Church in Councels,
and Sinods, or publike praiers, is of more force than of any particular
man.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  It is true that the vnitie and agréement of Gods Saints ioyned
in praier, and the consent of many gouernors of the Church
in executing discipline, is of more force than if the same be done
of a very few. And yet your proud prelate of Rome will haue his
doings being but one, stand and be of force against all consent
whatsoeuer.
               
            
            
               Matth. 19. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  Not all ⸫ take this word, but they to whom it is giuen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      capiunt.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This most plainly sheweth, that the vertue of continencie is
not in euery mans will, but a rare gift of God, and that therefore
they not onely deale rashly, but also directly against Gods
will, and pleasure that vowe perpetuall single life. And I doo not
doubte but that your other annotations shall shortly be answered.
               
            
            
               Matth. 19. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ if thou wilt enter into life, keepe the commandements.
               
               
                  The note.
                  I see not, saith Saint Augustine, why Christ should say, if thou wilt
haue life euerlasting, keepe the commandements, if without obseruing of
them by onely faith, one might be saued. Augustine de fide & operi.
cap. 1
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Augustine in that place, speaketh not against those that ascribe
iustification to a true and a liuely faith, but against the papistical
opinion of them, which vnderstood by them, that build vpon Christ
hay and stubble, such Christians as liue wickedly, whom they affirmed,
that they should passe through purgatorie fier, and so be
partakers of saluation through the merite of their foundation.
Against these Augustine replieth, that he séeth not to what purpose
Christ should exact the kéeping of the commandements, if
such a faith, that is, a bare profession of Christianitie, might saue.
What is this against that faith which worketh obedience in beléeuers,
as it is written.Hebr. 11 9. By faith Abraham obeyed God: who
then séeth not your vanitie in applying against vs, that which
was spoken against the patrones of purgatorie?
               
            
            
               
               Matt. 19. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  And againe I say to you, it is easier for a camel to passe thorow
the eie of a needle, ⸫ than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdome of heauen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Marke expoundeth it thus, rich men trusting in their riches.
cap. 10. verse 24.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This (as farre as I now remember) is the first note saue one,
giuen vs by conference of places of Scripture. And if this kind of
gathering were more in vse with you, we should haue a great
many fewer controuersies betwixt vs.
               
            
            
               Matt. 19 29.
               
                  The text.
                  And euery one that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or ⸫ wife, or children, or lands for my names
sake, shall receiue an hundred folde, and shall possesse life euerlasting.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Hereof is gathered that the Apostles amongst other things left their
wiues also to followe Christ. Hierom. lib. 1. aduer. Iouinianum.
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  The Apostles were neuer taught by Christ to leaue those
dueties vnperfourmed, which God had imposed vpon men, therfore
not their dueties towardes their wiues. Further, to leaue
these things, was not absolutelie to leaue either possession, or vse
of them, but onelie so to bridle them selues, as that the hauing of
these things were no withdrawing of them from cleauing to
Christ, & folowing their calling.Matth. 9. 10. For Matthew had stil his house,
in which he feasted Christ.Iohn 11. 1. Lazarus and his sisters dwelt in their
owne at Bethania:Matth. 27. 57. Ioseph was ritch, and yet a disciple: and if
Peters wiues mother were cared for,Matth. 8. 14. and healed of her feuer, it
is not likelie that her daughter was cast off. Further, what say
you to the canons,Canon. 6. which you say are the Apostles, which forbid
priestes to leaue their wiues vnder pretence of religion. But you
tell vs that Hierome gathereth it: what then? must we therefore
of necessitie beléeue it. He telleth vs in the same booke that the end
of marriage is death, and the ende of single life is life: and
I am sure you therein beléeue him not. But this is your practise,
such absurd collections as you are ashamed to set downe as your
owne gathering, ye gladlie shroud vnder the name of some Father,
to abuse your followers with.
               
            
            
               
               Matth. 20. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And receiuing it, they ⸫ murmured against the good man
of the house, saying.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Iewes are noted for enuying the vocation of the Gentiles, and
their rewarde equall with them selues.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that the Iewes enuied the calling of the Gentiles,
as the papistes at this day can not abide that reformed Christians
take the name of Catholike christians, and Church of God:
but that by this murmuring that enuying of equalitie of reward
is meant, is your bare surmise, which you can not proue. For the
purpose of the parable is nothing els, but to shew that it is frée for
God, to reward whom he will, though they deserue it not.
               
            
            
               Matth. 20. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus called them vnto him and said, you knowe that
the princes of the Gentiles ouer rule them, and they that are
the greater, exercise power against them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Superioritie is not here forbidden amongest Christians, neither ecclesiasticall,
nor temporall: but heathenish tirannie is forbidden, and
humilitie commended.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Christ here distinguisheth the regiment of his church from ciuill
gouernment, and denieth that any of the Apostles shalbe aduaunced
ouer his fellow apostles in dignitie, as kings ouer their
subiectes, which 
                        •
                     latlie striketh downe your supposed primacie of
Peter.Urbanus sextus drowned fiue Cardinals. Sergius tertius digged pope Formosus out of his graue. As for heathenish tirannie the popes of Rome haue excéeded
all that euer went before them, for they haue not onelie put
their Cardinals into sackes, and throwne them into the sea, but
also they haue not suffered one another to rest in their graues.
               
            
            
               Matth. 21. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus entred into the temple of God, and cast out all
that sold and bought in the temple.
               
               
                  The note.
                  How much the abuse of the churches, by marchandizing, walking, or
other prophane occupying of them, displeaseth God, here we may see.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Prophane occupying of the church displeaseth God, but héere
is a further thing meant, namelie, buying and selling vnder pretence

of religion and seruice of God, as héere the selling of such
things as perteined to the seruice of the temple, and with you the
selling of masses, diriges, trentals, and pardons, & such like stuffe.
Where couetousnesse of sacrificing priests, is the expresse cause
of prophaning the temple, which you s
                        •
                     ilie passe ouer, bicause it
toucheth your selues very nighlie.
               
            
            
               Matth. 21. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  And seeing a certaine ⸫ figge tree by the way side, he came
to it: and found nothing o
                        •
                      it, but leaues onelie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Iewes hauing the word of the lawe, and not the deedes, were the
figge tree full of leaues and voide of fruit. Aug. de verb. dom. serm. 44.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In the fig trée he did set out what end and issue remaineth for
hypocrites, which make a shewe of that which they haue not.
               
            
            
               Matth. 22. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  And his seruants going forth into the waies, gathered together
all that they found, ⸫ bad and good, and the mariage was
filled with guestes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not onelie good men be within the church, but also euill men against
the heretikes of these dayes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To which we answer that though in the outward participation
of the word and sacraments, many wicked are ioyned with
good, yet in trueth none are of the church but such as to whom the
promises of remission of sins, and resurrection to life eternall do
pertaine. And also we saie that this is a friuolous collection,
drawen from the outward calling to the truth of being in the
church. For many are called, but few chosen. Further nothing
can iustly be gathered out of this parable but that the Iewes,
which were first called, made themselues vnwoorthy of their calling,
and that in calling the Gentiles into their roomes, & place,
there was no respect had, how bad they were afore their conuersion.
But the grossest sinners for the most part, did soonest
and gladliest receiue the promise of grace, and fauor offered in
Christ. And they that racke the calling, and comming beyond
this: racke it beyond the meaning of Christ. And the bad that
come without amendment, shall be sure to be serued, as he that
came without his mariage garment.
               
            
            
               
               Matth. 23. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  But they do all their works, to be seene of men. For they
make broad their ⸫ philacteries, and enlarge their fringes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  These philacteries were peeces of parchment, wherein they wrote the
ten commandements, and folded it, and caried it on their fordhead before
their eies, imagining groslie and supersticiouslie, that so they fulfilled
that which is said. Deut. 6. They shall be immooueable before thine
eies, Hierom in 23. Mat.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  It is well that you so diligently tell vs the meaning of the
worde philacteries, but the simpler sort must take it vpon your
owne credit, for they can not looke into Hierom for it. But this
they may sée, that the Pharisées neither in apparell, nor otherwise
hunted more for estimation of holines amongst men, than
your sectaries (I should haue said) religious, do most manifestly.
               
            
            
               Matth. 23. 37.
               
                  The text.
                  Hierusalem, Hierusalem, which killest the prophets, and
stonest them that were sent to thee, how often would I gather
thy children, as the hen doth gather hir chickens vnder hir
wings, and thou ⸫ wouldest not.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Freewill.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  It is true that men of their owne will do fréely, and franklie
sinne, and refuse grace, but this is their greatest slauerie, & bondage
that can be. For so they shew themselues slaues of sin. And
therefore if that be the fréedome of will you so much contend for,
you may take it to your selues.
               
            
            
               Matth. 24. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And manie ⸫ false prophets shall rise, and shall seduce many.
               
               
                  The note.
                  There were in the people false prophets, as among you also shall be lieng
masters, which shall bring in sects of perdition, 2. Peter. 2.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If lieng, and denieng the benefit of Christs death, by which
we were bought, be good, and true notes to know false prophets
by, as they are for that purpose there by Peter deliuered, then all
the gouernors of the popish church be false prophets. Their lies
are so grosse, as that they themselues are ashamed of them, and

how they giue to others, the glory of our redemption onely due
to Christ, he knoweth nothing that knoweth not.
               
            
            
               Matth. 24. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  Then if any man shal say to you, Lo ⸫ here is Christ, or there:
do not beleeue him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Whosoeuer draweth Christ, or his Church from the communion, or
fellowship of all nations Christened, to one corner, towne, or countrie beleeue
him not. Augustine de vnit Ecclesiae. cap. 3.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Augustine there teacheth vs to séeke the church in the Scriptures,
not at Rome, but diffused euerywhere thorough the whole
world. They therefore that leade vs to Rome to seeke Christ and
his church there, by this rule of Augustine are not to be beléeued,
bicause Rome is but one litle corner, countrie, or rather towne
of the world. We embrace that doctrin, which the Apostles planted
in all nations, and we hold that God since the calling of the
Gentils, hath had alwaies his church generally dispersed thorough
the world, though in all places, and in all times not alike,
and though to vs, which liue at this time, and in one corner of the
world, a great number of the churches children, or rather particular
churches, haue béene, and are hidden, and vnknowne. But
this we know, that Rome somtimes a faithful citie, is now, and
hath béene many yeeres become a harlot.
               
            
            
               Matth. 24. 30▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  And then shall appeere ⸫ the signe of the sonne of man in
heauen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This signe of the sonne of man is the holie crosse, which then shall
appeere to the Iewes to their confusion. Chrys. in Matt. homilia 77. It
shall be no lesse confusion to heretikes which can not abide the signe
thereof.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is but Chrysostomes coniecture, for neither he nor you can
bring any good reason why it should be so. The glorie and maiestie
wherein he shall come set out in the words immediately following,
by al reasonable coniecture should make plain the words
before, and declare what was meant by the signe of the sonne of
man. What heretikes you meane that cannot abide the signe of
the crosse, I know not. The idolatrous abusing of the crosse in

poperie, and the attributing to the signe thereof the vertues
which it cannot haue, that no good Christians can abide, who yet
haue learned to glorie in nothing, but in the crosse of Christ.
               
            
            
               Matt. 25. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  And the foolish said to the wise, Giue vs of ⸫ your oile: bicause
our lamps are going out.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If we be not in the fauour of God, and haue not our owne merits, we
shall not be holpen by other mens deserts at the day of iudgement.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If the fauour of God might so easily be procured or promerited,
as some papists write by saying of Aue Maria,
                     Mille miracula beatae Mariae. or offering to
our Ladie a taper, or seruing some saint, I thinke few would die
out of the fauour of God. But to that, which I take to be your
meaning, if men be in the fauour of God, and haue some merits
of their owne, then they may be holpen by other mens deserts.
Which collection is tied to this place with points. For though
we should vnderstand as you do, by oile, meritorious works, yet
the quite contrarie is flatly héerof gathered. First they are héere
condemned for fooles that go a borrowing, or séeke helpe at the
merits of others. Then they that b
                        •
                      wise dare spare none from
themselues, for feare of wanting themselues. And from whence
then may men get that supplie of merits, when they which are
wisest and best, can spare none. But bicause you haue no manifest
scriptures to warrant your merits, you delight to draw, and
straine parables perforce to your purpose. For the meaning of
that parable is nothing els, but that they which during life, and
the time which God granteth them héere, neglect the ordinarie
meanes, which God hath appointed for their saluation, shal wish
for it then when it is too late, and when they cannot haue it.
               
            
            
               Matt. 23. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  Lord, fiue talents thou didst deliuer me, behold ⸫ I haue gained
other fiue besides.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Freewill with Gods grace doth merit.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It pleaseth God in mercie to reward liberally his seruants,
which vse the gifts, which God hath bestowed on them, to the honor
of God, and benefit of his Church. What maketh this either
for frée will, or for merits.
               
            
            
               
               Matt. 25. 26.
               
                  The text.
                  And his Lord answering, said to him: ⸫ Naughtie and slothfull
seruant, thou didst know that I reape where I sow not, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A terrible example for all such as do not imploy the verie lest gift
of God to his glorie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If this were as well weighed of you, as it is written: you
would not waste your gifts vpon aduancing the man of sinne,
and child of perdition, the proud Antichrist of Rome, who vaunteth
himselfe aboue all that is called God.
               
            
            
               Matt. 25. 34.
               
                  The text.
                  Come ye blessed of my father, possesse you the kingdome
⸫ prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This kingdome then is prepared for those only that do goodworks: as
Christ also signifieth els where, saieng that it is not in his power to giue
it otherwise. See the annotations chap. 20. verse 23.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note might be passed ouer, if the corrupt meaning of
them, which giue it were not manifest. Therefore this we say,
that whosoeuer by beléeuing in the name of Christ haue power
to become the sonnes of God,Ephes. 14. 
                           •
                        
                      they also are fruitfully replenished
with all maner of good works, as time, place, occasion, and other
circumstances do serue, which serueth not in all alike. For the
théefe vpon the crosse being now readie to die,Luk. 23. 43. and hauing spent
lewdly his former life, and therefore not hauing meanes to shew
foorth his faith, otherwise than by confession, is promised to be
partaker of the kingdome of Christ.Ezec. 18. 22. And at what time soeuer a
sinner truly repenteth him of his sinnes, God putteth all his sins
out of remembrance, how then can he be accursed or excluded out
of the kingdome of heauen? But our papists must either merit al
at Gods hand, or els they must haue nothing. Your note to which
you refer vs shall be considered of amongst your other larger annotations.
               
            
            
               Matt. 26. 33.
               
                  The text.
                  Amen I say vnto you, whersoeuer this Gospell shal be preached
in the whole world that also which she hath done, ⸫ shall
be reported for a memorie of hir.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heerby we learne that the good works of saints are to be recorded,

and set foorth to their honor in the church after their death, whereof
rise their holidaies and commemorations.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héereby we learne, that through Gods great goodnes the memorie
of the iust shall be blessed and eternall.Prouerb. 10. 7 Their holidaies afterwardPsalm. 112. 7.
grew (especially in such sort as they were in time of poperie
solemnized) whē the diuell by his false Apostles entised men
to giue to saints that honor which might not be lawfully giuen
to men.
               
            
            
               Matth. 26. 27.
               
                  The text.
                  Drinke ye all of this.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the margent note. Marke 14. verse 23.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It shall be séene and answered as it commeth in course.
               
            
            
               Matth. 26. 31.
               
                  The text.
                  Then Iesus said to them, All you shalbe scandalized in me, in
this night.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The nocturne of mattens in the Churches seruice answereth to this
night part of our Sauiours passion, and so consequently the other canonicall
howers to the rest.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is a clearkly note, you are well skilled belike in your
Church seruice. What your nocturne of mattens meaneth whether
morning praier at night, or any other mistery I can not tell.
For I haue not taken paines, neither in your pia, nor in your
portuise. But amongest other mockeries in your Church seruice
vsed, I remember that on maundy thursday at night, we went
frō your sacred ceremonies in the Chappell, to the Colledge hall,
where our maundy was prouided, and there whilest a boy read
on the Bible to these words rise and go hence, we eat and drinke
so fast, that he sang to deafe
                        •
                     men, but when he came to those
words: with our mouthes full, to the Chappel
                        •
                     we hied againe: to
make an end of your fooleries, which at that time were very many,
God forgiue it vs.
               
            
            
               Matth. 26. 74.
               
                  The text.
                  Then he began to curse, and sweare that he knew not the
man.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To this time the laudes doo answere in the Church seruice.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  This is such profound geare that I know not what to say to
it. For I am not skilfull in their Church seruice, and I can spend
my time better, then now to séeke skill therein.
               
            
            
               Matth. 27. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And the chiefe priest hauing taken the siluer peeces said, It
is not lawful to cast them into the ⸫ Corbanah, bicause it is the
price of blood.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This Corbanah was a place about the temple which receiued the peoples
gifts or offerings. Marke 12. vers. 42.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you would haue vouchsafed to haue translated in this place
Corbanah into English, neither your note, nor your reference
should haue néeded. Neither doo I thinke that you can giue any
good reason, why you doo not translate it treasurie. As for your
reference, it shall be considered of in your larger annotations.
               
            
         
         
            MARKE.
            
               Mar. 1. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  Iohn was in the desert baptizing, and preaching the baptisme
of penance ⸫ vnto remission of sins.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Iohns baptisme put them in hope onely of remission of sins as a preparatiue
to Christs sacrament, by which sins were in deed to be remitted,
Augustine lib. 5. de baptismo cap. 10.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In the Scriptures we learne,Matth. 21. 25. that Iohns baptisme was from
heauen,Luke 7. 30. the counsell, and ordinance of God, that Iohn was a minister
thereof for that purpose sent of God,Iohn 1. 33. that the hope of remission
of sins was grounded on the promises of God, which deceiueth
not,Iohn 1. 26. that Iohn was the minister of the outward element,
and Christ the giuer of the inward grace.Matth. 3. 11. Finally, the element
is the same, the doctrine is the same which the Church of God
now vseth: How then ran your braines on a difference? For
sooth Augustine maketh this difference. You may be a shamed to
alledge Augustine for that, wherof he was not resolued. The Donatistes
did rebaptise such Christians as they wan to their congregation
from Christs Church, in defence of which dotage they
alledged for them selues the example of Paul, who (as they supposed)

did rebaptise those that were once afore baptised of Iohn.
Which obiection did trouble saint Augustine not a little, so that
he wist not well how to shift it.August. de vnico baptismo. cap. 7. For somtimes he doubteth whether
they were baptised with the baptisme of Iohn, or no, or whether
they did but faine that they were so baptized: somtimes he
saith that those which Iohn baptized had not their sins forgiuen
them, yet he addeth, that he will not contend with them that
thinke they were indéed remitted: Which argueth Augustine in
this matter not to be resolute.
               
            
            
               Mark. 1. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of heauen is at hand,
⸫ be penitent, and beleeue the Gospell.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He doth not preach beleefe, or faith onely, but penance also.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And I pray you who euer preached faith without repentance.
If we be taught to beléeue the promise of remission of sinnes, we
be taught also that that promise is not made but to the penitent.
And so you seuer things inseparable. The word penance you do
but blear the eies of the simple withall, to make them imagine of
a satisfaction. But that your dealing hath béene already learnedly
laid out by Master Doctor Fulke against Martinius, to whom I
refer you.
               
            
            
               Mark. 1. 44.
               
                  The text.
                  And he saith to him, see thou tell no bodie: but go shew
thy selfe ⸫ to the high priest, and offer for thy cleansing the
things that Moises commanded, for a testimonie to them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Our Sauiour euen when he healed the leaper by extraordinarie miraculous
power, would not yet breake order, but sent the partie to the
priest.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The orders, which God hath appointed to his Church, are
with all reuerence and diligence to be obserued, and our care is
to kéepe them. You cannot iustly accuse our Church of any wilfull,
or willing breach of them.
               
            
            
               Mark. 2. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  When Iesus had seene ⸫ their faith, he saith to the sicke of
the palsie, sonne, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Our Lord is mooued to be mercifull to sinners by other mens faith
and desires, and not onelie by the parties owne meanes alway.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  This note is once answered alreadie Matthew 9. And nowe
againe we say, that amongst the manifold meanes which God
vseth in preuenting vs with grace & fauour, this is not the least,
that he maketh amongest men liuing, one an instrument of an
others saluation, euen then often times when they that haue
their saluation procured, least thinke of it. What is this to confidence
in dead mens prayers and helpe, which you draw yours
to, as much as in you lieth.
               
            
            
               Mark. 2. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  The dayes will come when the bridegrome shall be taken
from them, and then shall they ⸫ fast in those dayes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He foretelleth that fasting shalbe vsed in the church, no lesse then in
the old law, or in the time of Iohn the Baptist. See Matt. c. 9. verse 15.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note also hath alreadie bene answered in the place to
which you referre vs. And for further answer we say, that Christ
doeth not prescribe that men vnder colour of fasting, shall abstaine
from one kinde of meate as prophane, and fill their bellies
with another sorte as more holy: neither doeth he preferre fish
and fruite before flesh, egges and whit meate, in abstinence from
which, the common fast of papistes doth consist and stand. Otherwise
fastes commaunded by Christ to his church, both publique
and priuate are in vse with vs, as place, time, & occasion serueth.
               
            
            
               Mark. 2. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  Therefore the sonne of man is ⸫ Lord of the Sabaoth also.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The maker of the Lawe may abrogate or dispence, when and where
for iust cause it seemeth good to him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note is true though it come out of season, but the pope is
not the maker of Gods lawe, therefore he can not abrogate it, or
dispence with it, as he taketh vpon him most presumptuously.
               
            
            
               Mark. 3. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  For he healed many, so that there preased in vpon him for
⸫ to touch him, as many as had hurtes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The onely touching of Christes holy person, or any part of his clothes,
or whatsoeuer belonged to him, did heale all diseases.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  This note néeded no replie, if there were no secret serpent lurking
vnder the grasse, but bicause it is well knowen that by this
and such like places, the papistes séeke to maintaine their relikes,
and the gainfull marchandize that thereupon doth follow, therefore
we answer that these miracles were so many confirmations
of the doctrine of Christ at the first spreading of it, which after the
doctrine sufficiently confirmed,August. Retra
                           ••
                        ationum 1. cap. 13. ceased, and therefore none is not
to be looked after. Besides it is apparant that then the vertue and
power,Act. 3. 12. & 16 whereby those miracles were perfourmed,Mark. 5. 30. were neither
in any other person or thing, but onelie in the person of our Lord
and Sauiour Iesus Christ.
               
            
            
               Mark. 3. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  And when they had heard of it, they went forth to lay hands
on him, for they said, that he was become ⸫ madde.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See here the conceit of worldly friendes, who thinke the zeale of religion
madnesse, and therefore count them mad, that are zealous in Gods
cause and for the Catholike faith: and the more zealous the more mad.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Alwayes worldly wise men thought the profession of Christian
truth madnesse, or follie: and godlie wise men do thinke the
like of them, that are zealous they wote not for what, and can
giue none other reason of their faith, but they beléeue as the
church beléeueth, which implicate faith you count Catholike, and
allow verie well in your blind followers.
               
            
            
               Mark. 4. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said vnto them; To you it is giuen to know the mysterie
of the kingdome of God: but to ⸫ them that are without,
all things are done in parables, that seeing, they may see
and not see.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Such as be out of the Church, though they heare and read neuer so
much, they can not vnderstand. Bede. in 4. Marci.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note of Bede is manifestly collected out of this place, and
therefore we accept of it. And we maruaile the lesse at your grosse
ignorance and blindnesse, though you count your selues great
clarks, bicause you haue seuered your selues from the true church
of God.
               
            
            
               
               Marke 4. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said to them, Commeth a candle to be put ⸫ vnder
a bushell or vnder a bed? and not to be put vpon the candlesticke.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ came not to teach his doctrine in corners, and hucker mucker
as heretikes doe, but to lighten the whole world therewith.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that the same doctrine, which Christ taught in priuate
houses and places, he taught also in the Temple and synagogues.
And what heretikes they bée, that teach not openlie
where they may be suffered, and séeke not to make their heresie
as common as they can, I know not. And if teaching in corners,
and hucker mucker that doctrine, which can not be openlie suffered
to be taught, be alwayes a necessary note of heresie, then how
excuse you Campion and your other champions héere in England
from being heretikes, for they taught in corners.
               
            
            
               Mark. 5. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  And the spirits besought him, saieng: Send vs ⸫ into the
swine, that we may enter into them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is not without mysterie, that the diuels desired, and Christ suffered
them to enter into the s
                        •
                     ine, signifieng that filthie liuers be meete dwelling
places for diuels. August. tracta. 6. in epist. Iohannis.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This mysterie opened by Augustine, we well accept of, and
ad, that if your owne stories say true, then in al the world, where
is there a more fit place for the diuels dwelling than at Rome,
and with whom there,Iohn 13. sl
                           •
                        ine being taken in adulterie. rather than with the Popes good grace,
and his carnall colledge of Cardinals? Such is the beastly filthines
reported of them by al stories, and not denied by your selues.
               
            
            
               Mark. 5. 32.
               
                  The text.
                  Why make you this ado and weepe: the wench is not dead,
but ⸫ sleepeth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To Christ that can more easily raise a dead man, than we can do one
that is but asleepe, death is but a sleepe. Aug. de verb. Dom. ser. 44.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But that otherwise we should not haue vnderstood, nor your
ignorant followers haue maruelled at your great reading, you
néeded not to haue quoted your Doctor for this.
               
            
            
               
               Mark. 6. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  And going foorth they preached that they should do penance,
and they cast out many diuels, and annointed with ⸫ oile
many sicke, and healed them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A preparatiue to the sacrament of extreme vnction. Iam. 5.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Of whom learned you this. Your Pope hath coined that sacrament,
and others mo of his owne authoritie. And you his flatterers
would wring it out of the miraculous dealing of Christs
Apostles, & others in the primitiue church afore miracles ceased.
               
            
            
               Mark. 6. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  For the said Herod sent and apprehended Iohn, and bound
him in prison, for Herodias the wife of ⸫ Phillip his brother,
bicause he had maried hir.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He might and should by Moises law haue maried his brothers wife,
if he had beene dead without issue: but this Phillip was yet aliue, and
had also this daughter that danced.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The case was manifest. And so was that of Henrie the eight,
who maried his brothers wife, when he was dead, but not to stir
vp issue to his brother. Which mariage was condemned for vnlawful
by the greatest number of Diuines and Lawyers of your
owne Church. But for all that Pope Clement could salue the
matter, and make that which was naught good: such is the presumptuous
power that Antichrist taketh vpon him.
               
            
            
               Mark. 7. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  This people honoreth me ⸫ with their lips, but their hart is
far from me, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  They that say well, or teach and preach well, and haue Christ and his
word, and liue naughtily, be touched in this place.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This place doth most properly touch our hypocritical papists,
whatsoeuer shew of life they make, bicause a great part of their
doctrine is deuised by men, & is in truth nothing els but precepts
of men.
               
            
            
               Mark. 7. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  But the things that proceed from a man, those are they
which make a man ⸫ common.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  See the first annotation vpon this chapter.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your first annotation is, that common and vncleane is al one,
a profound note, and therefore néeded such reference.
               
            
            
               Mark. 8. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  I haue compassion vpon the multitude, bicause loe ⸫ three
daies they now endure with me, neither haue what to eate.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Great feruor and deuotion in the good people, and exceeding force in
our masters preaching, that made them abide fasting so long to heare
his diuine sermons.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But for entering into vnnecessarie contentions, it might be
easily shewed, that a great number of this people followed not
of deuotion, but for other considerations: Though their paines
and long tarieng with Christ to heare him be commendable.
               
            
            
               Mark. 8. 2
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And they come to Bethsaida: and they bring to him one
blind, and desired him that he would ⸫ touch him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Our Sauiour Christ vsed to worke much by touching, that we may
learne not to contemne the corporall and externe application of holie
things, nor to challenge by the spirit and faith onely, as heretikes do.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Our Sauiour Christ many times to declare his méere omnipotencie,
healed by his word, without any externe application of
anything. Other times applieng himselfe to the infirmitie and
weaknes of them, with whom he had to do, vsed some externall
application, not to bring into estimation, or reuerence, spittle,
clay, oile, or such like, much lesse your rotten relikes as you imagine:
but to teach vs (wherein we may) to beare with the infirmities
one of another. We challenge nothing by spirit, and faith
onely, but that that, which we haue good warrant for. And we do
most reuerently estéeme and vse all outward helps, props, and
staies of our faith appointed of God, and warranted in his word,
as publike and priuate reading and hearing of his word, the frequenting
of the Church assemblies, publike and priuate praiers,
administration of the sacraments, and such like.
               
            
            
               Mark. 9. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ And after sixe dayes Iesus taketh Peter, Iames and Iohn,

and bringeth them alone into a high mountaine apart, & was
transfigured before them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotations vpon the 17. of Saint Matthewe.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your annotations shalbe answered by some other, I am lothe
to be drawne from your marginall notes.
               
            
            
               Marke 9. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And there appeared to them ⸫ Elias with Moises: and they
were talking with Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Lawe and the Prophets ioyne with Christ and his Gospel: the
one signified by Moyses, the other by Elias, by whose apparitions also we
may learne that sometime there may be personall intercourse betwixt
the liuing and the dead, though not ordinarily.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That the testimonie which the Lawe and Prophets do beare
to Christ, is signified by the appearing of Moyses and Elias, I
easilie consent. The possibilitie of entercourse personall betwixt
the liuing and dead, bicause all things are possible to God, I will
not contend with you about it: but that which you note it for to
giue credit to the fables and tales forged for purgatorie, is neuer
the more likelie. But it is possible for all that, that they may bée
lyes.
               
            
            
               Marke 9. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said to them, This kind can go out by nothing, but
⸫ by prayer and fasting.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Note the great force of prayer and fasting.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The force thereof (God be praised) we haue had great experience
of, aswell for that the prayers and teares of the poore afflicted
in Quéene Maries time being heard of God, threw out so
manie popish diuels out of England, as that also by the same
weapons, the diuels vicar of Rome is kept from working his
will, and satsfying his malice amongest vs.
               
            
            
               Marke 9. 41.
               
                  The text.
                  For whosoeuer shall giue you to drinke a cuppe of water in
my name, bicause you are Christes: Amen I say to you, he shall
not loose his ⸫ reward.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Reward for almes deedes, whereby it is euident that they be meritorious.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If the reward be measured by the merite, the reward for giuing
a cup of water should skant be woorth the receiuing. But
make much of this euidence, for though it be bad, it is as good as
the best ye haue.
               
            
            
               Marke 9. 42.
               
                  The text.
                  And whosoeuer shall ⸫ scandalize one of these litle ones beleeuing
in me: it is good for him rather if a milstone were put
about his necke, and he were cast into the sea.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To giue scandal by our life to the weake in faith, is a great sinne, specially
in priestes, preachers, and princes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your séeking for tearmes to the multitude vnknowen and out
of vse, is (as you tearme it) a great scandal or offence to obscure
and darken of purpose the scriptures of God, and therefore in you
a great sinne.
               
            
            
               Marke 10. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  That therefore which God hath ioyned together, ⸫ let not
man separate.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The obligation betwixt man and wife is so great, that during life it
can not be broken.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The text doeth not teach that it can not be broken, but that it
ought to be inuiolable. That it is broken by them, which after
marriage haue carnall copulation with an harlot,1. Cor. 6. 16. it is manifest,
for they make themselues one flesh with an harlot. And how
there can be more than two in one flesh, I know not.
               
            
            
               Marke 10. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And imbracing them, and imposing handes vpon them, he
⸫ blessed them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Our Sauiour gaue the children his blessing.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Whereby wée sée he accepteth of poore infants, and declareth
his loue and fauour which he beareth to them. But magicall vertue

and force which you commonlie imagine in the word of blessing,
I sée none.
               
            
            
               Marke 10. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  Good master, what shall I do that I may receiue life euerlasting.
And Iesus said to him, why callest thou me good? none
is good but one, God. Thou knowest the ⸫ commandements.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Note that the keeping of Gods commandements procureth life euerlasting.
               
               
                  The Answer.
                  Note that this young man had béene instructed by the scribes
and pharisées, as you also now teach your followers: namelie, to
procure life by his déedes, as appeareth by the question which he
propounded to Christ. Note also that Christs answer is fit for the
question, for there is none other meanes by our déedes to attaine
life, then the perfect & exact obedience of Gods commandements.
Note further in his answer to Christ, howe foolishlie he was besotted
with the opinion of his obedience, and note lastlie, howe
Christ laid open his hypocrisie to him, whereby it did manifestly
appeare, that he neither loued God, nor his neighbour so well as
him selfe. Therefore our owne righteousnes and obedience failing
vs, God hath prouided a remedie for vs, the righteousnesse of
faith, that is to say, the righteousnes and obedience of our Christ
imputed to beléeuers.
               
            
            
               Marke 10. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus beholding him, loued him, and said to him, One
thing is wanting vnto thee, ⸫ go sell whatsoeuer thou hast, and
giue to the poore.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This is a counsell of perfection, (not a precept) which the religious
professing and keeping voluntarie pouertie, do follow.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Be Gods commandements now become imperfect, that perfection
wanting in the commandements must be sought for in
counsels?Psal. 19. 7. Then how was the Law of the Lord a perfect Law?
This was a commandement giuen him to bewraie how far he
was from that he vaunted of, and to bring him to sée that he had
not kept the commandements in such perfection, as before he
imagined. Your voluntarie pouertie hath neither warrant by
this, nor any other place of scripture.
               
            
            
               
               Mark. 10. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Amen I say to you, there is no man, which hath left house,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or
lands, for me and for the Gospel, that shall not receiue an hundred
times so much now at this time, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Exceeding happie be they that can forsake their temporall things for
religion.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bicause God hath promised to recompence them both héere
and in the life to come.
               
            
            
               Mark. 11. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ many spread their garments in the way, and others
did cut downe boughes from the trees, and strawed them in
the way.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All these voluntarie duties 
                        ••
                     ere gratefull to our Sauiour, and so be
the like done to him in the blessed Sacrament.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You haue gotten a good warrant for setting the Sacrament
on horse backe, as they say your holy father doth at Rome, but for
prisoning him in a p
                        ••
                     e, and trussing him vpon euery altar in a
string, you must fetch your president from Annas, Caiphas,
and Pilate, and not from this people. But I pray you, were you
in good earnest, when you made this note, or do you thinke, that
those duties ought, or might be done to him in the Sacrament,
that ought, and might be done to him, when he was in body here
conuersant amongst vs. If you affirme it, we shal finde you deny
it againe with an other breath. And if you dare not affirme it,
then what is become of your note. But you care not what you
speake, so as you may stir vp men to idolatrous blind deuotion
towards your breaden God.
               
            
            
               Mar. 11. 22. 23
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus answering said to them, haue ⸫ faith of God. Amen
I saie to you, that whosoeuer shall say to this mountaine,
be taken vp, and be cast into the sea, and shall not stagger in
his hart, but beleeue that whatsoeuer he saith, shall be done: it
shall be done to him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Faith of God is to beleeue that he is able, and that he will do it if it be
expedient, and no impediment on our part.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  The impediment on our part here set downe is staggering,
which you vnder pretence of humilitie do teach your followers,
and so consequentlie you teach them to be doubtfull of the truth
of Gods promises: which how it can stand with the faith of
God, no wise man can sée.
               
            
            
               Mark. 11. 26.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ If so be that you will not forgiue, neither will your father
that is in heauen, forgiue you your sinnes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  God neuer forgiueth sins to him that pardoneth not his enimies, from
his hart. Whereby it is euident that more is required than faith onlie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Who euer denied all vertues to be requisite for Christians.
If you did not know your owne scholers to be so blind and ignorant,
as that they vnderstand not the state of the question of iustification
by faith, you would neuer thus slightly deale, and put
vs to vnnecessarie labor, and paines. Faith alone embraceth the
promise of remission of sins. This faith worketh in vs amongst
other things a readines to forgiue. So though more is requisite,
yet faith alone embraceth Christ our righteousnes, and the promises
in him, and with him offered. The other things required
are necessarie consequents of faith, and therefore so many testimonies
to vs, and others of true beléeuing.
               
            
            
               Mark. 12. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  A man planted a vineyard and made an hedge about it, and
digged a trough, and built a tower, &c. vnto the tenth verse.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The man is God the father. This vineyard (as Esaie said 5. 1.) is the
house of Israel. The seruants sent are Moyses and the Prophets, whom
the Iewes did diuerslie afflict and persecute. His sonne is Christ our Sauiour,
whom the Iewes crucified out of the citie of Hierusalem, as it
were casting him out of the vineyard. The Iewes and their guides to
whom the vineyard was set destroyed, and Gods vineyard giuen to the
Apostles and their successors in the Gentiles.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  These notes we allow, and like of, and from thence we gather
that no place, no people, nor no succession of persons can be so priuileged,
but that the like may happen to them as hath done to
the Iewes. For you can not shew better promises for your popes

then were made to the high priest of the Iewes, nor greater priuiledges
for Rome, then for Hierusalem, nor for the nation of
the Latins such prer
                        •
                     gatiues, as the Iewes had: which notwithstanding
God hath reuenged vpon them, the blood of his
saints; by cutting them off from the true Oliue. And doth not the
blood of Gods saints shed in euerie corner of his church crie now
to him for vengeance? Or will not he that spared not the naturall
branches of the Oliue, cut off for the like causes those that are
but graffed into the others roome? I would that Gods seuere
iudgements towards the Iewes would make you beware, and
take héede in time.
               
            
            
               Mark. 12. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  The ⸫ stone which the builders reiected, the same is made
the head of the corner.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ is become the corner stone of the Synagogue and the church, in
which the faithfull both of the Iewes and Gentils are conteined.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And how chaunce you erect an other stone, to vnite and couple
beléeuers in?
               
            
            
               Mar. 12. 33.
               
                  The text.
                  And that he be loued from the whole hart, and with the
whole vnderstanding, and with the whole soule, and with the
whole strength: And to loue his neighbour as him selfe is a
greater thing then all holocausts and sacrifices.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This excellencie of charitie teacheth vs, that faith onely is not sufficient.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The eie onely sufficeth to sée withall, and yet it were not sufficient
for a man to haue the whole body an eie. So faith onelie
sufficeth a Christian man for iustification: And yet without other
vertues, which necessarily follow faith, a Christian were not sufficiently
be wtified. You should therefore haue done well to shew,
for what onely faith is not sufficient, whither for iustification, or
for sanctification.
               
            
            
               Mar. 12. 44.
               
                  The text.
                  Amen I say to you, that this poore widow, hath cast in ⸫
more than all that haue cast into the treasurie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  God doth accept almes that are correspondent to euery mans abilitie;
and the more able, the more must a man giue.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  God loueth a chéerefull giuer. For if there be a willing mind,2. Cor. 8. 12.
it is accepted according to that a man hath,2. Cor. 9. 7. and not according to
that he hath not.
               
            
            
               Mar. 13. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  And when you shall heare of wars, and bruits of wars, feare
not, for these things must be, but the end is not yet.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Great wars towards the latter end.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  A token that the end draweth néere, and yet it is not to be forgotten
that your Pope is he, that setteth nations togither by the
eares, and delighteth in warre, and bloodshed.
               
            
            
               Mar. 13. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  But looke to your selues, for they shall deliuer you vp in
Counsels, and in Synagogues shall you be beaten, and you shal
stand before presidents and kings for my sake, for a testimonie
vnto them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Much persecution of the faithfull and Catholike men in the latter
end.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your Church of Rome hath long béene, and is now still the
persecuting Synagoge, and therefore very vnlike the Catholike
Church of faithfull persecuted men.
               
            
            
               Mar. 13. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  And brother shall deliuer brother vnto death, and the father
his sonne: and the children shall arise against the parents,
and shall worke their death.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Great tr
                        •
                     cherie and many false brethren at the same time.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your principle so continually in the popish Church practised
of not kéeping faith, and promise made to those whom you accompt
heretikes, is the roote of treacherie and treason, and the
very nurse and cherishing of falsehood in pretended brotherhood.
As appeared in the mariage of the King of Nauarre with the
French Kings sister.
               
            
            
               Mar. 13. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  But he that shall endure to the end, he shall be saued.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Constancie and perseuerance necessarie in time of persecution.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And therefore that comfortable assurance, that nothing can seperate
vs, from the loue wherwith God hath embraced vs,Rom. 8. 38. which
is the roote of constancie, is necessary for Christians, though Papistes
be thereof quite destitute.
               
            
            
               Mar. 13. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  And vnles the Lord had shortened the daies, no flesh should
be saued: but for the elect which he hath elected, he hath ⸫
shortened the daies.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Antichrists reigne shall be three yeeres and an halfe, Daniel 7. Apocalipse,
13.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Out of this text nothing can be gathered for the shortnes or
length of Antichrists reigne: Therefore this note followeth not
of this text: Christ hath shortened the daies, therefore Antichrists
reigne shall be but thrée yéeres and an halfe. You had néed
to get tough glue or else this will not hold togither. But Daniel
and the Apocalipse shall helpe. Your mightie demonstrations out
of those places haue béene already learnedly confuted by Master
Whitakers, and we shall haue better cause to consider of them
when we come to your notes vpon the Apocalipse.
               
            
            
               Mar. 13. 32.
               
                  The text.
                  But of that day or houre no man knoweth, neither the Angels
in heauen, nor the ⸫ Sonne, but the Father.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not as though himselfe knew not, as the heretikes Agnoitae held: but
because he knew it not for to teach it others, as being not expedient, Ambrose
de fide lib. 5. cap. 8.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is maruellous that we may not attribute to Christ, that
which he attributeth to him selfe. And though it be true that
therefore it is not reuealed, bicause it is not expedient for vs to
know it, yet it followeth not that Christ as man knew it. Ambrose
beléeueth rather this place to be corrupted, bicause some
auncient Greeke copies had not those words, the sonne of man,
and bringeth diuers reasons to proue that Christ could not be ignorant
of that day. But if the place be true, then he thinketh that

Christ did but faine ignorance, bicause his disciples requested that
which was not profitable for them to know. This shift Ambrose
was driuen to, bicause he knew not how else to shift of the reasons
that the Arrians gathered out of this place, against the diuinitie
of Christ.
               
            
            
               Mark. 14. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  For the poore you haue alwaies with you, and when you wil
you may do them good: But ⸫ me you haue not alwaies.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We haue not Christ here needing our almes, as when he conuersed
vpon the earth.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And why haue we héere no doctors? Bicause this shift to expound
this text so, that it should not make against the bodilie
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, is a late deuise. It is true
that if he be not here in bodie, then it is not possible for him to
néede reléefe. But let vs see how your faith in this point agréeth
with the ancient Christian Catholike faith. Augustine willeth
Dardanus to hold this Christian confession:
                        
                           •
                        pistol. 57. That Christ rose
from the dead, ascended into heauen, sitteth at the right hande of
the Father, & shall come from none other place, but from thence
to iudge the quicke, and the dead, and that he shall so come (as
the angels voice testified) euen as he was séene go into heauen,
that is, in the same forme, and substance of flesh to the which he
truly gaue immortalitie, and tooke not away nature. According
to this forme he is not to be thought diffused euery where. Fulgentius
affirmeth that Christ according to the humane nature
is comprehended in a place,Ad Thrasimundū regem lib. 2. cap. 5. absent from heauen when he was
vpon the earth, and forsaking the earth, when he ascended into
heauen.Libro. 1. cap. 3. Uigilius writing against the heretike Eutiches saith,
that Christ is with vs, and not with vs. For those, whom he left,
and from whom he departed in his humanitie, he did not leaue,
nor forsake in his diuinitie. By forme of a seruant, which he took
from vs into heauen,
                        
                           •
                        ib. 4. cap. 4. he is absent from, &c. And in another place
when he hath prooued him to be euerie where according to his diuinitie,
and but in one place at once according to his humanitie,
he concludeth thus: This is the faith and confession Catholike,
which the Apostles deliuered, Martyres did confirme, and the
faithfull hitherto haue held. And concerning these very words,Tract. in 8. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Io. 50.
Me you shal not haue alwaies, Augustine expoundeth them simplie

to be ment of his bodily absence from the earth. Now let our
papists tell vs, how their faith can be Christian, and Catholike,
being directly against that, which in these fathers daies was
Christian and Catholike.
               
            
            
               Mark. 14. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And taking the chalice, giuing thanks, he gaue to them, and
they ⸫ all dranke of it.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All dranke, to wit, all the twelue, for more were not present. Wherebie
it is euident that the words in Saint Matthew (26, 27) Drinke ye
al of this, were spoken to all the apostles onely, which here are said that
they all did drinke. And so it is no generall commandement to all men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And why haue we not here one doctor to say for you, that
Drinke yée all, is not so general a commandement, as Take and
eate? Can that be a catholike exposition, which is contrarie to all
expositions of catholike expositors for many hundred yéeres after
Christ? Take and eate stretcheth to laie men, as the practise
of your church doth shew. And, Drinke yée all, that must be restreined
to priests, bicause no more but ye Apostles were present.
And if that cause be of force, why shall it not restraine the other
commandement also, Take and eate to priests onely? But the
holy Ghost foreséeing what popish corruptions the diuell would
bring into the Church, did afore hand (the more fully to preuent
the diuels fraud héerein) direct the pens of the Euangelists in the
giuing of the cup, to expresse the vniuersall signe, all, where in
deliuerie of the bread, he is content with an indefinite spéech, take
and eate. Heere all antiquitie is vtterly against poperie. Their
doctrine of concomitance was not in the fathers daies hatched,
neither had they wit ynough to foresée the danger of spilling, and
hanging in lay mens beards, and such other déepe considerations
as the pope picked out long after out of his night cap.
               
            
            
               Mark. 14. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  Amen I saie to you, that now I will not drinke of the fruits
⸫ of the vine, vntill that daie, when I shall drinke it new in the
kingdome of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See annotations vpon Matthew chap. 26. vers. 29.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your annotations are not woorth the looking on: yet such as

they are, they shall receiue answer by themselues.
               
            
            
               Mark. 14. 64.
               
                  The text.
                  Who all ⸫ condemned him to be guiltie of death.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Here we may see that they were worthily reprobated, and forsaken, according
to our sauiours prediction, by the parable Mark. 12. The kingdome
of God shall be taken from you, &c.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Their successors in impietie, blasphemie and crueltie Annas
and Caiphas of Rome, and their adherents cannot be in better
estate, for they with no lesse consent, and vnitie, haue condemned
Christ in his members, and his truth for heresie and blasphemie.
               
            
            
               Mark. 14. 66.
               
                  The text.
                  And when Peter was in the courte beneath, there commeth
one of the ⸫ woman seruants of the high priest.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He feareth not afterward Rome the ladie of the worlde, that in the
house of Caiphas was afraid of the high priests wench. Leo in natiuitate
Petri & Pauli sermone 1.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In this weake fearefulnes of Peter we may sée our owne
frailtie, and in the change that God after made in him, when he
had indued him and others with vertue from aboue, the power
by which God can and doeth worke in weake and fraile vessels.
Rome was the ladie of the worlde, therefore not the head of the
church, a place fearfull to the godlie, or els Peters valure in not
fearing of it had not béene commendable.
               
            
            
               Marke 1
                     •
                  . 29.
               
                  The text.
                  And they that passed by blasphemed him, wagging their
heades, and saying, Vah, he that destroyeth the temple, and in
three dayes buildeth it, ⸫ saue thy selfe comming downe from
the crosse.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So say heretikes of the blessed Sacrament, if it be Christ, let him saue
him selfe from all iniuries.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We, whome it pleaseth you to call heretikes, learne not from
the scornefull Iewes,
                        
                           •
                        udg. 6. 31. but from good Ioash the father of Gedeon,
that your bread is not God, bicause it can not plead for it selfe, nor
reuenge it selfe. But you haue a god and a religion alike, both of
your owne creation.
               
            
            
               
               Marke 15. 34.
               
                  The text.
                  My God, my God, why hast thou ⸫ forsaken me?
               
               
                  The note.
                  See Matth. cap. 27. 46. the blasphemous exposition of Caluine, and
his followers, and take heede thereof.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Sée the exposition, reape comfort thereof, and learne with hart
and minde to detest and abhorre the impudent and shamelesse
pennes of lying papistes.
               
            
            
               Marke 16. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  But go, tell his disciples & ⸫ Peter, that he goeth before you
into Galilee.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Peter is named in speciall (as often els where) for prerogatiue.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  A poore prerogatiue it is that can be picked out of his speciall
naming. But to graunt that he had some petit prerogatiue, what
is that to those, which you chalenge to his pretended successors?
               
            
         
         
            LVKE.
            
               Luke 1. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  And all the multitude of the people were ⸫ praying without
at the houre of the incense.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We see here that the Priest did his dutie within, the people in the
meane time praying without, and that the priestes functions did profit
them, though they neither heard nor sawe his doings.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You would faine finde warrant for your chauncels, and as
gladlie would you prooue that your masses mumbled in a corner
were profitable, not onelie to them, which being present vnderstand
not, but to those also, which neither heare nor sée them, but
you must séeke better proofe, than the abolished figures of the old
lawe. For by this diuision of priest and people in sundrie places
of the same temple, is nothing els taught vs, but that heauen is
shut to vs by reason of our sinnes, and that we can not enter into
the presence of God there, but in the person of our Priest,
our Mediatour, and that in him, and by him our prayers are accepted,
as at large the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrewes
doth teach vs. But if you would prooue any thing for your selues,

shew vs that either priest or people praied in a toung they vnderstood
not, or that either in the temple or in the synagogues, the
scriptures were read in a strange language. Or that they which
read, were shut vp in some odde corner of the synagogue, where
that which they read could not be heard of the people. If you
could finde warrant for any of these, then you had some defence
for your ordinarie church seruice: but because you want this,
therefore you flie to the figures of the old law, to wring out of
them that which neuer was to be learned by them. But in this
dealing you do but bewray your penurie.
               
            
            
               Luke. 1. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  For he shalbe great before our Lord, ⸫ and wine and sicer he
shall not drinke.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This abstinence foretold and prescribed by the angel, sheweth that it
is a worthie thing, and an acte of religion in Saint Iohn, as it was in the
Nazarites.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The abstinence foretold and prescribed, shewed that sanctimonie
should not be wanting in him, neither in déed nor in outward
shew, but that he should liue as a man wholie dedicate to God.
The prescription and appointment of God, maketh the acte good,
bicause it was a testimonie of holy obedience. But what maketh
this for your will worships, whereof you haue no warrant but
your owne wisedome?
               
            
            
               Luke 1. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  And behold, ⸫ thou shalt be dumme, and shalt not be able to
speake vntill the day, wherein these things shall be done: For
bicause thou hast not beleeued my wordes, which shall be fulfilled
in their time.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Zacharie punished for doubting of the Angels word.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And thinke you papistes to escape the punishment of God, for
teaching men to doubt of the trueth of Gods promises?
               
            
            
               Luke 1. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  Haile full of grace, our Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou
amongst women.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The beginning of the Aue Marie. See the rest, verse 42.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  A profound note. Mary tooke it for a salutation, but the church
of Rome haue vsed it as a praier.
               
            
            
               Luke. 1. 34.
               
                  The text.
                  And Marie said to the Angell; ⸫ How shal this be done? Bicause
I know not man.
               
               
                  The note.
                  She doubted not of the thing as Zacharie, but inquired of the means.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  If you would haue giuen to euerie man his due praise, I do
not doubt, but you might haue quoted Master Beza, for you borrowed
this out of his annotations.
               
            
            
               Luke. 1. 38.
               
                  The text.
                  And Marie said, ⸫ Behold the handmaid of our Lord, be it
done to me according to thy word.
               
               
                  The note.
                  At this very moment when the blessed virgin gaue consent, she conceiued
him perfect God and perfect man.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That she conceiued him perfect God and perfect man, is by
many places well warranted. But concerning the very moment
of the time, when she conceiued, I take it to be one of Gods secrets,
which he hath kept to himselfe, and which the holie Ghost
hath not reuealed, bicause it is not necessarie for vs to know.
               
            
            
               Luke. 1. 41.
               
                  The text.
                  And it came to passe as Elizabeth heard the salutation of
Marie, the ⸫ infant did leape in hir wombe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Iohn Baptist being yet in his mothers wombe, reioiced and acknowledged
the presence of Christ and his mother.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  What sense the child had in his mothers wombe of the presence
of Christ I know not, and yet I doubt not, but it was the
secret force of Gods holy spirit that caused that motion in the
child. But if your note be true, then grace was conferred vpon
this child, afore he was partaker of any sacrament, except you
will say, that the ioyfull acknowledging of the presence of Christ
may be without grace.
               
            
            
               Luke. 1. 46.
               
                  The text.
                  My soule doth magnifie our Lord.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Magnificat at Euensong.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I thinke your meaning is that Magnificat is vsed at Euensong,
and not that our Ladie sang Euensong, or that it was héere
appointed to be song at Euensong.
               
            
            
               Luke. 1. 48.
               
                  The text.
                  Bicause he hath regarded the humilitie of his handmaid.
For behold from hencefoorth ⸫ all generations shall call mee
blessed.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Haue the Protestants alwaies had generations to fulfill this prophesie,
or do they call hir blessed, that derogate what they can from hir graces,
blessings, and all hir honor?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The Protestants had their generations afore any papists
were in the world. And as they giue to the blessed virgin all honor
that is due to hir: so neither she, nor they can abide, that you
should rob God of his honor to giue it hir.
               
            
            
               Luke. 1. 80.
               
                  The text.
                  And the child grew, and was strengthened in spirit, and was
⸫ in the deserts vntill the day of his manifestation to Israel.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Marke that he was a voluntarie Eremite, and chose to be solitarie
from a child, till he was to preach to the people: insomuch that antiquitie
counted him the first Eremite.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You do but bleare the eies of the ignorant with the likenes of
the name: Antiquitie neuer knew what the profession of your Eremites
meant. And if you vouchsafed to giue vs a definition of
Eremites, then we should easily exclude from it, either Iohn, or
your superstitious hipocriticall Eremites. For it is one thing to
liue in a desert, as Iohn did, it is another thing to liue without
societie and companie, as yours do, and Iohn did not. And further
you must prooue that he shut vp himselfe to satisfie for his sins,
and that he was a paterne, or example for others so to do, without
further warrant, or vocation. Which bicause you cannot do,
Iohn will not serue for a shield or defence for your Eremites.
               
            
            
               Luke. 2. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And it came to passe in those daies, there came foorth an

edict from Caesar Augustus, that the whole world should be inrolled,
&c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  In the yeere from the creation of the world 5199. from Noes stood
2957. from the natiuitie of Abraham 2015. and from Moses and the
comming foorth of the people of Israel out of Egypt 1510. from Dauid
annointed king 1032. from the first Olimpias 800. from the building of
Rome 752. hebdomada 63. according to the prophesie of Daniel, c. 9.
that is, in the yeere 440. or thereabouts in the sixt age of the world,
when there was an vniuersall peace in al the world, the eternall God and
sonne of the eternall father, meaning to consecrate and sanctifie the
world with his most blessed comming, being conceiued of the holie Ghost,
nine months after his conception, Iesus Christ the sonne of God is borne
in Bethlehem of Iudah, in the yeere of Caesar Augustus 42. Vsuard in
martyrologio Decembris 25. according to the common ancient supputation.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  It is but a follie to endeuour to reduce them to truth, that wittinglie
& wilfully do deceiue, and are deceiued, for so a man shuld
be but sure to loose his labour. Those that be desirous to know
the true supputation of these times, haue alreadie in the English
bibles the true summe of these yéeres, according to the truth of
the Hebrue. As for your Chronographie with the authour thereof,
may haue some commendation for the paines he bestowed about
it, and not for the truth that is in it. But we can not maruaile
that those, in whome there is no loue of truth, be giuen ouer
to beléeue lyes.
               
            
            
               Luke 2. 35.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ thine owne soule shall a sword pearce, that out of manie
heartes cogitations may be reuealed.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Simeon prophecied not onelie of Christ, but of our blessed Ladie, of all
her sorowes, wherein she was alwaies partaker with our Sauiour, from his
flight into Egypt euen to his death.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  God by Simeon forewarned the blessed virgin, that notwithstanding
the great prerogatiue which God gaue her to be the mother
of God, and whereof no doubt she was excéeding ioyous: yet
she should not looke for worldlie happinesse, but prepare her selfe
to be partaker of the crosse and sorow with her sonne.
               
            
            
               Luke 3. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And he came into all the countrie of Iordan, preaching the
baptisme of ⸫ penance vnto remission of sinnes.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Penance prepareth the way to Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is verie true, that the knowledge of our sinnes with the
sight of Gods wrath and indignation against them, ioyned with
an wholesome griefe and sorow therefore, maketh men earnestly
to séeke how to escape the seuere iustice of God, and to obtaine remission
and pardon of their sinnes, which when they can finde no
where els, they are constrained to embrace the promises of mercie
offered them in Christ. But if your imagined satisfaction for
sinnes by penance be true, the preaching thereof were a way to
kéepe a man from Christ, and to make men to rest in themselues.
               
            
            
               Luke 3. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  Yeeld therefore ⸫ fruites worthie of penance.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Fruites of penance be workes satisfactorie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Men may be satisfied for offences made toward them, by the
fruites of penance or repentance, but that God also may be so satisfied,
all the papists in the world are neuer able to prooue▪ For
if men by their works might satisfie for their sinnes, then what
néede they séeke for remedie out of them selues, and to what purpose
is the death and satisfaction of Christ? But it is no maruaile
though you hold this fast, for it is one of the best things that
the Pope hath to heate his kitchin with.
               
            
            
               Luke 3. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Euery tree therefore that yeeldeth not good fruit, shall be
cut downe, and cast into the fire.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A man without good works is vnfruitfull, and shall be cast into euerlasting
fire.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If by good, you did not imagine meritorious or satisfactory, we
should easilie condiscend to you in this note, for all faithfull are
fruitfullie replenished with euery good worke, as time, place, occasion,
and other circumstances serue.
               
            
            
               Luke 3. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ He that hath two coats, let him giue to him that hath not:
and he that hath meate, let him do likewise.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Almes counselled or inioyned for sinnes, and to auoid damnation.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  In this note there are almost as many popish corruptions, as
words. For by almes counselled, you would haue men to vnderstand,
that it is matter of greater perfection then the commandements
of God. By the word inioined, you would haue yours
to thinke, that Iohn inioyned this as a parcel of penance, that it
might séeme to warrant the penances imposed by your ghostly fathers
in your eare shrift. For sinnes and to auoid damnation, by
these you would teach the giuing of almes to be meritorions and
satisfactorie for sinne, but S. Iohn neuer taught any other means
to take away sinnes, but the lambe of God: but with you,Iohn 1. 29. whosoeuer
teacheth or aduiseth any good thing to be vsed of man, teacheth
satisfaction and merit.
               
            
            
               Luk. 3. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ the people imagining, and all men thinking in their
heartes of Iohn, least perhaps he were Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Iohn was so holie, that manie might by errour easilie thinke he was
Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In that manie were readie to haue accepted Iohn for Christ,
who afterward would not receiue Christ him selfe, appeareth
the natural corruption of man, by which he is prone and readie
to erre and to be deceiued, and also the negligence of men that did
but superficiallie looke ouer that, which was foretold of either of
them by the Prophets, whereby they might easilie haue béene
discerned and knowne asunder.
               
            
            
               Luke 3. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  I in deed baptize you with water, ⸫ but there shall come a
mightier than I, whose latchet of his shoes, I am not worthie
to vnloose, he shall baptize you in the holy Ghost and fire.
               
               
                  The note.
                  How say then the heretikes that the baptisme of Christ is of no greater
vertue than Iohns?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You delight by ambiguitie of words to beguile the simple. If
by Christs Baptisme you meane the baptisme vsed in the church
of Christ, then we say that the baptisme of Ihon, and it is all of
one vertue. But if you meane by Christs baptisme the inwarde
and inuisible operation in baptisme, which is Christs proper

worke, then we say that the baptisme of Christ is greater, not
onely than Iohns Baptisme, but also then the baptisme of any
other minister. So if in baptizing Iohn be compared with
Christ, he must as a seruant giue place to his Lord, but if his ministerie
therin be cōpared with the ministery of others, Christs
ministers, we saie, and are ready to prooue, that they are of equal
force, and vertue.
               
            
            
               Luk. 3. 36.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Who was of Cainan.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Beza boldly wipeth out of this Gospell, these words, who was of
Cainan: though all the Greeke copies, both of the old Testament, and of
the new, haue the words with full consent. Wherby we learne the intolerable
saucines of the Caluinists, and their contempt of holie Scripture,
that dare so deale with the verie Gospell it selfe.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If this be such intollerable boldnes of Beza as you account it
to correct the Gréeke by the Hebrew, and to prefer the authoritie
of Moyses & the Hebrew text, then condemne Saint Augustine,
who taught that boldnes to him, and others, De Ciuitate dei, libro.
15. cap. 13. & 14.
               
            
            
               Luk. 4. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus ful of the holie Ghost, returned from Iordan and
was driuen in the spirit into the desert, ⸫ Fortie daies, and was
tempted of the diuell.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The churches fast of fortie daies (called Lent) commeth of this, and
is an apostolicall tradition. Clem. Constit. Apost. Lib. 5. cap. 13. Hier.
ep. ad Marcel. adu. erro. Montani. Leo serm. 6. & 9. de Quadragesima.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Now the example of Christ, and the authoritie of the Apostles
must confirme our Lenten fast of fortie daies. Two waighty reasons,
and therfore néed to be well considered of. Christs faste was
miraculous, and therefore they that propound this for an example
to imitate, may as well appoint vs to imitate him in commanding
both winde and sea. But the apostles appointed it, as
Clement, Hierome, and Leo saie. Clemens is a counterfait, and
he and Hierom name Quadragesima, but what number of daies
they ment thereby, that appéereth not. But the impudencie of
them appéereth that obtrude vnder the name of Clemens constitutions

Apostolicall, that which their owne church obserueth
not, but reiecteth. But that your fortie dais faste was not an apostolicall
tradition, appéereth many waies: First for that the heretike
Montanus (as Eusebius testifieth) was the first that appointed
certaine times and daies to faste in.Ecclesiastica historia lib. 5. cap. 18. Secondly bicause Augustine
knew not of any daies,Epistola. 86. or times appointed by the Apostles,
to be kept as fasting daies. Thirdly bicause the obseruation of fasting
daies, and namely of fasting afore Easter, was frée, and was
diuers according as euerie particular church sawe good. Which
Augustine séeing when he was yet but a nouice in Christ, asked
the aduise of Saint Ambrose, who willed him to do as he saw
him do: & afterward explaining his minde, willed him to frame
himselfe therein to the maner of ech church that he should come
to, so should he neither giue nor take offence.Ecclesiastica historia lib. 5. cap. 24. Irenaeus (as Eusebius
reporteth) wrot to Uictor bishop of Rome, of the great varietie
of the churches fasting afore Easter, which dissent in fasting
did not, saith he,Epiphanius in compend. fide
                           •
                        . break their cōsent in faith. The churches where
Epiphanius was conuersant, kept their faste of Quadragesima
but seauen daies afore Easter. The church of Rome kept it thrée
wéekes afore Easter, as the Tripartite story telleth vs. Finally,Lib. 9. cap. 38.
the libertie and diuersitie of the churches in kéeping of it was so
diuers and great, that Socrates (one of the authors of the tripartite
storie) marueileth that in such difference of time, and daies,
the name of Quadragesima in all places remained one. Now sée
how truelie you thrust vpon vs vnder the name of Apostolicall
tradition, that which neither your church of Rome, neither yet
the most part of Christs church did obserue, and kéepe for foure
hundred yéeres after Christ, that is your fortie daies faste.
               
            
            
               Luk. 4. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Thou shalt adore the Lord thy God, and him onelie shalt
thou serue.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotations in Saint Matthew. cap. 4. vers. 11.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue séene your annotation not woorth the looking on
which shall receiue answer with his fellowes.
               
            
            
               Luk 4. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ it is written, that he hath giuen his Angels charge of
thee, that they preserue thee: and that in their hands they shal
beare thee vp, least perhaps thou knocke thy foote against a
stone.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  If the diuell alledge Scripture against Christ, no maruell that heretikes
do so against Christs church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  They no doubt be heretikes, which do not think that to be the
best way, to refel the diuelish wresting of scriptures, which Christ
himselfe vsed, that is, by the Scriptures. Therfore papists flieng
that trial, and taking vpon them to deuise wiser, & better means,
then Christ gaue example of, cannot choose but be presumptuous
proud heretikes.
               
            
            
               Luk
                     •
                  . 4. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought vp: and
he entered ⸫ according to his custome on the Saboath day into
the Synagogue: and he rose vp to read.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Our Sauiour Christ vsed to preach in their synagogues.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You might haue added on the Saboath daies, and haue set
downe that your Romish Church spendeth the saboth in a few
superstitious, and idolatrous actions: and that those being done
then their people sit downe to eate, and drinke, and rise againe
to play, and so a great part of their Saboath they consume in lasciu
                        •
                     ous
wantonnes. As for preaching they were woont to kéep it
for high daies.
               
            
            
               Luke. 4. 22,
               
                  The text.
                  And al giue testimonie to him: And they ⸫ maruelled in the
words of grace that proceeded from his mouth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He had maruellous grace, and an extraordinarie force in moouing
the harts of his hearers.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But the hardnes of their harts the more appéered, in that so
few of them were pearced, and truly conuerted. And bicause the
same corruptions rest in vs, which were in them, we sée that it is
not the excellencie of any mans gifts, that can truly winne to
God, except he by his almightie power inwardly worke a reformation,
and create new harts, and renew right spirits in vs.
               
            
            
               Luke. 5. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And he commanded him, that he should tell no bodie, but
goe ⸫ shew thy selfe to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing as
Moyses commanded for a testimonie to them.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  See Saint Mathew cap. 8. 4.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your references are not worth the looking on, as will appéere
when they receiue answer togither.
               
            
            
               Luke. 5. 3
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ I came not to call the iust, but sinners to repentance.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ came not to call those which presume of their owne iustice,
and that count them selues to haue no neede of Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Then Christ came not to call Papists, for they can merit heauen
by their owne inherent iustice, which if it be not a proud
presumption, then I know not what presumption meaneth. And
though in word they will séeme to néede Christ, yet that néede
can not stand with the rest of their doctrine.
               
            
            
               Luke. 5. 33.
               
                  The text.
                  Why do the disciples of Iohn ⸫ fast often, and make obsecrations,
and of the pharisies in like maner, but thine do eate
and drinke?
               
               
                  The note.
                  See Saint Matthew annotations, c. 9. 15.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue séene it, and answered it before.
               
            
            
               Luke. 6. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  And it came to passe on the ⸫ sabaoth Second-first, when he
passed through the corne his disciples did plucke the eares,
and did eat, rubbing them with their hands.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Hierom (Epist. 2. ad Nepotianum) writeth of himselfe, that being
at Constantinople he asked his master Gregorie the Nazianzene,
the famous Doctor, then bishop there, what sabaoth this was: Who by his
answer declared, that it was very hard to tell. Neither is it yet knowen
to the best learned. Yet the Protestants are woont to say, All is very
easie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If Papists made any conscience of lieng and standering, a
great many of our controuersies would quickly be at an end.
Who euer said or wrote, that all is easie. But we do not vnder
pretence of hardnes and difficulty, fray poore men from searching
after, and séeking Christ in the Scriptures, as you do: but exhort

men so vse more care and diligence, to studie them with humilitie,
and to vse all helps which God hath lent them. And that this
was Saint Ieroms mind may appéere, that in his Epistles he
vouchsafeth the answering and opening of many a question, and
that to women, whom he doth not dissuade or discourage from
reading.
               
            
            
               Luke. 6. 
                     •
                  0.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ to euery one that asketh thee, giue.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is, to euery one iustly asking. For that, which is vniustly asked,
may iustly be denied, Augustine libro 1. cap. 40. de sermone Dom. in
monte.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  He iustly asketh, whom néede driueth to aske. And we cannot
iustly denie, if God haue so blessed vs, that we may spare that
which is asked. But the contributions of papists to maintaine
traitors abroad, are neither iustly required, nor iustly giuen.
               
            
            
               Luke. 6. 48.
               
                  The text.
                  Euery one that commeth to me, and heareth my words,
and doth them, I will shew you to whom he is like. He is like a
man ⸫ building an house that digged deepe, and laid the foundation
vpon a rocke.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He buildeth rightly and surely, that hath both faith and good works:
he buildeth on sand, that trusteth to his faith or reading, or knowledge
of the scriptures, and doth not worke or liue accordingly.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Against vaine boasters and flatterers of themselues no doubt
Christ speaketh, and not against true beléeuers. For true faith
worketh by loue, and therefore endeuor of obedience is his inseparable
companion.
               
            
            
               Luke. 7. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  Lord, trouble not thy selfe. For ⸫ I am not woorthie that thou
shouldst enter vnder my roofe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotations vpon S. Matthew, cap. 8. 8.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Yée do but cumber vs with these references, which when we
sée them, are to small purpose, and shall be answered with your other
annotations.
               
            
            
               Luke. 7. 
                     •
                  3▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  The ⸫ poore are euangelized.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Pauperes euangelizantur, that is, to the poore the Gospell is preached,
and they receiue it.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It had béene no more shame for you to haue learned of vs to
translate plainly, then for to learne of vs to note aptly and truly,
according to the sense and meaning of the words. For it is true,
that the poore receiue the glad t
                        ••
                     ings of the Gospell. But the
proud pope, his rich cardinals, his fat greasie shauelings, wallowing
in the wealth of this world, and puffed vp in a proud conceit
of themselues, as they are not poore, so are they not apt to receiue
the Gospell.
               
            
            
               Luke. 7. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  But what went ye forth to see? a man clothed ⸫ in soft garments?
Behold they that are in costly apparell, and delicacies
are in the house of kings.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Marke this well concerning Iohns apparell and diet. See the annotations
vpon Saint Matthew, cap. 3. 4.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Concerning Iohns apparell, we sée nothing héere but that it
was not courtly. Concerning his diet héere is nothing at all. We
haue looked for the annotations to which you refer vs, and haue
lost our labour, for we can find none vpon that verse.
               
            
            
               Luke. 7. 30.
               
                  The text.
                  But the pharisies and the lawyers ⸫ despised the counsell of
God against themselues, being not baptized of him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  As they that contemned Iohns baptisme, despised Gods counsell and
wisedome; so much more they which make no account of the sacraments
of the church, despise Gods counsell and ordinance touching their saluation
to their owne damnation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your note is true. But you vnder the color and name of sacraments,
do obtrude to the people that whereof God was neuer
author, but which resteth, and is founded vpon your owne counsell
and wisedome, which we despise,Rom. 8. 7. bicause we know it to be
enimitie against God.
               
            
            
               Luke. 7. 37.
               
                  The text.
                  And behold a woman that was in the citie, a sinner, as she

knew that he was set downe in the pharisies house, she brought
an alabaster boxe of ointment, and standing behind besides
his feete, she began to ⸫ water his feete with teares, and wiped
them with the haires of hir head, and kissed his feete, and annointed
them with the ointment.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A perfect paterne of true penance in this woman, who sought of
Christ with open teares, and other strange works of satisfaction and deuotion,
remission of hir sinnes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This sheweth your want of due and sound proofe for mens
satisfieng for their sinnes, when you scrape héere for satisfaction.
I pray you which call you a satisfactorie worke? hir teares, hir
wiping his féet with hir haire, or hir cost in annointing of Christ.
As repentance is fained, wherof no fruits can appéere: so it is a
grosse forgerie, to imagine the outward testimonies of true repentance,
to be so many satisfactions for sinnes. Draffe is good ynough
for swine, and any thing you offer is truth amongst your
followers.
               
            
            
               Luke. 7. 47.
               
                  The text.
                  For the which I say to thee, Many sinnes are forgiuen hir,
bicause she hath loued much. But to whom lesse is forgiuen,
he loueth lesse.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not onely faith (as you may perceiue) but loue or charitie obtaineth
remission of sinnes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And how may we perceiue it? Forsooth loue is the cause that
she hath many sinnes forgiuen hir. This collection is but grating
vpon a word, contrarie to the plaine sense of the place. For if
they loue more, that haue more forgiuen, and they lesse to whom
lesse is forgiuen: then it is manifest that loue is a consequent of
forgiuenes, and not a cause. And therefore you do but abuse men
with the Coniunction causall, which is héere, as diuers times
elsewhere, a note of consequence, as it is plaine by the words
immediately following: But to whom lesse is forgiuen, he loueth
lesse. So, according to the proportion of forgiuenes, the proportion
of loue followeth.
               
            
            
               Luke. 7. 49.
               
                  The text.
                  And they ⸫ that sate together at the table, began to say within
them selues, ⸫ who is this that also forgiueth sinnes?
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  As the Pharisies did alwaies ca
                        •
                     pe Christ for remission of sinnes vpon
earth, so the heretikes reprehend his church, that remitteth sinnes by
his authoritie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It appeareth by the Pharisies bus
                        •
                     e carping, that it was a receiued
truth, that onlie God could pardon offences committed against
God. And they ought thereby to haue espied their owne
error, in imagining that Christ was no more but a méere man.
Such remission as Christ gaue his church power to vse, is in daily
practise amongst vs, and for my part I know no professor of the
Gospel that findeth fault with it, but your proud presumption beyond
any authority giuen to the church of God, in binding whom
you list, and loosing whom please you, with your gainfull marchandize
made therof, that with all our harts we abhorre and detest.
               
            
            
               Luke 8. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  To you it is giuen to know the mysterie of the kingdome of
God, but to the rest in parables: ⸫ that seeing they may not
see, and hearing they may not vnderstand.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotations vpon Saint Matthew, cap. 13. 14.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue alreadie giuen answer to that annotation.
               
            
            
               Luke 8. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  For they vpon the rocke, such as when they heare with ioy
receiue the word: and these haue no roots, bicause ⸫ for a time
they beleeue, and in the time of tentation they reuolt.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Against the heretikes that say, faith once had cannot be lost, and
that he which now hath not faith neuer had.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If either you had the feare of God before your eies, or els regarded
your owne estimation afore men, you would not thus
without all cause cauill. We say that those whom God by his
owne wil hath begotten, by the word of truth which is an incorruptible
séed, to beléeue in the name of his sonne, and so to become
the children of God, it is impossible that their faith should bée
quite lost, and that he which hath not this faith, neuer yet had it,
what is this to the faith here spoken of, which is for a time a ioyfull,
and readie accepting of the doctrine preached, and is therefore

improperlie called beléeuing, because it hath some similitude
with true beléeuing. But you make of the Scriptures an exercise
to whet your wits, to wrangle and cauill, for such is your reuerence
towards them.
               
            
            
               Luke 8. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  Who answering, said to them, My ⸫ mother & my brethren
are they that heare the word of God and doe it.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He did not heere speake disdainfullie of his mother, but teacheth that
our spiritual kinred is to be preferred before carnall cognation. Hilar. in
12. Mat.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This néedlesse citing of the fathers you vse to deceiue the simple
withall, and to make them imagine that your aduersaries
hold that Christ spake disdainfully of his mother. For they do not
thinke that you vse this and other authorities, but onlie where
you néed, by that meanes to winne some credit to that which you
write, which in this matter was altogether néedlesse.
               
            
            
               Luke 8. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ they came and raised him, saying, Master, we perish.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotations vpon Saint Matthew, cap. 8, 24.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue for your pleasure lost so much labour, as to looke into
the place, and there finde no such matter.
               
            
            
               Luke 8. 43.
               
                  The text.
                  And there was ⸫ a certaine woman in a fluxe of blood for
twelue yeeres past, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotations vpon Saint Matthew, cap. 9. 19.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your annotation is séene, and shall be considered of in the answer
to the rest.
               
            
            
               Luke 8. 45.
               
                  The text.
                  And all denying, ⸫ Peter said, and they that were with him,
Master, the multitudes throng and presse thee, and doest thou
say, Who touched me?
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is an euident signe of prerogatiue, that Peter onlie is named so often
as chiefe of the companie. Marke 1. 36. Actes 5. 29. Luke 9. 32.
Marke 16. 7. 1. Cor. 15. 5.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  It is a very sillie argument, Peter onlie is named, ergo he is
named as chiefe of the companie: It is a poore prerogatiue that
can be wonne for Peter by such kinde of reasoning. The Apostles
amongst whom he was conuersant, knewe nothing of this his
prerogatiue and superioritie, as appeareth by their reasoning of
the case diuerse times, which of them should be greatest or chiefe.
And therefore it is plaine and euident that you want better
helpes, when you are faine to staie vp Peters authoritie with
such weake proppes.
               
            
            
               Luke 8. 50.
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus hearing this woord, answered the father of the
maide, Feare not, ⸫ beleeue onlie, and she shalbe safe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotations vpon Saint Marke cap. 5. 36.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue looked and sée there a great péece of learning: Forsooth
that is an vsual spéech to saie onely do this, when we meane
chéefely. To which we replie, that it is most vsuall to saie onely
do this, when we require onely that, which we speake of and no
more. And againe, it is a verie sillie shift for you to fl
                        •
                     e to chéefely,
in stéede of onely, when in other places you will haue charitie
chéefely required, and preferre if greatly afore faith.
               
            
            
               Luk. 9. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  And calling togither the twelue apostles, he gaue them ⸫ vertue
and power ouer all diuels, and to cure maladies.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To command diuels and diseases either of bodie, or soule, is by nature
proper to God onely: but by gods gift, men also may haue the same, euen
so to forgiue sinne.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And why do you not saie euen so to create heauen and earth,
men, and angels? God doth impart to men, whatsoeuer pleaseth
him to giue, and to bestowe, and not what it pleaseth proud men
to chalenge. Shew to vs that God hath giuen any man authoritie
to sell remission of sins. Otherwise I haue alreadie answered,
that we vse this authoritie of remitting sins, so farre foorth
as God hath giuen it.
               
            
            
               Luk. 9. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  And whosoeuer shall not receiue you, going foorth out of

that citie shake of the dust also of your feete ⸫ for a testimonie
vpon them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A great fault to reiect the true preachers, or not to admit them into
house for needfull harbour and sustenance.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But no fault, to reiect traiterous and vndermining papists,
who secretlie stir vp subiects to murther their soueraignes, the
Lords annointed, and to séeke the subuersion and destruction of
their owne countrie.
               
            
            
               Luk. 9. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And taking the fiue loaues, and the two fishes, he looked vp
to heauen, and ⸫ blessed them: and brake, and distributed to
his disciples, for to set before the multitude.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Here you see that he blessed the things, and not onely gaue thanks to
God. See annot. Mark. cap. 8. 7.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Who can better tell what is ment by blessing, then the holie
Ghost himselfe, who in the fiftéenth of Matthew, & in the sixt of
Iohn expresseth the same by giuing of thanks? Neither is there
any cause, or reason in this place, why any farther matter should
be thought, or imagined to be ment by blessing. And as for the seuerall
blessing of the bread first, and then the fishes afterward, is
but your dreame, without warrant. Your annotation shall be
considered of with the residue of the same sort.
               
            
            
               Luk. 9. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ they did all eate, and had their fill.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The miraculous prouidence of God towards such as follow Christ into
deserts, prisons, banishment, or whether soeuer.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Manie things besides may be noted, as to giue thanks to God
for his gifts, though they séeme neuer so small, or course, and to
marke that he can make so small a matter, to suffice great multitudes,
and such like.
               
            
            
               Luk. 9. 41.
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus answering said, ⸫ O faithles and peruerse generation,
how long shall I be with you and suffer you?
               
               
                  The note.
                  Incredulitie hindreth the effect of exorcismes, and other miraculous
power giuen to the church.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  The power of myraculous working was granted to the
church but for a time, for the better confirming of men in the doctrine
then deliuered. The doctrine continuing one and the same,
new miraculous confirmations are not to be looked for. Yet exorcismes
in your church are verie common, and how bad soeuer
your popish priests are, yet they must worke, or else you beguile
both your selues, and others.
               
            
            
               Luk. 9. 46.
               
                  The text.
                  And there entred ⸫ a cogitation into them, which of them
should be greater.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Desire of preheminence is an humane infirmitie often euen among
the good. Against which Christ teacheth humilitie, but forbiddeth not
superioritie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Ambition in truth is a disease very common, and good men very
often haue béene therewith infected. But for pride, and preheminence
ambiciously sought, and tyrannously kept, the pope
hath no péere, the diuell and great Turke onely excepted. But by
this it appéereth that the Apostles knew not, which of them
Christ had appointed to be greatest.
               
            
            
               Luk. 9. 50.
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus said to him ⸫, prohibite not. For he that is not
against you, is for you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  There be some that follow not Christ precisely in life and doctrine, of
whom we may make our aduantage, toi
                        ••
                     e propagation of Christs honor,
and religion, when they do any thing for the aduancement thereof, of
what intention soeuer they do it.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you preached Christ and not your selues, you might be the
better borne with. So his honor were aduanced, your intentions
néeded the lesse to be looked vnto. But now you aduance the power
of the pope, the abilitie of fréewill, and the valure of merits,
into the place of Christ the power of God to saluation to beléeuers,
and therefore are iustly prohibited.
               
            
            
               Luke. 9. 58.
               
                  The text.
                  Iesus said to him ⸫ the foxes haue holes, and the foules of
the aire nests: but the sonne of man hath not where to repose
his head.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  This man would haue followed him for temporall commodities, and
therefore was not suffered.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This man then was méete to haue made a papist. For it is
plaine, and euident that there was neuer any religion in the
world deuised so gainefull, and so apt, and méete to bring in all
maner of worldly cōmodities to the teachers thereof, as popery.
               
            
            
               Luk. 10. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And after this our Lord designed also other ⸫ seuentie two:
and he sent them two and two before his face, into euery citie
and place whether himselfe would come.
               
               
                  The note.
                  As the twelue Apostles did represent the higher degree of the cleargie,
called bishops: So these seauentie two beare the figure of the inferiour
cleargie called priests, Beda.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is apparant and euident, as well by the scriptures, as by
testimonie of antiquitie, that at the first there was no such distinction
of higher, and lower orders, of cleargie men called bishops,
and priests, but that they were al one, till for the better order
of gouernment some one among a multitude of priests,Hieronima E
                        
                           •
                        agrio. being
chosen to gouerne, guide, and direct the rest, had the name of
bishop for distinctions sake giuen to him. And therfore this prefiguring,
or representing that, which then was not thought of, is
but a dreame of Master Beda. But I maruell that Master Beda
found no more of your cleargie orders there prefigured, especially
the pope, and his cardinals, belike the one was not growne
then to his full height, and the other scant hatched.
               
            
            
               Luk. 10. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  I saie to you, it shall bee more tolerable for Sodom in that
daie, then for that citie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Difference of pains and damnation in hell according to the difference
of demerits, August. Lib. 5. cap. 5. contra Iulianum.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It was néedlesse for you in this matter, to quote your doctor,
considering that in it, at this day (so far I know) you haue none
aduersaries. I hope you do not take hell for purgatorie, nor make
any of the differences temporall, and then I sée no great cause to

contend with you. Howbeit in citing the place of Augustine either
you delt very negligently, or else you trusted your note booke
too well, for in the place you sende vs to, Augustine hath no such
thing.
               
            
            
               Luk. 10. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  Wo be to thee Chorozaim, wo be to thee Bethsaida: for if
in Tire and Sidon had been wrought the myracles, that haue
been wrought in you, they had done penance, sitting ⸫ in sackcloth,
and ashes long ago.
               
               
                  The note.
                  True penance not onely to leade a new life, but to punish the body
by such things as heere be recorded for the ill life past.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Who euer denied that penitent men should shew outward tokens
of the greatnes of their inward sorrow conceiued for their
sinnes, or that they should not punish their bodie, to the end that
by not satisfieng the lusts, and desires thereof, it may be the lesse
rebellious, and more obedient to the spirit. But all this is farre
from that which you imagine, concerning satisfieng by that
meanes, for ill life past.
               
            
            
               Luk. 10. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ He that heareth you, heareth me: and he that despiseth
you, despiseth me: and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that
sent me.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is all one to despise Christ, and to despise his priests and ministers
in the catholike church, to refuse his doctrine and theirs.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I will not quarrell with you about your word priests, though
I iustly might, being taken of you for sacrificers. But I returne
your note against your selfe, that therefore you despise Christ,
and his doctrine, bicause you despise vs, whom Christ hath sent
to be teachers of his people in the Catholike Church.
               
            
            
               Luk. 10. 35.
               
                  The text.
                  And the next day he tooke foorth two pence, and gaue to
the hoast, and said, haue care of him: and whatsoeuer thou
shalt supererogate, I at my returne will repaie thee.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine saith that the Apostle (1. Cor. 9) according to
this place did supererogate, that is, did more than he needed, or was boūd
to do, when he might haue required all duties for preaching the Gospel,
but would not. Lib. de oper. monachor. cap. 5. whereof it commeth that

the works which we do more than precept, be called works of Supererogation:
and whereby it is also euident against the protestants, that there
be such works. See Optatus lib. 6. contra Parmenian. How aptlie he applieth
this parable to saint Pauls counsell of virginitie, (1. Cor. 7.) as to a
worke of supererogation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If your doctrine be true in this point, then Christ did a worke
of Supererogation, when he suffered death for vs, that is to say,
a worke more then he néeded to do. For if we can do more then
is commaunded, we may haue life by our déedes, and so Christ
might haue spared his paines he tooke for vs: besides, it were
strange, if any thing that maketh to the glorie of God, and saluation
of mens soules, should be a worke more than néedeth, or not
within compasse of Gods commaundements. But Augustine
saith that Paul did a worke of Supererogation, when he serued
as Christs souldier without taking wages as he might: you do
great violence to Augustine in that place, by grating vpon a
word to make him serue your purpose against his will, when his
whole scope is nothing els, but to shew that Paul abstained from
that, which was frée for him to take for his paines, and that hée
laboured for his liuing, whereupon he concludeth, the labour of
monkes to be lawfull against idle monkes, which because they
would liue on the sweat of other mens browes, not onlie refused
to labour, but also maintained, that it was vnlawfull for
them to labour.
               
            
            
               Luke 11. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  But if I in the ⸫ finger of God do cast out diuels: surelie
the kingdome of God is come vpon you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This finger is the spirit of God, Matth. 12. 18.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  As by the onelie power of Gods spirit, the diuell was then
throwen out of his possession in the first propagating and spreading
of the kingdome of Christ, by the preaching of his word:
euen so againe in these late yéeres, by the like mightie working
of Gods spirit with the ministerie of the word, Sathan, who
reigned by his vicar general of Rome, hath béene expulsed out of
a great part of his possession.
               
            
            
               Luke 11. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  But he said, ⸫ yea rather, blessed are they that heare the word
of God and keepe it.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  The said mother of God in that also was blessed, that she was the temporall
meanes and minister of the incarnation, but much more blessed, in
that she continued the perpetuall keeper of his word. Beda. August. tract.
19. in Iohannem.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You loue and delight to shew your reading in matters néedles.
Who knoweth not, that it was an excéeding blessing of God to
the virgin Marie, that he vouchsafed to choose her to be the mother
of his onlie begotten sonne? Also who are there that confesse
not, that the greatest blessing of all, is to be the childe of God,
wherof the obedient kéeping of the word is a testimonie?
               
            
            
               Luke 11. 32.
               
                  The text.
                  The men of Niniue shall rise in the iudgement with this generation,
and condemne it, because they ⸫ did penaunce at the
preaching of Ionas, and behold, more then Ionas heere.
               
               
                  The note.
                  ⸫ 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Marke that the great penaunce of Niniuites (Ionae 3.) is
heere expressed by this Greeke word. See annotations Matth. 3. 2.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The outward testimonies of true repentance shewed foorth
by the Niniuites, were not works of satisfaction as you imagine.
And it is true, that they which waxe wiser especially in knowing
and eschewing sinne, will shewe it aswell by humbling them
selues afore God for their sinnes past, as also by a more carefull
and diligent héede to their wayes after.
               
            
            
               Luke 11. 47.
               
                  The text.
                  Wo to you that ⸫ build the monuments of the prophets,
and your fathers did kill them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not the building of the Prophets monuments is condemned, but their
imitation of their fathers that slew the prophets. Ambrose.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héere is an high point of learning that you bring Ambrose for.
We know that the memorie of Gods saints is pretious in his
sight: But in this you resemble your fathers the Iewes. For the
saints of God long ago dead, you wil séeme to honor and estéeme.
But towards the saints aliue you are as cruell and outragious,
as euer were your fathers. And therfore God must in iustice require
of you the blood of all his saints shed since the beginning of
the world to this day.
               
            
            
               
               Luke. 12. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  But I will shew you whom you shall feare: ⸫ Feare him who
after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The feare of hell also is profitable: contrarie to the Protestants, teaching
securitie of saluation, and that feare of hell maketh men hypocrits.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your ordinarie lieng sheweth whom in conditions you resemble,
and whose children yeare. What protestant hath taught that
the feare of hell is vtterly vnprofitable? We assigne many profits
which it bringeth: First, the wicked many times with the feare
thereof are terrified and bridled, that they run not so headlong to
the execution of their wicked desires, as otherwise they would.
Secondly, the elect and chosen children of God being by nature
as other men corrupt, are many times at the first by the feare of
hell, driuen to séeke Christ their onely remedie and deliuerer.
Thirdly, they are strengthened against the feare of man, when
they sée the eschewing of bodily death wold bring eternal death.
It is manifest therefore that that which you charge vs with, is
your malitious collection, and not our doctrine. But our doctrine
is, that they which by faith haue power to become the children
of God, do shew foorth their obedience of méere loue and reuerence
to God their father, and that they would so do, though
there were no hell to punish disobedience in. And that they who
would not shew any obedience, but for feare of hell, are hypocriticall
slaues, doing some dutie, not for dutifulnes, but onely for
feare of punishment.
               
            
            
               Luke. 12. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ What shall I do, bicause I haue not whither to gather my
fruits?
               
               
                  The note.
                  Giue it to the poore, that shouldst thou do, saith saint Basil.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You might as well haue alledged saint Paul, but that so you
should not reape that which you hunt after, that is, the estimation
of great clarks for great reading amongst your ignorant vnskilfull
followers. But if saint Basil had béene of your religion,
he would haue taught the rich man to haue founded abbeies,
n
                        ••
                     neries, priories, and chauntr
                        ••
                     s for his soules health, or else
to haue bestowed his superfluitie in gilding roodlofts, and finding

of lights, and such other toies. For with you these things consume
the portion of the poore.
               
            
            
               Luke. 12. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  And God said to him, ⸫ Thou foole, this night they require
thy soule of thee: and the things that thou hast prouided
whose shall they be?
               
               
                  The note.
                  A goodly warning for all rich men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  So it was. But if the practise of your popish church were well
warranted, there had béene no cause at all to haue pronounced
him a foole. For, for monie he might haue béene canonized, and
made a saint, and whatsoeuer masses, diriges, pardons, and such
like popish pelfrie might haue done, he should be sure of it, bicause
he left ynough to pay well for it.
               
            
            
               Luke. 12. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said to his disciples, therefore I say to you, ⸫ Be not
carefull for your life, what you shall eate: nor for your bodie
what you shall do on.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He forbiddeth not competent prouidence, but too much carefulnes.
See annot. vpon S. Matthew, c. 6. v. 25.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is very true that men not marking the prouidence of God,
but hanging altogither vpon their owne prouision, do thinke
themselues neuer to haue cared sufficiently, til they haue scraped
togither prouision for a long time aforehand. Against which
Christ doth arme his with the due consideration of Gods prouidence.
Touching your annotation, you are disposed to send vs to
séeke that which is not to be found.
               
            
            
               Luke. 12. 32.
               
                  The text.
                  Feare not ⸫ little flocke, for it hath pleased your father to
giue you a kingdome.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It was little at the beginning, and is still in comparison of all the reprobate:
but in it selfe very great, as in the parable of the great tree that
grew of the little mustard seed, Matth. 13.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your note in words is true, though in your meaning not true.
For we doubt not but that you meane, that this greatnes is alwaies

visible to the world, which we denie, and you are not able
to prooue.
               
            
            
               Luke. 12. 35.
               
                  The text.
                  Let your ⸫ loines be girded, and candels burning in your
hands.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To girde our loynes is to keepe chastitie and continencie. Greg. ho. 10.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your exposition though it be Gregories, it is far fetched, and
the farther from truth, bicause you imagine no chastitie but in
single life. By which collection it should follow that no maried
men should be aptly prepared, or furnished to wait for the comming
of Christ. And so consequently one of the sacraments of
your church excludeth men, from waiting for the glorious
comming of our Lord, and Sauiour. Surely maried men are
much beholding to you.
               
            
            
               Luke. 12. 51.
               
                  The text.
                  Thinke you that I came to giue ⸫ peace on the earth: no I
tell you, but separation.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth the naughtie peace that is betweene worldlings, and
sinners, the agreement that is in infidelitie, in heresie, or in any other
wickednes. He came to breake this peace. See annotations Mat. 10. 34.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is sure that the knowledge, and imbracing of Christ doth
disturbe the former agréement we had in darknes, & ignorance:
and therfore no maruel though in this light of the Gospel which
God hath raised there be many dissentions. Your note like the
rest shall be censured with his fellowes.
               
            
            
               Luke. 13. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  No, I saie to you: but vnlesse you ⸫ haue penance, you shall
likewise perish.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Or as it is vttered in other places do penance. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . the which in
the new Testament signifieth perfect repentance. See annotations Mat.
3, 3. 11. 21.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We do not doubt but that the Euangelist vsing that worde

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ment true, and perfect repentance. But this is that we denie,
and you should prepare your selues to prooue, that men can
not be truely, or perfectly repentant, except either they haue some

penance inioined them, or else assume to themselues some penance,
whereby they may satisfie to God for their sinnes in the
whole, or in part. Which except you do prooue, your labor about
the signification of the word is but méere wrangling. Your annotations
shall receiue answer by themselues.
               
            
            
               Luke. 13. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said this similitude, A certaine man had ⸫ a fig tree
planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking for fruite on it,
and found none.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The fig tree with onely leaues and no fruite is the Iewes Synagogue
and euerie other people or person, which hath faith and faire words, and
no good works.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By your continuall separation of faith from works, your
meaning is to make your followers beléeue, that we teach that
men may be iustified by an idle and fruitlesse faith. Wherin your
owne conscience doth witnes to you, that you do vs great iniury.
The Iewes Synagogue had a shew of works, but no true faith,
and therefore that (as you confesse) being signified by the fig trée,
your hypocriticall confidence in works, whereby you and they
sought to establish your owne righteousnes, is flatly by this parable
condemned.
               
            
            
               Luke. 13. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  It is like to a mustard seede, which a man tooke, and cast into
his garden, and it grew: and became a great tree, and the
foules of the aire rested in the boughes therof.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See annotations, Matth. 13. 31.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your references are neither rightly quoted, for vpon the 31.
verse there is nothing noted, and vpon the next verse there is nothing
said, which might not haue béen set downe of any scholler
neuer so meane. For what Christian, that hath made any progresse
at all in Christs schoole, can be ignorant of the beginning,
and encrease of the church of Christ?
               
            
            
               Luke. 13. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  But he said to them, ⸫ Striue to enter by the narrow gate,
bicause many, I say to you, shall seeke to enter, and shall not be
able.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christians must in their liues seeke the strait way, but in religion the
ancient common way.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  If by ancient and common, you meane that religion which Adam
receiued of God, and by him was deliuered to all mankind,
and which Christ deliuered to his whole church, then we accorde
with you, that it is that, which we are to folow, and to striue for.
But if you meane that, which for some ages hath béene common,
and therfore beareth some shewe of antiquitie, then we dissent
from you. Bicause whiles you séeke to establish your popery, you
are not ashamed to make Christ to exhort men either to supersticious
Iudaisme, or to idolatrous Gentilisme. For at that time
there were none other religions commonly receiued, and embraced
but these: and neither of them both, but did beare a greater
shew of antiquitie, then in truth euer did poperie.
               
            
            
               Luke. 13. 30.
               
                  The text.
                  And behold, they are ⸫ last that shal be first, and they be first
that shall be last.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Gentils comming into Gods fauor later, are preferred before the
Iewes which were first.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note must haue a fauorable exposition. And we take it
that the preferment you meane, is our graffing into the true oliue,
whence they were cut out. And then we reason thus: If the
Church of the Iewes once florishing, might afterward decay,
and that people falling away, giue roome and place to such nations,
as God made himselfe knowen vnto in Christ long after
them: then why may not the Romans, though their faith was
once commended, & praise woorthie, be in like case shaken of also?
               
            
            
               Luke. 13. 34.
               
                  The text.
                  Hierusalem, Hierusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest
them that are sent to thee, how often would I gather thy
children, as the bird doth hir broode vnder hir wings, and ⸫
thou wouldest not.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Iewes lost their preheminence, by their owne freewill and not by
Gods causing: who ceased not to call and crie vpon them, and they would
not heare: Whereby freewill is plainly prooued.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you had prooued that the Iewes had by their owne will merites
deserued, and therefore obtained at Gods hand, that their

preheminence, whereby they were preferred before all nations
vpon the earth, you had plainly prooued fréewill. But when you
can find none other fréedome of will but to sinne, and to refuse
obstinately Gods gratious calling, and crieng to them by his ministers
and messengers, you sufficiently confute your selues, and
plainly prooue what thraldome you are in by your fréedome of
will. And where you say, that they lost not their preheminence by
Gods causing,Rom. 11. 32. you speake directly against the Apostle Paul, who
saith that God concluded or shut them vp into incredulitie.
               
            
            
               Luke. 14. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  But when thou makest a feast, call the poore, feeble, lame,
and blind, and thou shalt be blessed, bicause they haue not to
recompense thee: for ⸫ recompence shall be made thee in the
resurrection of the iust.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Reward for charitable deedes, and that they may be done for reward
against our aduersaries.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  What aduersaries be they, that denie that God rewardeth
works procéeding of loue? Or that it is not lawfull for men to
looke for reward sith God hath promised it? This is onely denied,
that works be therefore meritorious, bicause they be rewarded,
or that the children of God do worke in respect of reward onely,
or principally, but in respect of dutie and obedience to God. But
papists consider not, or at the least way regard not, that the lieng
toong killeth the soule.
               
            
            
               Luke. 14. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  And they began all at once to make excuse. The first said to
him, ⸫ I haue bought a farme, and I must needes go foorth and
see it, I pray thee hold me excused.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Worldlines, wealth, and voluptuousnes are the things that specially
hinder men from God.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And yet none of these so great an hinderance, as is the vaile of
hypocrisie, and the trust and confidence in our selues, and in our
own works. Which was the cause that the grossest sinners came
sooner to Christ, than the proud popish pharisies.
               
            
            
               Luke. 14. 26.
               
                  The text.
                  If any man come to me, and hateth not his ⸫ father and mother,

and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea and
his owne life besides: he cannot be my disciple.
               
               
                  The note.
                  No creature so deere vnto vs, which we must not hate or forsake, if
it hinder vs, and in that respect that it hindereth vs from Christ, or his
Church, and our saluation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In this we consent. And a great number of vs haue not onely
forsaken all our friends, how déere to vs soeuer, but also giuen ouer
our selues and our golden yéeres to prison, paines, torments,
and most bitter death, rather than to leaue and forsake Christs
catholike Church, and our saluation.
               
            
            
               Luke. 14. 33.
               
                  The text.
                  So therefore euerie one of you that doth not ⸫ renounce all
that he possesseth, cannot be my children.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He that is a right Christian man must make his account, that if he
be put to it (as he often may be in times of persecution) he must renounce
all that euer he hath, rather than forsake the catholike faith.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Wherefore all true and sincere Christians must arme themselues
rather to abide whatsoeuer extremities may befall them,
than to be drawen to imbrace the faith now professed at Rome,
which neuer was catholike.
               
            
            
               Luke. 15. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  What ⸫ man of you hauing an hundred sheepe: and if he
had lost one of them, doth he not leaue the ninetie nine in the
desert, and goeth after that which was lost vntill he find it?
               
               
                  The note.
                  This man is our Sauiour Christ, whose care and trauaile in searching
and reducing sinners to repentance, all spirituall men especiallie should
follow.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You follow faire. If there be anie whom you thinke straied
from you in places where you are of power, in stéed of seeking,
finding, and laying on your shoulders, you, I say, make shorter
woorke, that is, you cut their throtes, or roste them aliue, which
is a plaine euidence that you are woolues, and not shepherds.
               
            
            
               Luke. 15. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  Or what ⸫ woman hauing ten groats, if she leese one groat,

doth she not light a candle, and sweepe the house, and seeke
diligentlie vntill she finde?
               
               
                  The note.
                  This woman is the Catholike church, who also seeketh continuallie
her lost children.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Therefore your church can not be the Catholike church, for
such children as she supposeth that she hath lost, she procureth
their destruction: witnesse the massacres in Fraunce, and the
monstrous cruelties in other places shewed. So farre off is shée
from séeking anie for their good.
               
            
            
               Luke 15. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  A certaine man had two sonnes: and the younger of them
said to his father, Father, giue me that portion of substance
that belongeth to me, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The prodigall sonne is a parable both of the Gentiles conuersion, and
also of euery dissolute sinner penitentlie returning to God.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  God, if it be his good will, make you truelie penitent, that it
may be a parable of your conuersion also.
               
            
            
               Luke 15. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ when he was yet farre of, his father saw him, and was
mooued with mercie, and running to him fell vpon his necke,
and kissed him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Gods wonderfull and tender mercie toward penitent sinners.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Gods works are wonderfull, but his mercie is aboue all his
works.
               
            
            
               Luke 16. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  Make vnto you friends of the ⸫ mammon of iniquitie, that
when you faile, they may receiue you into the eternal tabernacles.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Mammon (saith Saint Hierome q. 6. ad Algas.) in the Syriake
tongue signifieth riches, mammon of iniquitie, because they are often 
                        •
                     ll
gotten, or ill bestowed, or occasion of euill, or at the least worldlie, and
false, and not the true heauenlie riches.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And yet your religion is altogether framed of purpose, to gaine

mammon of iniquitie, which you estéeme aboue all heauenlie riches:
and spend it you doo not, but to the disquieting and troubling
of the whole world.
               
            
            
               Luke 16. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And lifting vp his eies when he was in torments, he sawe
Abraham a farre off, ⸫ and Lazarus in his bosome, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Lazarus in Abrahams bosome and rest, but both in hell, and not in
the kingdom of heauen before Christ. Hierom. epist. 3. Epitaph. Nepot.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You wrestle in vaine for a third place, for though your errour
therein be somewhat auncient, and haue some fauour of the olde
writers, yet they are so vncertaine and so diuers in that matter,
dissenting both from them selues, and one from another, not
knowing where to place this third place, or what to make of it,
that no wise man will wander after such vncertaine steps, as
they lead him in. Hierome taketh this place to be paradise,Ad Paulam super obitu Bl
                           •
                        sill
                           •
                        e. and
Hierome taketh this place not to be paradise in this place by you
quoted: and if your owne authour be not constant, what shall we
thinke of the rest?Epistola 57. Augustine can not tell whether the bosome of
Abraham be paradise or hell, but in reasoning the case, he deliuereth
thrée reasons why it should not be hell: first, bicause hell is
named in the text in the death of the rich man, and not named in
the death or rest of Lazarus. Secondlie, bicause it is hard to finde
the name of hell in scriptures taken in good part, for a place of ioy
and rest: so that if the scriptures had said, that Christ had gone
into Abrahams bosome after death,Epistola 99. and had not told of the loosing
of the sorrowes of death, he would haue marueiled that any durst
haue béene so bold, as to haue affirmed that he discended into hel.
Thirdlie, the great and wonderfull distance héere mentioned betwixt
hell and Abrahams bosome, it were too long, and not agréeing
with the breuitie which I haue hitherto vsed, to rippe vp the
disagréeing iudgements of the fathers, whether Abrahams bosome
be parcell of heauen or hell, or whether it be aboue vs or
beneath vs, for so alwaies it is, when men are vncertainlie caried
after the vanitie of their owne minde and conceite, they wot
not whither them selues. How much better had it béene for them
and you to hold fast that,Hipognosticon 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 5. which saint Augustine calleth the faith
of the Catholikes: namelie, that the kingdome of heauen is a
place of ioy for the faithfull, and hell a place of punishment for

infidels and apostataes, and that a third place either for rest or
punishment is vnknowne, and no where found in scriptures.
These two places are héere liuelie described, for the rich man
went to hell, a place of torments: but Lazarus was caried into
Abrahams bosome, a place of ioy and rest. Heauen is called Abrahams
bosome, bicause that God gaue him that honour to bée
father of the faithfull, therefore his children are said to be gathered
into his bosome, when together with him they are crowned
with heauenlie ioy and rest, the reward of his and their faith.
               
            
            
               Luke. 16. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  And Abraham said vnto him, Sonne, remember that thou
didst receiue ⸫ good things in thy life time, and Lazarus likewise
euill: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To be in continuall pleasures, ease, welth, peace, and prosperitie in this
world is perillous, and a signe of paines in the next. Saint Hierome.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You haue cited Saint Hierome at randon in a cause néedlesse,
we haue learned of the Apostle that God doth chastice euery child
whom he receiueth,Hebr. 12. 6. and that they, which in this life escape his
rod, are bastards and not children. Séeing then Hieroms spéech
is warranted by the word, we acknowledge with you, that continual
pleasures, ease, welth, peace and prosperitie are perillous,
and betokeneth that God deferreth the punishment of such to
the next life.
               
            
            
               Luke. 16. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  And Abraham said to him, ⸫ They haue Moyses and the
Prophets: let them heare them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Abraham had knowledge of things in earth, which were not in his
time, as that they had Moyses and the prophets bookes, which he neuer
saw. Augustin. de cura promortuis. cap. 14.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Augustines iudgement is, that the dead know no more what
we do héere, then we know what they do there, against which
his iudgement he obiecteth this, which you boldlie put downe for
his assertion. To which he answereth, that this knowledge was
extraordinarie, either by relation of Moyses and the Prophets
now dead and with Abraham, or by ministerie of Angels, which
serue men héere, who reueale to saints there so much as it pleaseth

God to let them know. What is this then to anie ordinarie
knowledge of our affaires héere? Which is the thing that you
would faine persuade men, to encourage them forward in inuocation
of dead mē, which you may the easilier get at their hands,
if you can assure them, that the saints departed know their necessities,
and heare their praiers. But how much better and trulier
might you haue noted, that God denieth to those, to whom hée
hath graunted his word, extraordinarie instruction by the dead,
which would ouerthrow the credit of those fables, whereupon
your purgatorie is grounded.
               
            
            
               Luke 17. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said to his disciples, It is ⸫ impossible that scandale
should not come: but wo to him by whom they come.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not of meere necessitie, for then it were no fault: but presupposing
the great wickednesse of men, it is impossible but there shalbe scandales,
and therefore it followeth, wo to him by whom they come.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If it were such necessitie as should exclude will, then there
were no fault, but nowe as scandals (as you tearme them) are
necessarie, so you wilfullie and wittinglie runne into them, and
therefore wo to you. To omit all other, the séeking to murther
the Lords anointed, our most gratious soueraigne, an horrible offence,
answer it and excuse it if you can.
               
            
            
               Luk. 17. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said to him, Arise, go thy waies, bicause ⸫ thy faith
hath made thee safe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  And yet we see heere, it was not onlie faith, but also his thankefulnes
and returning to giue glorie to God.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We sée héere two things. First, the impudent boldnes of papistes,
that dare controll the spéech of our Lord and Sauiour
Christ. Secondlie, that though faith be accompanied with many
other vertues, yet Christ ascribeth the receiuing and embracing
of safetie, and such benefits as procéed from God to men, to faith
onlie and alone.
               
            
            
               Luk. 17. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  The kingdom of God commeth not with obseruation: neither
shall they say, loe heere, or lo there, for loe, the kingdome
of God is within you.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Whiles they looke and aske for a temporall kingdome in pompe and
glorie, loe their king and Messias was now among them, whose spirituall
kingdome is within all the faithfull that haue dominion ouer sinne.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If the kingdome of God commeth not with obseruation, then
how say you that it must alwaies haue a visible and a knowne
succession of bishops in a place certaine, which is directlie against
this spéech of Christ.
               
            
            
               Luke. 17. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And they will say to you, Lo heere, and lo there, ⸫ Go not,
neither do ye follow after.
               
               
                  The note.
                  No man must run out of the Church after schismatikes, to heare them
preach Christ in corners, Christs doctrine being open in al the world. See
annot. Matthew. 24. 23.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But all they are schismatikes, who haue diuided themselues
from the doctrine which Christ and his Apostles openly deliuered
to the whole world, & therefore whether they preach openly,
or in corners, men may not heare them, nor go after them. But
you papists teach that, whereof there is no commandement, no
doctrine, no example in the whole doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles:
therefore no man ought to go after you. Your annotation
is alreadie answered.
               
            
            
               Luke. 18. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And he spake a parable to them, that it behooued ⸫ alwaies
to praie, and not to be wearie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We should alwaies pray by faith, hope, and charitie, and by working
the things that be acceptable to God: though speciall times of vocall
praiers in the canonical howers be assigned, for the stirring vs vp to God
through externall signes of deuotion.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That those which pray ought to be furnished with all things
that may beautifie a Christian we denie not, and that the praiers
of Christians ought to be continual without ceasing we affirme,
bicause their néedes and necessities are continuall. But the speciall
thing required, that their praiers may be heard, and petitions
granted, is faith. That in the great dulnes and negligence of

Christians, times of praier be appointed for the better stirring
vp of men thereto, we thinke it very necessarie. What you mean
by externall signes of deuotion I know not, you haue so many
superstitious toies, as crossings, beades, and such like.
               
            
            
               Luke. 18. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  The pharisie standing praied thus with himselfe: God, I
giue thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners,
vniust, adulterers, as also this publican, ⸫ I fast twise
a weeke, I giue tithes of all that I possesse.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To take pride of fasting, tithing, or any goodworke, is naught, though
the works themselues be very good.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And how can men auoid pride, and carrie an humble mind
that are instructed by you, or that beléeue your doctrine, will it
not (thinke you) puffe vp a man in pride, to be persuaded that his
works deserue heauen, and life euerlasting? This praier of the
pharisie doth plainly shew, that the opinion of the pharisies, and
of the papists touching grace and works were all one, and the
very same. And how then shall it not worke the same effect in
you that it did in the pharisie? And héere by the way is to be noted,
whence you papists learned to kéepe two fasting daies euery
wéeke.
               
            
            
               Luke. 18. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  And the publican standing a far of, would not so much as
lift his eies toward heauen: but he ⸫ knocked his brest, saieng;
God be mercifull to me a sinner.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So do the priests and people at the holy altar knocke their brests, and
say with the humble publican, Deus propitius, Aug. psal. 31. concione 3.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To what purpose do you cite Augustine? To prooue what
your priests do now adaies? he cannot tell. Or to prooue the antiquitie
of your altars. Therein you do but delude men with the
name, whereas in the things there are great differences. Or to
prooue that Deus propitius was then in the church seruice. If you
had now nothing therein that then was, it were hard. That doth
neither prooue your masse, nor your mattens in a strange toong.
As for the people they come not néere the altar, but som poore boy
for the most part is faine to be spokesman for them.
               
            
            
               
               Luke. 18. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  Amen I say to you, Whosoeuer receiueth not the kingdome
of God ⸫ as a child shall not enter into it.
               
               
                  The note.
                  In matters of faith and religion we must be as humble and obedient
to the catholike church, as yoong children to their parents.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By the catholike church you vnderstand the pope and his colledge
of cardinals, to whom you would haue men so childishly obedient,
as to beléeue whatsoeuer they shal tel them, though they
call chalke chéese. But how agréeth this with S. Paul,1. Cor. 12. 14. which wil
not haue vs children in vnderstanding,Ephes. 4. 14. but of ripe age, to the end
we may be constant, and not wauering in the faith and knowledge
of Christ, neither caried about with euery puffe of doctrine?
               
            
            
               Luk. 18. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  Thou knowest ⸫ the commandement, thou shalt not kil, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not faith onely, but also keeping the commandements purchase life
euerlasting. See annotations Matthew. 19. 16.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You loue to repeat one thing often. Your notes vpon this haue
twise béene answered alreadie. And now the third time, I praie
you tell vs how yée gather this, or what necessitie there is of any
such consequence vpon this place? You know, & it is of all hands
granted, that he which fulfilleth the Law, shall liue by the Law.
Also you know that the Apostle concludeth,Gala
                           •
                        . 3. 1
                           •
                        . that therefore none
liue by the Law, bicause no man performeth all things that are
written in the Law. This man would know by what doing a
man should possesse life. Christ answereth his question aptlie,
and fitly by kéeping the commandements. Doth it follow therefore
that a man can kéepe the commandements, and so haue life?
But it appéereth that the Iewish teachers had besotted this
yoong man, as they had done a multitude of others, to make them
séeke righteousnes, and life, where it could not be found, that is
in themselues, and in their owne obedience. Euen as you popish
pharisies, do now a daies bewitch men with an opinion of
inherent iustice, whereby they may deserue heauen.
               
            
            
               Luk▪ 18. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  Yet one thing thou lackest: ⸫ Sell al that euer thou hast, and
giue to the poore, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  This is not a commandement or precept, but counsell which the religious
do follow. See annot. Matth. 19.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Now haue we the works of Supererogation of religious papists,
which obserue not onely cōmandements, but counsels. But
to let you to assume that, which no mā néedeth to grant you, that
is, that this is no commandement: I pray you why doth not the
pope, his cardinals, archbishops, bishops, abbots, priors, moonks,
priests, obey this counsell, and sell their possessions, and giue the
money raised thereof to the poore? Be not these amongst your religious
men? But this would gréeue them woorse then it gréeued
this rich man. As for your other orders, which liue by the spoile
of the poore, and maintaine themselues in idlenes by begging,
they haue nothing to sell, for the possesse nothing. And so it falleth
out, that your note is a thrasonicall bragge, and that none of
you set store by Christs counsell, which none of you do follow, or
séeke to obserue.
               
            
            
               Luk. 18. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  Amen I saie to you, there is no man that hath left house, or
parents, or brethren, or ⸫ wife, or children for the kingdome
of God, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Apostles amongst other things left their wiues also, as Saint Hierome
noteth out of this place. Libro 1. adu. Iouinianum.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I maruell you haue no more copie of fathers for this matter.
Your note and the authority of Hierome hath béene alreadie answered.
Yet for farther answere we say, that in that sence in
which you take it, it was vtterly vnlawful, against the commandement
of God, & doctrine of the holy scriptures, for the apostles
to leaue their wiues. Also if we may beléeue Hierom, none of the
Apostles had wiues, but onely Peter, and then how could they
leaue that, which they neuer had? Reconcile I pray you Hierome
to himselfe.
               
            
            
               Luk. 18. 30.
               
                  The text.
                  And shall not receiue much more in this time, and in the
world to come ⸫ life euerlasting.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Life euerlasting the reward, for leauing or loosing willingly our goods
for Christs sake.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Whereby it more then manifestly appéereth, that the reward
is the méere liberalitie of God the giuer, and not the merit of the
receiuer.
               
            
            
               Luk. 19. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And he said to him. Wel fare thee good seruant, bicause thou
hast been faithfull in a little, thou shalt haue power ouer ⸫ ten
cities. And the second came, saieng, Lord thy pound hath
made fiue pounds. And he said to him. And be thou ouer fiue
cities.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Marke heere against the aduersaries, that the reward of these two
good seruants be diuers, and vnaequall, according to the diuersitie or inaequalitie
of their gains, that is their merits. And yet one receiueth the
penie, Mat. 20. 9. as well as the other, that is heauen, or life euerlasting.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Well marked without a considering cap. First you loue to
wring that out of parables, which you can not prooue by plaine,
and euident testimonies of the scripture. Next it is not in question
betwéene vs, whether there be any inequality of rewards, according
to the inequalitie of mens doing, but whether we may
for our déeds (or as you call them merits) chalenge iustice, life,
heauen and such like, as due debts to vs, for them, or for the deserts
of them. Thirdly if your owne note were true, that though
the one deserued scant halfe so wel, as the other, yet he is rewarded
with heauen, and life euerlasting as well as the other,
it plainely declareth that whatsoeuer difference there was in other
blessings, yet heauen, and life are not merited, but procéed
from the liberalitie of the giuer, otherwise both could not in so
great inequalitie of merit, be equally partakers of it. And how
the peny which enuious men which grudged against the mercy,
and liberality of God were partakers of, must néeds be the kingdome
of heauen, Let them tell that can, for I can not.
               
            
            
               Luk. 19. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And why didst thou not giue my money to the banke, and
I comming might certes with vsurie haue exacted it?
               
               
                  The note.
                  See Matth. 27, 29.&c.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I do not know what you meane by these references, but to
make vs trouble our selues with séeking that, which is not to be
found.
               
            
            
               
               Luk. 19. 
                     •
                  3.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ the daies shal come vpon thee, and thine enimies shal
compasse thee with a trench, and enclose thee about, and straiten
thee on euerie side, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This was fulfilled 40. yeeres after the death of Christ by Titus and
Vespasianus, when besides incredible miseries of famine, and other distresses
there perished eleuen hundred thousand, and were taken captiues
97000. the siege beginning in the very same feast, and greatest
solemnitie of Easter, when they put Christ to death. Euseb. lib. 3. hist.
cap. 6, 7, 8. Ioseph. lib. 7. cap. 17.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It can not be chosen but men of such great reading, haue read
the destruction of Hierusalem, but I maruell that you giue
Rome no warning, to take héede of the like plague.
               
            
            
               Luk. 20. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Tell vs in what power thou dost these things? or who hath
giuen thee this power?
               
               
                  The note.
                  See annotations, Matth. cap. 21. 23.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue séene it, and answer that God of his goodnes hath
furnished vs with gifts, his church hath called vs to the ministery
of the word, and God hath giuen testimonie thereunto by blessing
our labours.
               
            
            
               Luke. 
                     •
                  0. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  A certaine man planted a vineyard, & let it out to husbandmen,
and he was from home a long time.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the marginall annotations, Mark. 12.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  They are alreadie answered.
               
            
            
               Luke▪ 20. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said to them. Render therefore the things that are
Caesars to Caesar, and the things that are Gods to God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So duties must be done to princes, that our dutie to God be not neglected.
See annotations, Matth. cap. 22. 15.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Still you trouble vs with reference to places where you

haue said iust nothing. Upon the 21. verse you haue noted somewhat
though to small purpose, as shall appéere when your large
annotations are answered. In the meane space you giue dutie
neither to God, nor your prince, but to him to whom you owe
none, that is, to the proud prelate of Rome.
               
            
            
               Luke. 20. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  But they that shall be ⸫ counted woorthy of that world, and
the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are married,
&c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Greeke 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      importeth also this much, they that are
made woorthy, to wit, by the grace of God, and so they are in deed woorthy:
as also in the next chapter, verse 36, and 2. Thessalonians, 1. 5.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Why do yée not expressely say, that they are made woorthie by
their own demerits? For that I know you wil haue ioined with
the grace of God, neither do you account any indéed woorthy, but
by their owne inherent iustice. And if it were not for these foolish
imaginations of yours, your note were tolerable. But of these
you kéepe silence, bicause you know not how to wrest the text to
them.
               
            
            
               Luke 21. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  These things which you see, the daies will come wherein
⸫ there shall not be left a stone vpon a stone, that shall not be
destroied.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This was fulfilled 40. yeeres after the death of Christ, the 19. of
August, being the very moneth and day, wherin the Babylonians burnt
it, from the first building thereof by Salomon 1130. yeeres, from the
reedifieng of it, vnder Cyrus 639. Ioseph. de bello Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 10.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is a matter of Chronographie, and therefore I will not
bestow paines to examine your diligence therein.
               
            
            
               Luk. 21. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  Who said, See you be not seduced, for many will come in
my name, saieng, that I am he. And the time is at hand, go not
therefore after them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Manie false prophets, and heretikes. See annot. Mat. 24. Mark. 13.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  As many as go about to tie the Church of Christ to Rome, and
to perswade all men to be partakers of the cup of fornications of

the whoore of Babylon. Your notes as I take it are alreadie answered.
               
            
            
               Luk. 21. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  But before all these things they will ⸫ laie hands vpon you:
and persecute you, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Great persecution of catholike men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  These catholikes neuer knew, what the supremacie of the
bishop of Rome ment.
               
            
            
               Luke. 21. 37.
               
                  The text.
                  And the daies he was teaching in the temple, but the nights
going foorth, he abode in the ⸫ mount that is called Oliuet.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Solitarines or eremitage (as S. Gregorie Nazian saith) is a goodlie
thing. This doth the mount Carmel of Helias teach, Iohns desert, and
that mount vnto which Iesus often retired, and was quietly alone with
himselfe. Ser. 26. de amore pauperum.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Gregorie Nazian neuer imagined or thought of any such superstitious
persons, as your eremites be: neither for such solitarines
as they vse can any thing be soundly brought from these examples.
               
            
            
               Luke. 22. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ This is the chalice the new testament in my blood, which
shall be shed for you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Greeke is heere so plaine, that there was very blood in the chaliceshed
for vs, that Beza saith it is a corruption in the Greeke. See the
annotations vpon this place.
               
               
                  The answere.
                  The Gréeke is so plaine, that no papists of you can by any necessarie
consequence prooue out of this place that very blood is in
the cup. The defence of Master Beza, and a more full answer to
your cauill about this place, I refer to the learned answer of that
reuerend man master Doctor Fulke against Martinius.
               
            
            
               Luke. 22. 30.
               
                  The text.
                  And I dispose to you, as my father disposed to me a kingdome,
that you may eat and drinke vpon my table in my kingdome,
and may sit ⸫ vpon thrones, iudging the twelue tribes of
Israel.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Straight after the former louing checke and admonition he promiseth
to them all that haue been partakers with him of his miseries in
this life, greater preheminence in heauen, than any potentate can haue
in this world, and therefore that they need not be carefull of dignitie or
supremacie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If Christ had appointed Peter in supreme authoritie ouer the
rest, how happened that the Apostles were stil ignorant of it, and
contended stil amongst themselues for superiority, so that Christ
is faine still to giue them new checks and new admonitions for
that matter? Further, touching the louing promise of Christ
wherewith he comforted them, they had béen much to blame if
they would haue doubted of it, as you teach other Christians to
doubt of his promises.
               
            
            
               Luke. 23. 45.
               
                  The text.
                  And the ⸫ sunne was darkened: and the veile of the temple
was rent in the middes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This eclipse was seene and woondered at, as a thing aboue nature of
Dionisius Areopagita at Thebes, when he was yet a pagan. Dionis. ep.
ad Policarp. & epist ad Apollophanem.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The iudgement of men concerning this eclipse is diuers, som
thinke that it was vniuersall, others bicause the stories which do
diligently & exactly set out the notable things of those times, do
not mention it, thinke that therfore it was but in Iewrie onely.
And the authoritie of Dionysius, whom men know to be a counterfet,
doth nothing mooue them to the contrarie. But whether
it were vniuersall or particular, all consent that at that time it
must néedes be a worke aboue nature, and therefore woonderfull
and miraculous. And if you had respected the benefit of your reader,
rather than the maintenance of the vaineglorious opinion of
your much reading, you in the margent, in stéed of citing a bastard
autoritie, would haue giuen vs some good lesson or obseruation,
what that so woonderfull worke of God at that time might
betoken.
               
            
            
               Luke. 24. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And in the ⸫ first of the sabaoth very early they came to the
monument, carieng the spices which they had prepared.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is, first after the sabaoth, which is (saith saint Hierom, q. 4. ad

Hedibiam) dies Dominica, our Lords day wherin he arose. For the weeke
is diuided into the sabaoth, and the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. of the sabaoth. And
the Apostle (1. Cor. 16. 2.) commanded a collection of money to be made
on the first of the sabaoth. Whereby we learne both the keeping of Sunday,
and the churches count of daies by the 2. 3. 4. of the sabaoth to be
Apostolicall, which saint Siluester afterward named 2. 3. 4. feriam, &c.
Breuiar. Roman. Decemb. 31.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That our Lords day in common spéech called sunday is meant
by the first of the sabaoth, and that the obseruation of that in the
churches of Christians was instituted by the Apostles is cléere,
their reckoning of the other daies they left frée to euery countrie
their maner. If your church had had nothing apostolicall left in
it, your defection had béene without all colour plaine and grosse.
But now these, and such like silly remnants, as they serue somewhat
to shadow and to hide you, so are they horribly poisoned
with a multitude of trash of your owne deuising and bringing in.
               
            
            
               Luke. 24. 46.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said vnto them, that so it is written, and it behooued
Christ to suffer, and to rise againe from the dead the third
day: and penance to be preached in his name, and remission
of sinnes vnto all nations beginning from Hierusalem.
               
               
                  The note.
                  As he shalbe Anathema (saith Saint Augustine) which preacheth
that Christ neither suffered nor rose againe, bicause we learne by the
Gospel that it behooued Christ to suffer, and to rise againe the third day:
so he shall also be anathema, whosoeuer preacheth the church to be else
where then in the communion of all nations: bicause by the selfe same
Gospel we learne in the words next following, and penance to be preached
in his name, and remission of sins through out all nations. Aug.
epist. 48.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  How happened it, that in so many conflicts as Augustine hath
with the Donatists, that he neuer doeth pronounce Anathema
against them, for appealing from the sentence of the Bishop of
Rome? And why doth he neuer vrge against them, that the bishop
of Rome could not in giuing sentence and iudgement erre?
For if he had beléeued the principles of popish diuinitie, these had
béene very materiall points against the Donatists. But in this
anathema here by you rehearsed, he doth as directlie strike the
Romanists as the Donatists. For Rome hath rent hir selfe from

the churches of the East parts, & also from as many of the West,
as do not consent to her abominations and fornications: so that
whosoeuer at this day do place Gods church there, doeth forsake
the communion of the church of all nations, which was, is, and
shall be. And if Augustine were aliue againe now, he would impugne
the church of Rome with the same reasons that he vsed
against the Donatists then.
               
            
         
         
            IOHN.
            
               Iohn 1. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  This was he of whom I spake, He that shall come after me, ⸫
is made before me, because he was before me.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He is preferred and made of more dignitie and excellencie then I, bicause
he was before me and all things eternall God.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I know that diuers and sundrie good men, and excellent interpreters
of the scriptures do explane this as you doo, yet notwithstāding
I rather assent to them, which do not refer it to the time,
or eternitie of Christes being, but to the dignitie and excellencie
of his person.
               
            
            
               Iohn 1. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  Art thou ⸫ the prophet? and he answered, no.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Belike the Iewes ignorantlie vnderstood not the place in Deuteronomie
of Christ, and therefore they aske also, whether he be the prophet
there spoken of. See also cap. 7. 40.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Whether the Iewes had in this their question reference to
that place of Deuteronomie, or no, it is vncertaine, neither can
anie proofe be made of it but coniecturall. The like I say to your
other place, cap. 7. 40. and yet we do not doubt of their blindnes
and ignorance in not vnderstanding the Scriptures, which appeareth
manifestly in their reply to Iohn, after he had told them,
I am the voice of one crying, &c.
               
            
            
               Iohn 1. 26.
               
                  The text.
                  Iohn answered them, saying, ⸫ I baptize in water: but there
hath stood in the middest of you, whom you know not, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He doth often heere signifie the great difference of his baptisme and
of Christs, as of his person and Christs. See annot. Matth. 3.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  We haue often answered, that you doo but bleare the eies of
the simple with the name of Christs baptisme, which they take
for the baptisme of euerie minister in the church, and being so taken,
there is no difference betwéene Iohns baptisme and it.
Otherwise in this place and in the like, Iohn considereth of him
selfe as of a seruant or minister, and of Christ, as of his master,
and Lord, and attributeth to him selfe the outward worke and
washing in baptisme, and to Christ the inward grace and workemanship.
In which comparison we learne the general difference
betwéene all ministers and Christ, their worke and his. Your
annotations are séene, and they are like your selues, slaunderous,
lying, vntrue, and shall bée answered in the generall answer to
your annotations.
               
            
            
               Iohn 1. 41.
               
                  The text.
                  He findeth his brother Simon, and saith to him, we haue
found ⸫ Messiah, which is being interpreted, Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Messias in Hebrue, in Greeke Christ, in English anointed, to wit,
with the spirituall oile of grace aboue his brethren. Psalme 44.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You must néedes exempt the pope from amongst the brethren
of Christ, for he is not Christs inferior in grace, if that which is
attributed to him by popish parasites be true.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 1. 42.
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus looking vpon him, said, Thou art Simon the son
of Iona: thou shall be called ⸫ Cephas, which is interpreted
Peter.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Cephas in Siriacke, and Peter in Greeke, in English Rocke. See Matthew
16. 18.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I maruell that Paul knew not this mysterie:1. Cor. 3. 11. for he taught
to build vpon Christ and not vpon Peter.1. Peter. 2. 3. And Peter though he
make all beléeuers liuely stones, yet teacheth none other chéefe
stone but our Lord and Sauiour Christ.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 2. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  And after the cheefe steward tasted the ⸫ water made wine,
and knew not whence it was, but the ministers knew that had
drawen the water, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  He that seeth water turned into wine, needeth not to dispute or doubt
how Christ changed bread into his bodie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  He that séeth and knoweth the perpetuall phrase and maner of
speaking of the holy Ghost touching sacraments, will woonder
that men should be so blind, or else so wilfull as to dispute and
contend for such a change of bread into the bodie of Christ, as neither
can stand with that phrase of spéech, nor with the nature of
a sacrament, neither yet with the articles of our beléefe.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 3. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  The spirit breatheth where ⸫ he will, and thou hearest his
voice, but thou knowest not when he commeth, and whither
he goeth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We follow rather saint Augustine, and those ancient fathers which
most commonly vnderstand this place of the holy Ghost, and not of wind,
although both be good.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And we do follow saint Augustine, and those fathers which do
interpret this to be meant of the wind, bicause both the hearing
of the sound of it, and the force of the comparison, which must
néedes be betwixt things diuers, doth inforce it to be the truer.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 4. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  When Iesus therefore vnderstood that the pharisies heard
that Iesus maketh mo disciples, and baptizeth than Iohn,
(howbeit ⸫ Iesus did not baptize, but his disciples) he left Iewrie,
and went againe into Galile.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He did not baptize ordinarily, yet that he did baptize his Apostles,
saint Augustine thinketh it very probably. Epist. 108.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Augustine doubteth not, but that the Apostles of Christ were
baptized either by Christ, or by Iohn afore they tooke vpon them
to baptize, but by whether he is not resolute, neither is it materiall.
But that some of them were by Iohn baptized it is manifest,
bicause they were Iohns disciples afore they were Christs Apostles.Iohn. 1. 37.
                  
               
            
            
               Iohn. 4. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  There commeth ⸫ a woman of Samaria to draw water, Iesus
said to hir, Giue me to drinke.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  This woman is a figure of the church not yet iustified, but now to be
iustified, August. tract. 15. in Iohannem.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You willingly follow allegories, bicause many times they are
far fetched, and serue you to dally withall: howbeit I do not sée
to what vse this may serue you. I do not thinke that you your
selues do thinke, that this womans fiue husbands were either the
fiue bookes of Moses, or hir fiue senses, which notwithstanding
Augustine affirmeth in the same treatise. The lessons which the
plaine letter do giue do both more edifie, and are more safe.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 4. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  How doest thou being a Iew, aske of me to drink, which am
a Samaritane woman? For the Iewes ⸫ do not communicate
with the Samaritans.
               
               
                  The note.
                  There were many other causes why the faithfull Iewes could not abide
the Samaritans, but their precise abstaining from their companie
and conuersation, was their scismaticall temple and seruice in mount
Garizim.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is very true that those which make a scisme, and continue
therein, are not to be communicated with of faithful Christians,
and yet I thinke in that corrupt state of the Iewish church, the
other causes were rather stronger than that.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 4. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  If thou didst know the gift of God, and who is he that said
to thee, Giue me to drinke▪ thou perhaps wouldest haue asked
of him, and he would haue giuen thee ⸫ liuing water.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He speaketh of his baptizing in the holy Ghost. See Iohn 7. 39.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  He speaketh of giuing his holy spirit to them that in faith aske
and require it.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 4. 39.
               
                  The text.
                  And of that citie many beleeued in him of the Samaritans
for the words of the ⸫ woman giuing testimonie, that he told
me all things whatsoeuer I haue done.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This woman mysticallie being the church, it is heere signified that

they, which at the first beleeue bicause the church teacheth so, afterward
be much confirmed finding it in the Scriptures also, and by other instructions.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is here signified by what weake and vnlikelie instruments
God can worke, in drawing men to the knowledge of him selfe,
and embracing his mercies and graces offered. And further wée
learne, that as the authoritie and credit of this woman, by whom
the Samaritans were first conuerted, was not greater therefore
then the credit and authoritie of our Sauiour Christ, by whome
the Samaritans were now confirmed: so the authoritie of the
church first drawing men to beleeue, is not greater then the authoritie
of the scriptures, by which men be after confirmed in the
truth of their beléefe. As for your addition of other instructions,
if you meane thereby your vnwritten verities, or some such like
stuffe, you might haue kept it for your owne stoore.
               
            
            
               Iohn 5. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And there is at Hierusalem, vpon ⸫ probatica a pond which
in Hebrew is surnamed Bethsaida, hauing fiue porches.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By our Latine text and the Greeke, this miraculous pond was in or
vpon probatica, that is, a place where sheepe to be sacrificed were kept:
but by other Latin copies Saint Hierome and some Greeke fathers, probatica
is the very pond it selfe, so called, bicause the sheepe of sacrifice
were there washed.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Whether the pond were probatica, or in, or vpon probatica,
whether shéepe were sold there, washed there, or kept there, it is
not materiall nor woorth the contending for.
               
            
            
               Iohn 5. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  Maruaile not at this, bicause the houre commeth, wherein
all that are in the graues shall heare his voice, and they that
haue ⸫ done good things shal come forth into the resurrection
of life.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not faith onlie, but good and ill deeds shalbe counted, and accordinglie
rewarded, at the day of iudgement.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And who denieth this, and yet then the onlie instrument of
vniting vs to Christ our righteousnesse, shalbe faith onlie & alone.
               
            
            
               Iohn 5. 39.
               
                  The text.
                  Search the ⸫ scriptures, for you thinke in them to haue life
euerlasting: and the same are they that giue testimonie of me.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Catholikes search the scriptures, and finde there Peters and his successors
primacie, the reall presence, the priests power to forgiue sinnes,
iustification by faith and good workes, virginitie preferred before matrimonie,
breach of the vow of continencie damnable, voluntarie pouertie,
penance, almes, and good deeds meritorious, diuers rewards in heauen
according to diuerse merits, and such like.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Whom haue we héere? Thraso, or Gnato? For this can not
procéed, but either from a vainglorious vaunter, or from a filthie
flatterer. You catholikes may as e
                        •
                     silie wring water out of a
flint, as find in the scriptures that, which is not in them, as in the
particulars which you haue reckoned, in their particular places
are, or shalbe shewed. And to the end your credulous followers
may be the lesse able to espie your fraud herein, you haue hitherto
kept them safe from searching the scriptures, and now, when
by Gods good benefit you can no longer kéep them from the scriptures,
you haue sent them the scriptures in their mother tongue,
not to the end they should search, but corrupted, and of purpose obscured
and darkened, to the end to terrifie and feare men from
searching: for if with humilitie and hartie desire of truth, they
would diligently search the scriptures, the testimonies of them
would driue them to leaue you, and to flie to Christ for life.
               
            
            
               Iohn 5. 43.
               
                  The text.
                  I am come in the name of my father, and you receiue me
not: if ⸫ another shall come in his owne name, him will you
receiue.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth specially Antichrist, then how can the pope be he, seeing
the Iewes receiue him not.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  He meaneth anie false and forged Christ, and not Antichrist,
of which sort it is well knowen, there were diuers both before,
and after Christ, whom the Iewes were very readie to embrace.
And it is manifest, that they were not onlie readie to receiue
such impostors & seducers, as vaunted them selues to be Christ,
but also by a solemne embassage the prouoked and procured, (as
much as in them lay) Iohn Baptist to haue,Iohn 1. 19. and take that honor
vpon him. Further, you forget that which some of you haue much
contended for, namely, the force of the Gréeke article, by addition
whereof in other places, you will inforce Antichrist to be meant

of some particular man, but héere that must be meant of Antichrist,
which neither hath article added, nor yet can possibly with
anie probabilitie bée restrained to any one particular person.
Thus may your holie father be Antichrist still, for any let that is
in this place.
               
            
            
               Ioh. 6. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  But other boates came in from Tyberias beside the place
where they had eaten the bread, our Lord ⸫ giuing thanks.
               
               
                  The note.
                  These words do plainly import, that the giuing thanks was an effectuall
blessing of the bread, and working the multiplication thereof.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  These words do plainly import, that the blessing which the
other Euangelists speake of, was nothing else, but praier and
thankesgiuing, by the which the creatures of God are sanctified,
to the vse and behoofe of men.
               
            
            
               Ioh. 6. 32.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Amen, Amen, I say to you, Moyses gaue you not the bread
from heauen, but my father giueth you the true bread from
heauen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Why we keepe the Hebrew
                        •
                     word Amen and translate it not, See the
annot. cap. 8. vers. 34.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is a cloake for the raine, if you had only abstained from
translating such words, as vse hath vpon occasion made common
to other toongs, we would not greatly blame you, but your hunting,
and séeking vnder that, and the like pretences, to leaue
things as darke, as you can, is that, which men do iustlie condemne
in you.
               
            
            
               Ioh. 7. 
                     •
                  ,
               
                  The text.
                  And the festiual day of the Iewes ⸫ Scenopegia was at hand.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Scenopegia (Leuit. 23. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) is the feast of Tabernacles which
the Iewes kept, from the seauenth of October, for eight daies togither by
Gods commandement, for a memorie that their fathers dwelt by Gods
protection fortie yeeres in tabernacles, or tents, and not in houses, comming
out of Egypt, See Leuit. 23. 34.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You might haue kept your margent vnblotted, if it had stoode
with your pleasure, to haue translated Scenopegia. The place in
Leuiticus would sufficiently haue shewed the cause of the institution.
               
            
            
               
               Ioh. 7. 17
               
                  The text.
                  If any man ⸫ will do the will of him, he shall vnderstand of
the doctrine, whether it be of God, or I speake of my selfe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The way to come to know the truth is to liue well.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The way to come to know, and vnderstand the truth, is wholie
to renounce, & resigne our owne will, and to giue our selues
ouer wholie to the obedience of God. For the Lord himselfe wil
teach the humble,Psal. 25. 9. 12. and méeke: euen them that feare him.
               
            
            
               Ioh. 7. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ He that speaketh of himselfe, seeketh his owne glorie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is spoken of Antichrist specially, and it is true in all heretikes, Augustin.
tract. 29. in Euangelium Io.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If euer it was verified of any, it is most true of the bishop of
Rome. The séeking of his glorie, is the cause of all the mischiefes
wrought by wars, in the world at this present. If we will not
therefore be snarled in the snares of Antichrist, we must séeke
his onely glory that created vs, as in the same treatise Augustine
doth aduise vs.
               
            
            
               Ioh. 7. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  The multitude answered and said, ⸫ thou hast a diuell, who
seeketh to kill thee?
               
               
                  The note.
                  No maruell, when these speake thus to Christ himselfe, if 
                        •
                     eretikes
call his vicar Antichrist.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  No maruell though sincere Christians be estéemed, regarded,
and spoken of by papists, and atheistes, as Christ him selfe
was by the Iewes. As for any vicar of Christ, we know none,
but euerie prince, and magistrate within his owne dominion,
and euery pastor in his owne flocke.
               
            
            
               Ioh. 7. 39.
               
                  The text.
                  And this he said of the spirit that they should receiue, which
beleeued in him: ⸫ for as yet the spirit was not giuen bicause
Iesus was not glorified.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This was fulfilled on Whit sunday Acts 2. and afterward alwaies by

imposition of hands in the Sacrament of Confirmation visibly in the primitiue
church, and inuisibly to the end of the world.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your sacrament of confirmation, who instituted it? What promise
was giuen to it? What signes were appointed? What signification
had they? Who were authorised to minister it? Whether
the bishop alone? Or euerie priest?
               
            
            
               Iohn. 7. 50.
               
                  The text.
                  Nicodemus said to them, ⸫ he that came to him by night,
who was one of them, doth our law iudge a man, vnlesse it first
heare him, and know what he doth?
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ hath alwaies some good euen amongst the wicked, which secretly
serue him, and by wise delaies, auert the execution of vniust lawes
against him and his people, as Nicodemas and Gamaliel.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Christ hath his amongst euery sort of men, and often worketh
great benefit to his church by the weakest of those that beare good
will to his truth.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 8. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ He that is without sinne of you, let him first throwe the
stone at hir.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We cannot conueniently reprehend or condemne other mens faults if
our selues be giltie of the same, or other greater. Cyrill. in Io. See annot.
Matt. 7. 1.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You are great clarks, that are so liberall of your fathers in
matters▪ néedlesse. And yet neither Christ nor Cirill meant that
none should reprehend others, but such as are faultlesse themselues.
But onely they meant to discouer the hypocrisie of men,
which neuer looking vpon them selues, how great soeuer their
faults be, yet are seuere censurers of others.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 8. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus said, ⸫ Neither wil I condemne thee. Go and now
sinne no more.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine by this example of our master prooueth, that clergiemen
specially should be giuen much to mercie: and that they ought
often, as the cause and time require, to get pardon of the secular magistrates
for offenders that be penitent. Epist. 54.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  How wel you follow this which you alledge out of Augustine
it is manifest, in that the secular magistrates are stirred vp by
you to extreme cruelties and most horrible bloodsheds and murders,
as all the world can witnes. If euer mercie were exiled
from men, sure it is banished from amongst papists. Which néedeth
no proofe: for in all places where the heresie of poperie is
fauored and vpheld with the sword of authoritie, experience teacheth
it. Your horrible tragedies my hart panteth to thinke vpon,
and my pen trembleth to record. There are in all countries so
many witnesses of your horrible cruelties, that it is néedlesse to
set downe any examples.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 8. 26.
               
                  The text.
                  Iesus said to them, ⸫ The beginning who also speake to you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So read S. Cirill, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine expounding it of
Christs person, that he is the beginning or cause of all creatures.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you would haue had your reading maruelled at, you should
héere haue brought vs some other fathers. For, for these we
thinke you are beholding to Erasmus and Bezaes annotations,
whence you borrowed them. But that you professe of purpose to
follow the old Latin translation, and therfore could not translate
otherwise, it had béene no hard matter to haue shewed, that you
willingly erre with them whom you follow.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 8. 31.
               
                  The text.
                  Iesus therefore said to them that beleeued him, the Iewes,
If you ⸫ abide in my word, you shall be my disciples in deede.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Onely faith is not sufficient without perseuerance or abiding in the
keeping of his commandements.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Onely fire is not sufficient to warme a man standing by it
without heate, and in the like order you do but abuse men in diuorcing
things inseparable.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 8. 36.
               
                  The text.
                  If therefore the sonne make you free, you shall be free in
deede.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Man was neuer without free will, but hauing the grace of Christ

his will is truly made free (as saint Augustine saith) from seruitude of
sinne also, tractatu 41. in Euang. Io.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you meane such fréedome of will, as is in thraldom and seruitude
of sinne to serue sinne willingly, we will easily grant that
man was neuer without it. If you meane otherwise, you abuse
saint Augustine for that, he meant not. Yea when we are fréed
by Christ, he speaketh thus in the same treatise: Partly libertie,
partly seruitude, libertie is not yet whole, pure and full, bicause
full eternitie is not yet. It is strange that you are not ashamed
to abuse men thus with the fathers.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 8. 39.
               
                  The text.
                  If you be the children of Abraham, ⸫ do the works of Abraham.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not onely faith but good works also make men the children of Abraham,
according as saint Iames also speaketh of Abrahams works, cap. 2.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you gather no better consequences at Rhemes, none of
mine shall learne Logike there. Howe holdeth this; Do the
works of Abraham, if yée be the sonnes of Abraham, ergo to do
the works of Abraham, make men the sonnes of Abraham. It is
a shame for children to glorie in the goodnes, and vertue of their
parents, and not a whit to resemble them therein. This is it that
Christ reprooueth the Iewes for. As for Iames speaketh of iustifieng
by works, but of being made the children of Abraham by
works, I finde there iust, and iumpe nothing.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 8. 44.
               
                  The text.
                  You are of your father the diuell, and the desires of your father
you will do. He was a ⸫ man killer from the beginning,
he stood not in the veritie, bicause veritie is not in him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Augustine compareth heretikes, in their spirituall murther, by driuing
Christian men out of the church, to the diuell that droue our parents
out of paradise. Cont. Lit. Petili. lib. 2. cap. 13.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The diuell did bereaue our first parents of their happy estate,
by making them beléeue they should be more happie, and blessed:
euen so you with the swéete name of the church do allure, draw,
and entise men from the true catholike, and vniuersall church,
and so bring them to the pit of perdition.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn. 8. 49.
               
                  The text.
                  Iesus answered ⸫ I haue no diuell: but I do honor my father
and you haue dishonored me.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He denieth not that he is a Samaritane, bicause he is our keeper or
protector, as the word signifieth, and bicause he is indeed that mercifull
Samaritane in the parable of the wounded man, Luk. 10. 33. August.
tract. 43. in Iohn.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Augustine (as some other also of the fathers) is much delighted
with allegories, sometime more then enough. But why did
you not spare Augustine héere, where you néeded him not, and
vse him afore, in that you knew would be denied to you, to prooue
that works make men the children of Abraham, what? is it not?
bicause you could get no helpe at his hand?
               
            
            
               Iohn. 9. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Iesus answered, ⸫ neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents:
but that the works of God may be manifested in him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Though manie infirmities fall for sinne, yet not all, some comming
for probation, and some sent, that God by the cure thereof may be glorified.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Men are not rashly to be iudged of for the afflictions, or the
infirmities, which God laieth vpon them, or theirs. Considering
that God hath diuers ends, & purposes, for the which he scourgeth
his owne chosen children, as wel as the vngodly, wicked, and
reprobate.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 9. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  The night commeth ⸫ when no man can worke.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The time of working, and meriting, is in this life: after death we
can deserue no more by our deeds, but must onely receiue good or ill, according
to the difference of works heere.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If this note be true, then how excuse you your selues in making
men pay for your praiers, your pardons, masses, diriges,
trentals, and such like trash for the soules of their friends departed,
séeing works after death do them no good, and séeing they
must receiue according to that they haue done in their bodies,

whether it be good, or bad. Are you not ashamed to cosin your credulous
followers? Your coupling of works and merits, déedes
and deseruing, is not woorth the noting, bicause it cannot now
besot any, but méere fooles.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 9. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  Go ⸫ wash in the poole of Siloe which is interpreted sent.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This was a figure of baptisme, to which al men borne in sin and blindnes
are sent for health & sight, Ambrose Lib. 3. cap. 2. de Sacramentis.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Stil we must sée your great reading, and your followers must
thinke that there is no such clearks in the whole world againe.
The truth of Ambroses spéech héerin is not woorth the discussing,
but it is ynough to you, that a father speaketh it, if it be not against
anie thing determined by your church of Rome.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 9. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  They therefore againe called the man that had beene blind
and said to him, ⸫ Giue glorie to God, we know that this man
is a sinner.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So saie the heretikes when they derogate from miracles done by
Saints, or their relikes, pharisaically pretending the glorie of God. As
though it were not Gods glory when his saints do it by his power & vertue,
yea his greater glorie, that doth such things by his seruants, and by
the meanest things belonging to them, as Peters shadow, Act. 5. and
Paules napkin, Act. 9.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If by pretence of giuing glorie to God, the pharisies had not
gone about to derogate from the glory of our Lord and Sauiour
Christ, their words had not béene faultie. We confesse that by
the smaller and weaker things God worketh, the more his glory
thereby appéereth. Yet that maketh nothing for your impudent
shamelesse forged miracles, as in making our Ladie a chappell
kéeper (I will not saie a baude) in a nunnerie xv. yéeres togither,
to couer the vile life of Beatrix the Nun,Mille miracula beatae Mariae. who plaied the whoore
so many yéeres togither. Do you thinke that such miracles as
this will make to the glorie of God? And yet your bookes of lies
are full of them.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 9. 39.
               
                  The text.
                  And Iesus saide to him, For iudgement came I into this

world, ⸫ that they that see not, may see, and they that see, may
become blind.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By this we see that this miracle was not onely marueilous and beneficiall
to the blind, but also significatiue of taking away spirituall blindnes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is very true that the miracles of Christ were not lik popish
miracles, strange things onlie to be wondered at, but foretold by
the prophet Esaie, beneficiall to the parties, for whom they were
done or wrought: and significatiue, that is, bearing witnes to the
truth of his doctrine. All which properties the lying signes and
wonders of the popish church want.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 10. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  He that entreth not by doore into the folde of sheepe, but
climeth vp another way, he is ⸫ a thiefe and a robber.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The thiefe is the heretike speciallie, and anie other that vnlawfully
breake in vpon the sheepe, to kill and to destroy them by false doctrine
and otherwise.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Poperie is a dunghill compacted of the shreds of many heresies,
Christ being the onlie doore, and heauen the folde, prouided
for the safe kéeping of Gods flocke, the papists must néedes bée
théeues and robbers, for that they will clime into heauen by many
waies, besides Christ.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 10. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And when he hath let foorth his owne sheepe, hee ⸫ goeth
before them, and the sheepe follow him, bicause they knowe
his voice.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is the fashion of Iurie and other countries, signifiyng that the
shepherd or pastor must teach the sheepe, and not they him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Onlie England haue their shéepe and other cattell wander abroad
harmelesse, hauing no kéeper, which in other countries is
counted a miracle. Your signification we accept, and therefore
conclude that you are none of Christs shéepe, bicause you take vpon
you to set your shepherd to schoole. Further, it is to be noted
how continuallie the scripture calleth the shéepe of Christ to the
hearkening to his voice, contrarie to the papists, who call all to
the harkening to, and obeying of their church.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn. 10. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  As the father knoweth me, and I know my father, & ⸫ I yeeld
my life for my sheepe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christs death was so necessarie for the flocke, that when he might haue
escaped, he voluntarilie offered him selfe to death for his flocke.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That Christs death was necessarie in word you graunt, but
when it cōmeth to péecing of it with other parts of your doctrine,
it must stand for a worke néedlesse, else it can not hold togither.
For if the blood of saint Thomas could helpe vs to heauen, what
néeded Christ to haue shed his blood for vs?
               
            
            
               Iohn. 10. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ other sheepe I haue that are not of this fold, them also
I must bring, and they shall heare my voice, and there shall be
made one fold and one pastor.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth the Church of the Gentils.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that Christ made of Iewes and Gentils one folde,
and of both he, and not the pope is the one only pastor and head.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 10. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  My father, ⸫ that which he hath giuen me, is greater then al.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Another reading is, my father that hath giuen me, &c.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In diuers readings you choose that which is most obscure, and
can not carie any true sense, if it be weied with the circumstances
of the place, and leaue that which is plaine, and carieth an inestimable
comfort to all that loue God, and best agréeth the Gréeke
originall.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 11. 44.
               
                  The text.
                  Iesus said to them, ⸫ Loose him, and let him go.
               
               
                  The note.
                  S. Cyril lib. 7. cap. vlt. in Ioh. and Augustine tract. 49. in Ioh. applie
this to the Apostles, and priests authority of absoluing sinners affirming
that Christ doth reuiue none from sinne, but in the church, and by the
priests ministerie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Wée beléeue that the promise of life eternall pertaineth to

none, but to such as are or shalbe of the Church of God, and that
the ordinarie meanes, whereby God effectuallie calleth men to
be of his church, is the ministerie of his woord. But we dare not
tie God to his ordinarie meanes, sith he extraordinarilie called
Paul and others. But how well this place is applied to the
ordinarie authoritie of ministers, or priestes in absoluing, I
will spare to speake, for reuerence of them whom you alledge. It
is well that the church hath plaine euidence of scriptures for the
authoritie of binding and loosing, for if it staid it selfe vpon the authoritie
of men, wresting such places as this to that purpose, it
were but a poore sillie comfort, that the conscience of a poore penitent
sinner, could reape by the churches absolution.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 11. 48.
               
                  The text.
                  If we let him alone so, all will beleeue in him: and the Romans
will come, and ⸫ take away our place and nation.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All men but speciall nations must take heed, that whiles to saue their
temporall state, they forsake God: they loose not both, as the Iewes did,
August. tract. 49. in Io.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Therefore we vndergo all the perils and dangers, which by
your stirring vp, the force and might of all the popish princes in
the world can bring vpon vs, rather than to displease God, by giuing
ouer his truth, wherwith he hath blessed vs: least we should
prouoke his heauie indignation against vs, and so perish as the
Iewes haue done before vs.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 12. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Marie therfore tooke a pound of ointment of right spikenard,
precious, and annointed the feete of Iesus, and wiped his
feete with hir haire, and the house was filled with the odour of
the ointment.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Of this womans extraordinarie offices of deuotion, and how acceptable
they were to Christ, See the annot. Mat. 26.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bicause those annotations are to receiue answer by themselues,
therefore I thought not good to touch them here.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 12. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  Iesus therefore said, Let hir alone that she may keepe it for
the day of my ⸫ buriall.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  The deuout offices of balming and annointing the dead bodies of the
faithfull are here also allowed.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And we do not disallow whatsoeuer in buriall serueth either
for comfort of them that be aliue, and for the honest and comely
bringing the dead to the graue, being the last duties that men
can do to their faithfull friends.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 12. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  For the poore you haue alwaies with you, but me you shall
not haue alwaies.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not in visible and mortal condition to receiue almes of you, and such
like offices for supply of my necessitie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And why do you not say not in bodie nor in humanitie? Bicause
you would faine with some color shift of Christs bodily absence
from the earth, for the better safetie and defence of your reall
prese
                        •
                     ce in the sacrament. You are full of fathers in matters
n
                        •
                     edlesse, why do you not in this place so often repeated bring vs
at the least one plaine place of some father, affirming that he is
not simply absent in bodie from vs, but onely in such sort as you
do imagine? Is it not a secret confession that all antiquitie is against
you? I maruell that you are so impudent still to glory and
to cry, that your faith hath continued almost xvj. hundred yéeres,
when you know that in a number of things you are not able to
bring foorth any true authoritie of halfe the age.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 12. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  And there were certaine Gentils of them that came vp to
adore in the festiuall day.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We may see there a great difference where a man pray or adore, at
home or in the church and holy places. When the Gentils also came of
deuotion a pilgrimage to the temple in Hierusalem.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Now pilgrimages are prooued, and that full pithily. For the
Gentiles came to adore at Hierusalem. When you can find such
expresse commandement of God for running to saint Iames of
Compostella, or our Ladie of Walsingham, or visiting the holie
sepulchre, as was for al both Iewes and conuerts then to appéere

before the Lord at Hierusalem, then your reason will hold. Otherwise
it is as much as if I should say,Deut. 12. 5. The Iewes and conuerts
of the Gentils obeied the commandement of God in going
to Hierusalem at the feast daies to worship: Ergo it is lawful for
me to go a roging to what place of pilgrimage in the world séemeth
best in mine owne eies without further warrant. As for
the difference of publike and priuate praier, and of seruing God
at home, and in the common assemblies are both knowen and
practised amongst vs.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 12. 40.
               
                  The text.
                  Therfore they ⸫ could not beleeue, bicause Esay said againe,
he hath blinded their eies, and indurated their harts, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If any man aske (saith saint Augustine) why they could not beleeue:
I answer roundly, bicause they would not. Tract. 33. in Io. See annotations
Matth. 13. 15. Mark. 4. 12.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that the corruption of mans will is the cause of all
euill and wickednes in man. But héere either your printer made
a fault, or your note booke deceiued you, for it is in 53. treatise▪
And I muze why you should so much couet so force Augustine to
speake for you, séeing that you know that of all other he is most
earnest in this cause of frée will against you. For in the same
place he acknowledgeth the iust iudgement of God vpon them in
leauing them in blindnes, and not helping them to sée. And teacheth
vs in inquiring why God would so leaue them, to crie out
with the Apostle: O the depth of the riches of the wisedome and
knowledge of God, &c. Which exclamation sheweth, that Augustine
had an eie to somwhat more than their will, yea and to such
a somwhat, as was not within compasse and reach of reason.
Your annotations containing no matter greatly woorth the answering,
I refer ouer to the generall answer of them.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 12. 42.
               
                  The text.
                  But yet of the princes also many beleeued in him: but ⸫ for
the pharisies they did not confesse, that they might not be cast
out of the synagogue.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This is the case of many principall men in such countries, where heresie
hath the vpper hand, who know and beleeue the Catholike faith, but
making choise to keepe mans fauour rather then Gods, they dare not

confesse the same. Such may pray that God and the world agree togither▪
for else it is seene whose part they will take.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Turne ouer this matter to those countries where papistrie
preuaileth, for as there is greater compulsion by crueltie, so also
there are more, who knowing the truth dare not confesse it for
feare of men. Such God in his good time will make to know by
lamentable experience, what it is to feare man more than God:
and what follie it is, for sauing the body a litle while, to cast away
body and soule eternally.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 13. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  And when ⸫ supper was done, wheras the diuel had now put
into the hart of Iudas Iscariot the sonne of Simon, to betraie
him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By Supper he meaneth the eating of the Paschall lambe, for the institution
of the blessed Sacrament was after this.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note is true, and therefore shall receiue no replie.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 13. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  For certaine thought, because Iudas had ⸫ the purse, that Iesus
had said to him, Buie those things that are needfull for vs
to the festiuall day: or that he should go giue some thing to
the poore.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ had som prouision before hand giuen him by the collections of
the faithfull, which was vsed both in his owne necessities, and bestowed
vpon the poore.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We learne therby the vse of mony, to serue both our owne necessitie,
and the necessity of others that are poore, and in néed and
miserie. And we sée the great abuse in the contrarie in the popish
prelats, heaping vp great treasures togither, and not spending
them, but either riotouslie vpon voluptuousnesse, or els filthily to
maintaine warres and troubles in the world.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 14. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  In my fathers house there be ⸫ manie mansions, if not, I
would haue told you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  These mansions signifie differences of glory in heauen. Hierom. libro.
2. aduer. Iouin.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Howe differences of glorie in heauen can be drawen out of
this, you your selues know not, therefore you rest vpon Saint
Hieroms credit, being loath to cracke your owne: you might also
haue added Augustine vpon this place, but I had rather séeke to
be sure of a place there, than contend about difference and diuersitie
of glorie there. The place is plaine, Christs meaning is euident,
that there are roomes ynough in his fathers house for all
that are his: whatsoeuer is added to this, is but the dreames of
men.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 14. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  If you ⸫ loue me keepe my commandements.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is then possible both to loue Christ, and to keepe his commandements.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To kéepe is one thing, to fulfill by kéeping is another thing.
No man denieth that there are good endeuors in those that loue
Christ, and that in some measure they obserue and kéepe his commandements,
namely, according to the measure of loue which
they haue obtained. But the perfect and continuall abiding in all
things commanded, to which condition do this and liue is annexed,
that we say is not possible for vs in this vale of miserie. And so
you do but deceiue men with doubtfulnes of spéech.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 14. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  I will aske my father, and he will giue you another ⸫ paraclete,
that he may abide with you for euer.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Paraclete by interpretation is either a comforter or an aduocate, and
therefore to translate by any one of them onely, is perhaps to abridge the
sense of this place.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You would not willinglie haue anie part of the Scripture
translated into English, and therfore no maruel though you séeke
an excuse for not translating paraclete. Our translators haue
translated it comforter, whereby how the sense of this place is abridged,
perhaps you would haue told vs if you could. But now
hauing laid all your heads togither, and finding nothing that carieth
any shew of truth, you come in with perhaps it may be abridged,
perhaps no wise man will beléeue you, but either such
as be wilfully blind, or méerely ignorant.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn. 14. 26.
               
                  The text.
                  But the paraclete the holie Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my name, he shall ⸫ teach you all things, and suggest
vnto you all things whatsoeuer I shall say to you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotations vpon the 16. chapter, verse 12.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We will sée it, and answer it when we come to it.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 15. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  Euerie branch in me not bearing fruit he will take it away.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ hath some branches in his bodie mysticall that be fruitlesse,
therefore ill li
                        •
                     ers also may be members of Christ and the church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you hold not this fast, your popes and their cardinals may
be no members of Christ, nor of his church. For I suppose you
your selues will not vndertake to defend their liues. But hauing
continued fruitlesse, you cannot denie but that their end is to be
cast of, and so to be reprobates. You know it is one thing to be in
name and outward account a Christian, it is another thing to be
in déede and in the account of him that cannot be deceiued. For
according to that account, he that abideth in Christ is so far from
continuing a wicked life, that he bringeth foorth much fruit.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 15. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  And euery one that beareth fruit, he will purge it ⸫ that it
may bring more fruit.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Man may continually increase in iustice and sanctification so long as
he liueth.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It were not altogither vntimely to tell you of your subtill ioining
of iustice and sanctification, which you do, bicause your followers
should not be able to discerne betwixt iustification and
santification, which you continually confound, iustice being common
to them both, but in sundrie respects. For if they did espie
the difference, then confidence in inherent iustice, which you
maintaine them in, would soone vanish away. And yet by experience
all good Christians know, that God of his infinite goodnes
doth make his saints from time to time more fruitfull, and more
and more to abound in holines.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn. 15. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Now you are cleane for the ⸫ word which I haue spoken to
you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine expoundeth it of the sacramentall word of baptisme,
and not as heretikes do of preaching onely. Tract. 80. in Io.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I pray you tell vs what heretikes they be that denie the sacraments
to be annexed by God vnto his word, and that in this
worke of our purging and making cleane? but you will neuer
leaue your lieng. We do not so speake of preaching onely, that
we exclude any helpe which God hath giuen vs besides. But you
exclude the word when you tie grace to the outward worke of
your vnpreaching priests. And you adde a number of helps of
your owne, as salt, spittle, oile, creame, and such like trumperie,
which God neuer appointed to his church, but the proud presumption
of man hath brought in.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 15. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  If you ⸫ abide in me and my words abide in you, you shall
aske what thing soeuer you will, and it shall be done to you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If a scismatike pray neuer so much, he is not heard, bicause he remaineth
not in the bodie of Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I conclude therefore that the praiers of papists are vnprofitable,
bicause they haue cut themselues from the ancient catholike
church of Christ, and therefore remaine not in his bodie.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 15. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  If they haue persecuted me, you also will they persecute: if
they haue kept my word, ⸫ yours also will they keepe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He foresheweth that many will not obey the churches w
                        •
                     rds, and no
maruell, bicause they contemned Christs owne precepts.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  As the Iewes cried the temple of the Lord,Ierem. 7. 4. when they had
conuerted it into a den of théeues, euen so crie you, The church,
The church. But as then the prophets shewed to them by their
manifold contempts of Gods cōmandements, that their words
were lieng and counterfet words: euen so we shew that your
church is the synagog of sathan and prooue it, bicause she will be

credited both aboue the word of Christ, and contrary to the word
of Christ.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 16. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  Out of the synagogues they will ⸫ cast you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The heretikes translate, Excommunicate you. See what corruption
this is, and the reason thereof Annot. ca. 9. 22.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If to excommunicate be to put men from their cōmunion and
fellowship in seruice, praier, and sacraments, then this casting
out is excommunication, and so rightly translated. The cause
that you in your annotations imagine, that is, to bring the churches
excommunication into contempt is friuolous, and beareth
no shew of truth, sith excommunication amongst vs is vsed as a
principall censure of our church. And you your selues cannot denie,
but when hypocrites haue crept into authoritie, this censure
is abused as your confesse, saieng, the excommunication of heretikes
is ridiculous. And I pray you what made the rulers of the
Iewes afraid of this casting out? Was it not bicause in common
estimation they should be estéemed as none of Gods people, and
what else is excommunication, but to make the excommunicate
to be estéemed as ethnikes and publicans?
               
            
            
               Iohn. 16. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  But when he, the spirit of truth, commeth, ⸫ he shall teach
you all truth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If he shall teach all truth and that for euer (as before 14. 16.)
how is it possible that the church can erre, or hath erred at anie time,
or in any point?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Whosoeuer followeth that truth which the spirit taught the
Apostles, and swarueth not there from doth not erre. But with
you the pope can not erre, the councels cannot erre, the multitude
of those whom you account the pastors of your church cannot
erre. As though Christ by this promise had tied his spirit to thē,
which we denie,Harding against the Apologie, 6. part. c. 5. diuision. 1. and you are not able to prooue. Their errors are
as manifest as the light, so grosse and palpable that they may be
groped. You know that some of the greatest learned of your side,
are driuen to distinguish betwéene the pope and a man, bicause
as a man he may erre, as a pope he cannot.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn. 16. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  Amen Amen I saie to you, if you aske the father any thing
in my name, he will giue it you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Vpon this the church concludeth all hir praiers, per Christum Dominum
nostrum, euen those that be made to saints.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Is Christ bound to you, must he needes be at your commandement,
whither he will, or no? He promiseth indéed that if they
aske the father any thing in his name, he will giue it. And can
you constreine him to giue it, if we aske others? Can your fansie
be an assured warrant for it, or from whence else can you fetch any
good ground for it? The commandement of Christ,Rom. 8. 
                           •
                        6. the example
of Christ, the doctrine of Christ, and the guiding, and direction
of the holie Ghost, do leade vs to praie to none but to God.
And what are you? Or what is your church, that we should beléeue
you against all these?
               
            
            
               Iohn. 17. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  These things spake Iesus, and lifting vp his eies into heauen,
he said, Father the houre is come, ⸫ glorifie thy sonne, that thy
sonne may glorifie thee.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The father glorifieth the sonne by raising him from death, exalting
him vp to his right hand, making all creatures to bowe downe at his
name and giuing him all power and iudgement. The sonne againe glorifieth
his father, by making his honor, which onely in a maner was in
Ie
                        •
                     rie before, now knowen to all nations.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You papists spoile the sonne of all glorie, first in taking awaie
from his glorified bodie, the nature of a bodie, and so making it
no bodie,Augustine 
                           •
                        pist. 5
                           •
                        . or nothing. Secondly in giuing that to others, for
which he is aduanced to the right hand of his father. Thirdlie in
setting the pope a mortall man aboue him, in power, and iudgement.
You spoile the Father also of his glorie,For the pope can dispence against the new and the old Testament. by taking the
key of knowledge from the multitude, and so (as much as in
you lieth) reducing the knowledge of God againe to a verie
fewe.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 17. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  Holie father, ⸫ keepe them in thy name, whom thou hast giuen
me: that they may be one, as also we.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  His petition is specially to keepe the apostles and his church in vnitie
and from schis
                        ••
                     es.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is verie true that Christ doth commend vnto his fathers
protection, and defence, the vnitie of his church, and children.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 17. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  And for them do I ⸫ sanctifie my selfe: that they also may
be sanctified in truth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To sanctifie himselfe is to sacrifice himselfe by dedicating his holie
bodie and blood to his father, both vpon the crosse, and in his holy Sacrament.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To sanctifie himselfe, is to separate, and seuer himselfe wholy
to the vses of God his father: which dedication of himselfe was
plainly, and euidently to be séene in his whole life, and in euerie
action thereof. Which in some sort may also be called a sacrifice,
as also our reasonable seruice of God, is termed a sacrificing of
our selues. But bicause the chéefe part of his priestly 
                        〈◊〉
                      in
this life,Rom. 12. 1. was put in execution in his death, in his sacrifice vpon
his crosse, therfore by way of excellencie, the chéefe point of our
sanctifieng by him, is attributed to the then dedicating of himselfe
to God, for vs. But what is this toward the proouing of the
Sacrament,Heb. 10. 10. to be a sacrifice propitiatorie, which for that purpose
you do craftilie, and closely couple with the sacrifice on the cresse.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 18. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  When Iesus had said these things he went foorth with his
disciples beyond the Torrent Cedron, where was a garden, into
the which he entred and his disciples, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The passion according to Saint Iohn is the Gospell at masse on good
Fridaie. So the passion is read in holie weeke foure times; according to
the foure Euangelists, as Saint Augustine also appointed in his church
at Hippo. Ser. 144. de tempore.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To what purpose is your reading of the Gospels, which verie
fewe, or none vnderstand? Is it not as good for a man to hold his
peace, as to speake that which the hearers vnderstand not? Did
Saint Augustine appoint at Hippo, the Gospels to be read in a

language, which the people vnderstood not? We may in truth
much better alledge Saint Augustine for the custome of our
church, which at the same time readeth the same Scriptures, in
the natiue naturall language of the common people, and also
teacheth and instructeth the people out of the said Scriptures, as
Saint Augustine did, and you commonly do not.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 18. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  The wench therefore that was portresse, said to Peter, Art
not thou also of this mans disciples? He saith to her, ⸫ I am not.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is all one for a man to denie Christ▪ and that he is a disciple of
Christ, or a Catholike, or a christian man, when he is demanded. Augustine
tract. 113. in hom. Ioan. for so Peter heere denieth Christ, in
denieng him selfe to be his disciple.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We graunt, and we pray to God to giue vs strength, boldnes
and courage to confesse him before men, whatsoeuer danger ensue
of it. But héere you vse a péece of your accustomed fraud, in
putting in the word Catholike, which Augustine hath not: which
you did but to deceiue them withal, whom you haue vntruly persuaded,
that there are none other Catholikes in the world but
your selues.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 18. 35.
               
                  The text.
                  Pilate answered, why am I a Iew? ⸫ Thy nation and the
chiefe priests haue deliuered thee vp to me: what hast thou
done?
               
               
                  The note.
                  It pleased God that Christ, who was to die both for the Iewes and the
Gentiles, should be betraied by the one, and put to death by the other.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Why doe yée not say that God did but permit and suffer it? If
it were Gods good pleasure, that it should be so, how was not
God the authour of it? Do you not sée then by your owne confession,
that God may be the authour of their fact, though not of the
fault thereunto adioyned.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 19. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  And it was the parasceue of the Pasche, about ⸫ the sixt
houre, and he said to the Iewes, loe your king.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth midday counting from sunne rising: for so doeth the

Scripture count of the houres of the d
                        •
                     ie. Matth. 20. Marke 15. Luk.
23. Iohn 4. Actes 3. 
                        〈◊〉
                      10.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your accompt of the houres, as it is a matter of small moment,
so is it easie: but we had rather haue heard some good
reason, why you durst not giue vs the english héer of Parasceue,
and Pasche, but if anie had béene readie, I am persuaded wée
should haue had it aswell for this, as afore for Amen, amen. But
till such time as you better discharge your selfe thereof, we shall
still thinke that you would haue the scriptures so obscure and
darke, that poore men might be fraied from studieng of them.
               
            
            
               Iohn 19. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  This title therefore manie of the Iewes did read: bicause
the place was nigh to the citie: & it was written in ⸫ Hebrue,
in Greeke, and in Latine.
               
               
                  The note.
                  These three tongues being for other causes most famous before in all
the world, are now also dedicated to God in the triumphant title of the
crosse of Christ, and in them the holie Scriptures are more conueniently
written, taught and preserued.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I pray you shew vs by what reason you can collect this dedication
out of this place, or that it is not as conuenient also to
haue the scriptures in other tongues: it is strange, you go about
what you can to discredit the scriptures written in those tōgues.
You would if you could abolish knowledge out of the world, and
bicause you can not doo that, you labour to make the groundes of
knowledge vncertaine, to the end that the onlie oracles accompted
of in the world, may be the decrées of your holie father of
Rome.
               
            
            
               Iohn 19. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And his ⸫ coat was without seame, wrought from the top
throughout.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This coate without seame is a figure of the vnitie of the church. Cyprian
de vnit. &c. and Euthi
                        •
                     ius & other write that our ladie made it.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is easie for men to deuise figures, but when the
                        •
                      are deuised
without ground or warrant, they are but mens fansies. Who
made that coat i
                        •
                      no more materiall then who made his other
garments.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn 19. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  And there stood beside the crosse of Iesus his mother, and
his mothers sister, Marie of Cleophas, and Marie Magdalene.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The great loue, faith, courage and compassion, and sorrowes that our
Ladie had, who forsooke not the crosse, and her sonne, when so manie
were fled from him, and his chiefe Apostles denied him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  So long as you doo but attribute a truth to our ladie, and not
adorne hir with that which appertaineth not to hir, you can not
heape vp too manie praises vpon her.
               
            
            
               Iohn 20. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And the ⸫ first day of the Sabaoth Marie Magdalene commeth
earlie, when it was yet darke vnto the monument, & she
saw the stone taken away from the monument.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is the first day of the weeke as some interprete it, taking saboath
(as somtime it is) for a weeke. This is our Sunday, called dies dominica,
bicause of the Lords resurrection. See the marginall annot. Luk. 24 1.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you had not héere brought a new interpretation, we should
not haue séene that you excell also in varietie: if you had vouchsafed
to haue told vs in plaine English that Sonday had bene called
the Lords day, bicause of the Lords resurrection, we should
haue thought you somewhat willing that the people shuld learne
somewhat: but now that you tell vs but in Latine, wée thinke
that you can be content, that they be blind, be blind still.
               
            
            
               Iohn 20. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  But Marie stood at the ⸫ monument without weeping.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Sepulchers of martyrs (saith Saint Hierome epist. 17.) we do
honor euerie where, and putting their holie ashes to our eies, if we may,
we touch it also with our mouth: and be there some, that thinke the monument
wherein our Lord was laide, is to be neglected, where the diuell
and his angels as often as they are cast out of the possessed before the
said monument, tremble and roare, as if they stood before the iudgement
seat of Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We will not striue with you for your author. For though
women beare the name of that epistle, yet I thinke Hierome

was their pen man. But we are not bound to beléeue what S.
Hierome speaketh, further then he prooueth his speeches by the
word. And we easilie beléeue that the diuell might worke there
strong illusions to deceiue, and to draw people into an admiration
of such things, as God hath no where commended to them
in his word.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 20. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  He said therefore to them againe, ⸫ peace be to you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Though he gaue them his peace hard before, yet now entering into a
new diuine action, to prepare their harts to grace, and attention, he blesseth
them againe.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Christ by repetition of his vsual blessing, or salutation, séeketh
to make his Apostles being astonished, at his sodaine and maruellous
comming amongst them to know, vnderstand, and be assured,
who he is.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 20. 26.
               
                  The text.
                  Iesus commeth ⸫ the doores being shut, and stood in the
midst and said, peace be to you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotations on the 19. verse of this chapter.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue séene stale stuffe of it, and refer the answer to him
that answereth your other annotations.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 20. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  Bicause thou hast seene me Thomas, thou hast beleeued:
⸫ blessed are they that haue not seene and haue beleeued.
               
               
                  The note.
                  They are more happie, that beleeue without sensible argument or
sight, then such as be induced by sense or reason to beleeue.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bicause that sensible experience, which Thomas had of Christ,
and by which he was induced to beleeue the resurrection, was
granted but to a few: therefore generally the happines of Christians
doth consist in beléeuing the testimonie of the word preached,
without any farther sensible experiments. Yet not withstanding
in matters subiect to sense, we are no where commanded
to beléeue that to be cheese, which is chalke, neither that to be
flesh, which our eies tell vs to be bread.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn. 21. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Simon Peter when he heard that it is our Lord: girded his
coat vnto him (for he was naked) & cast himselfe into the sea.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See in Saint Augustine tract. 122. In Io. the great mysterie hereof
concerning the church, and in Saint Gregorie hom. 24. in Euang. and
Saint Barnard lib. 2. cap. 8. de consi. Peters primacie here mystically
signified.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Hungrie dogs are glad of dirtie puddings. Our papists haue
béene these 27. yéeres séeking a néedle in a bundle of haie, that is,
they haue béene seeking the fathers to finde the bishop of Rome
to be called the vniuersall bishop, or head of the vniuersal church,
and cannot finde it. Therefore they hunt for other things in stéed
thereof, to bleare the eies of the simple withall, and there is nothing
so sillie, and simple, that they finde, but it must serue their
turne. It hath béen told them, that their reasons hold not, which
they deduce from Peter, to the bishops of Rome. It hath béene
tolde them also that primacie is one thing, and the supremacie
which they chalenge for the bishop of Rome is an other, being
things verie far vnlike. And yet bicause they cannot finde better
stuffe for their purpose they are still faine to finde themselues
plaie with these. But let vs sée your authorities. The mysteries
which Saint Augustine gathereth out of this place, are taken
out of the net, throwen out of the right side, Christs being on
land, the number of the fish, taken, and such like, which he applieth
to the church at the resurrection, and neither to the name,
nor authoritie of Peter. Gregorie toucheth the same mysteries,
and addeth onely this concerning Peter, that he dr
                        •
                     w the net to
lande, bicause the church was committed to him. And that he
drew the elect, to the stability of the shore, by preaching, writing,
and myracles. And then I pray what did Peter here, that the
other apostles did not?
               
            
            
               Iohn. 21. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  This now the ⸫ third time Iesus was manifested to his disciples,
after he was risen from the dead.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not the third apparition, but the third day of his apparition, for he
appeared in the verie daie of his resurrection often, againe vpon Lowe
Sunday, then this third time, and Saint Marke saieng, Last he appeared,
cap. 16. 14. meaneth his last apparition the first daie.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  A note so true, and so necessarilie collected vpon the place, so
plaine for the capacitie of the simple reader, as this, afore will
hardly be found, and with you is a verie rare birde.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 21. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  So will I haue him to remaine til I come, what to thee? Follow
thou me.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So readeth Saint Ambrose in Ps. 45 & serm. 20. in Ps. 118. Saint
August. tract. 124. in Io. and most ancient copies and seruice bookes
extant in Latin: ⸫ other read, if I will, other if so I will, &c.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Against the consent of all copies of the Gréeke, against the
greatest number of ancient copies of your old translator, against
the generall consent of the enterpretors, both Grecians, and Latinists,
and especially against the manifest truth appearing in
the circumstances of the text it selfe, you follow those copies,
which you know to be corrupt, and al to vpholde a lie, and a fable.
You enforce Augustine to giue you credit against his wil, knowing
that that which you alledge, is but the fault of the printer, or
writer, & not his minde. For his long doubtful disputation, whether
Iohn were dead, or no, doth plainly declare, that he read not
as you haue set it downe. For then he would neuer haue made
doubt of that which Christ so plainelie spake. And againe, how
can your reading stand with that, which Iohn saith after. Christ
said not that he should not die.
               
            
            
               Iohn. 21. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  But there are manie ⸫ other things also which Iesus did:
which if they were written in particular, neither the world it
selfe I thinke were able to conteine those books, that should
be written.
               
               
                  The note.
                  How few things are written of Christs actes, and doctrine in comparison
of that which he did and spake? And yet the heretikes will needes
haue all in Scripture, trusting not the Apostles owne preaching, or report
of any thing that our master did or said, if it be not written.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Now for vnwritten verities, I pray you for my learning shew
me one of those heretikes, that hold that all that Christ said, and
did, are written in the Scriptures. If you cannot do that, then

you abuse your reader with a lie. We saie, that enough is written
in the Scriptures to bring beleeuers to life eternall, and so
hath Iohn written before vs.Iohn 20. 31. But it greeueth you that we giue
not credit to a number of lies, which you obtrude to vs vnder the
name of the apostles. If all that vnder their names you haue set
out be true: how chance their canons, and constitutions are not
better beléeued, and obserued in your Romish church?
               
            
         
         
            Actes of the Apostles.
            
               Act. 1. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  The first treatise I made of ⸫ al things (O Theophilus) which
Iesus began to do and teach, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not al particularly (for the other Euangelists did write diuers things
not touched by him) but all the principall and most necessarie things.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That Luke did not write all things particularly, we know,
but that he vnderstandeth by all, all the principall, and most necessarie
things, that we can not grant. For the things which the
Euangelist Iohn wrote, and the other Euangelists omitted,
were not in any respect of dignitie, or necessitie inferior to the
other. Therefore we vnderstand by all, neither euerie particular
acte, and doctrine, neither all the principall, and most necessarie
things, but the whole and complete storie of his life, beginning
from his birth, and ending with his resurrection and ascension.
               
            
            
               Act. 
                     •
                  . 5.
               
                  The text.
                  For Iohn indeed baptized with ⸫ water.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Iohns baptisme gaue not the holie Ghost.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Neither yet the baptisme of any other priest, or minister.
               
            
            
               Act. 1. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  But you shall be ⸫ baptized with the holie Ghost after these
fewe daies.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The aboundant powring of the holy Ghost, vpon them, on Whit sunday,
he calleth baptisme.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Giue to euerie man his due praise and commendation, and
confesse that you borrowed this note from Master Beza vpon
this place.
               
            
            
               
               Act. 1. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  And when they were entred in, they went vp into an vpper
chamber where abode ⸫ Peter, and Iohn, Iames, and Andrew,
Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, & Matthew, Iames of Alphaeus
and Simon Zelotes, and Iude of Iames.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This visible companie was the true church of Christ, which he left,
and commanded to keepe togither till the comming of the holie Ghost,
by him to be further informed and furnished to gaine all nations to the
same societie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I pray you what companie of men vpon earth were euer inuisible?
We will easilie confesse that the church vpon earth is alwaies
visible, as these were visible. They were but a few: they
kept close, & secret togither for a time: the enemies of the church
knew not as yet of their assemblies: they did not glitter, nor shine
in the eies of the world by anie worldlie authoritie or pompe:
finallie, here is no visibilitie, but such as doeth well agrée to the
secret and hidden church of God.
               
            
            
               Actes 1. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  All these were perseuering with one minde in praier with
the ⸫ women, and Marie the mother of Iesus, & his brethren.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The heretikes, some in the text, other in the margent translate wiues,
to wit, of the Apostles, most impudentlie, knowing in their consciences,
he meaneth the Maries, and other holie women that followed Christ, as
Luke 8. 2. 24. 10 See Beza and the English Bible 1579.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you had not stirred vp the hatred of your blind followers against
vs, by the odious names of heretikes and impudent men,
the rest of your note had not béene woorth a rush. First, denie if
you can that the Gréeke héere doeth not as indifferentlie signifie
wiues as women, and then let vs consider which translation the
circumstances of the place fauour must. First, you can not denie,
but that manie of the Apostles, and also other beléeuers héere
gathered with them were married men, & that they had special
care of auoiding whatsoeuer might bée offensiue, or open the
mouth of the wicked to speake euill: which they had had great
occasion of, if the Apostles & other beléeuers had left their owne
wiues, and liued in secret with other women. And againe, who

can thinke that the Apostles and a great manie of the other disciples
had not beléeuing wiues? And if they had, what reason shuld
mooue vs to thinke that they were not more likelie to kéepe their
husbands companies, & to be at the first assemblies of the church
of God then other women. If then Gréeke word may be so
translated, and the circumstances of the text lead vs thereunto,
why should you so crie out impudent, and heretikes.
               
            
            
               Actes 1. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  Therefore of these men that haue assembled with vs, all the
time that our Lord Iesus went in and out amongst vs, beginning
from the baptisme of Iohn, vntill the day that he was assumpted
from vs, ⸫ there must one of these be made a witnes
with vs of his resurrection.
               
               
                  The note.
                  No small mysterie, that the number of twelue Apostles must needs
be made vp againe.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You expresse not your mysterie, and therefore we leaue your
note as we finde it.
               
            
            
               Actes 2. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ Peter standing with the eleuen, lifted vp his voice and
spake to them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Peter the head of the rest, and now newlie replenished with all knowledge
and fortitude, maketh the first sermon.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you did not with colour of words go about to beguile the ignorant,
we would not stumble at your naming Peter the head
of the rest, but now because vnder that terme you would haue
men vnderstand that supremacie and superioritie which you chalenge
for the bishop of Rome, therefore it is not amisse to shew
how vaine your collection is out of this place. Peter spake for
himselfe & the rest, Ergo he is head of the rest. Master Recorder
speaketh for my Lord Maior of London, and his brethren, Ergo
master Recorder is aboue my Lord Maior and the bench. And
where you say he maketh now his first sermon, except you meane
the first after he receiued the gift of tongues, you are deceiued, for
he both preached when Christ was vpon the earth,Matth. 10. 6. Actes 1. 15. and afterward
at the election of another, into the roome of Iudas.
               
            
            
               Actes 2. 27.
               
                  The text.
                  Because thou wilt not leaue my soule in ⸫ hel, nor giue thy
holie one to see ⸫ corruption.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Who but an infidell (saith Saint Augustine) will denie Christ to
haue discended into hell. Epist. 99. As his soule suffered no paines in hel,
so neither did his bodie take anie corruption in the graue.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And we also say the like, and teach the people the true meaning
and sense of that article, as our Catechismes do sufficientlie
for vs testifie. If anie hath séemed to denie it, it hath béene in that
grosse and vntrue sense, which you papists take it in, in which
sense Augustine beléeued it not. For he disputing the matter to &
fro, and setting downe diuerse opinions resolueth him selfe no
way. But he flatlie reiecteth your popish opinion, that he went to
the fathers which were in rest in Abrahams bosome, and vrgeth
against it the loosing of the sorrowes of hell,Actes 2. 24. mentioned in this
present chapter. Then they that are loath to beléeue they wote
not what, must learne of Augustine to examine other mens opinions,
& so by what authoritie they confirme their iudgements,
and rest vpon that which they sée hath good ground and warrant.
As for hell in that sense that you take it in, is true that he suffred
no paines there: though all of your side be not yet resolued what
to vnderstand by hel in the Créed, nor whether he suffred there or
no. But that this place of scripture hath no reference to that article,
it is plaine and euident by the exposition of Peter immediatlie
following, who can gather nothing to be prophesied in this
text, but the short and quicke resurrection of the bodie of Christ
out of the graue.
               
            
            
               Acts. 2. 38.
               
                  The text.
                  But Peter said to them, ⸫ do penance, and be euerie one of
you baptized in the name of Iesus Christ for remission of your
sinnes: and you shall receiue the gift of the holie Ghost.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not onely amendment of life, but penance also required before baptisme
in such as be of age, though not in that sort as afterward in the sacrament
of penance. Augustine de fide & operibus, cap. 11. & ep. 108.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Wherefore do you cite Augustine? To prooue a sacrament of
penance. Seauen sacraments were vnknowen in his daies. I
pray you what penance did Peter inioine these men? tell if you
can: Forsooth not such as afterward was woont to be inioined in
the sacrament of penance. I beléeue you. But if there were then

a sacrament of penance instituted, how excuse you Peter for inioining
penance not according therto? And if there were no such
sacrament, then tell vs in good earnest when it began, & who had
authoritie to appoint it, and whence he had that authority? Haue
they béene better replenished with the spirit of God since, than
Peter was? Thus you sée the rat perisheth by hir owne bewraieng
of hir selfe. And least your ignorant readers should conceiue
that saint Augustine whom you alledge doth speake in those places
of the sacrament of penance, they are to be admonished, that
if they be able to view the places themselues, they shall be sure
to find there no such thing.
               
            
            
               Acts. 2. 41.
               
                  The text.
                  They therefore that receiued his word were baptized, and
there were added in that day about ⸫ three thousand soules.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Three thousand were conuerted at the first sermon, and they were
put to the other visible companie and church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Under the name of visible lurketh poison. For thereby you
would perswade yours, that the church of Christ could neuer lie
in corners hidden, and knowen to few or none but themselues.
Which doctrine of yours if it were true, would exclude the Apostles
after the resurrection being in a house with the doore fast
shut to them,Iohn. 20. 19. Acts. 1. 15. and the congregation of beléeuers gathered secretly
togither, and kéeping closely in a chamber from being the church
of God. Your champion Stapleton, who for his writing of all
English papists hath deserued most praise, is driuen of force to
confesse the hidden and secret church, but that he will haue to endure
but a while, wherby he supposeth he hath salued the matter.Stapleton de 
                           ••
                        tente Ecclesia, cap
                           •
                        te. 2.
But that little while is sufficient to ouerthrow all your reasons
for perpetuall visibilitie in that sense which you take it.
               
            
            
               Acts. 2. 42.
               
                  The text.
                  And they were perseuering in the doctrine of the Apostles,
and in the communication of ⸫ breaking of bread and praiers.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This was the blessed sacrament, which the Apostles daily ministred
to the Christians at the least in one kind? See chap. 20. 7
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And why say you at the least in one kind? Was it euer heard of
in the world that the sacram
                        •
                     nt was minist
                        •
                     ed in lesse than one

kind? But you would haue said if you durst for shame, that they
ministred but in one kind. And then if you had had any fathers
that fauored that exposition, we should also haue heard of them.
But your doctrine of concomitance, the groundworke of your
halfe communion was then not hatched in hell. The fathers
were vtterly ignorant of it.
               
            
            
               Acts. 
                     •
                  . 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And Peter and Iohn went vp into the temple at the ⸫ ninth
hower of praier.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This maketh for distinction of canonicall howers and diuersitie of
appointed times to pray in. See annot. cap. 10. 9.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Let people pray in the language which they vnderstand, to
him, to whom they are commanded to offer vp their praiers in
faith, according to his will, and then times appointed for praier
may haue their right and true vse.
               
            
            
               Acts. 3. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And in the ⸫ faith of his name, this man whom you see and
know, his name hath strengthened: and the faith which is by
him, hath giuen this perfect health in the sight of you all.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This faith was not the faith of the lame man (for he looked onely for
almes) nor a speciall faith of the Apostles owne saluation: but the whole
beleefe of Christian religion.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  How prooue you that this was not the faith of the lame man?
Forsooth he looked for nothing but almes. At the first he did not.
What then? Nay he looked not for almes when they had told
him that they had neither gold nor siluer to giue. But as he cast
away the expectation of almes, so did he gréedily imbrace the gift
of health, offered him in the name of Iesus Christ. And this is
the faith which Peter héere speaketh of. If Peters hearers had
so vnderstood the matter as you take it, they might haue concluded,
that they néeded not beléeue: other mens faith might make
them safe,Acts. 14. 9. as it did this man. How happened it that the lame
man of Lystra néeded his owne faith to be saued or healed? Was
not Pauls faith as good as Peters, if a man might be healed by
another mans faith without his owne? The residue of your note
is a riddle. For what is Christian religion? Is it not the imbracing

of the promises of saluation by faith? And then how is that
distinguished from the faith or beléeuing of a mans owne saluation?
But bicause you papists want the comfortable assurance of
Christians, therefore you deuise a new kind of faith to flatter
your selues withall, void of that comfort and assurance.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   3. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  Whom ⸫ the heauens truly must receiue vntill the times of
the restitution of all things, which God spake by the mouth of
his holie prophets from the beginning of the world.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Some heretikes fouly corrupt this place thus: Who must be contained
in heauen, of purpose (as they protest) to hold Christ in heauen from the
blessed sacrament, Beza. As though his presence there drew him out of
heauen. Neither can they pretend the Greeke, which is word for word
as in the vulgar Latin, and as we translate.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This bable hath béene sufficiently plaied withal alreadie. The
Gréeke being the meane verbe is indifferent to be translated actiuely
or passiuely. The sense in both translations resteth one and
the same. Prating Martinius made this quarrell 
                        •
                     tale, and the
learned and reuerend master doctor Fulke hath cléered it. I pray
you shew vs thus much fauour as to giue vs one sentence of a
doctor for sixe hundred yéeres after Christ, that telleth and teacheth
vs in plaine words that Christs bodie may be in manie
places, and that he is bodily in the sacrament.
               
            
            
               Acts. 4. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ many of them that heard the word, beleeued: and
the number of the men was made fiue thousand.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere againe we see the proceeding and increase of the church visibly.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héere we sée the church of God may procéed and increase without
a bishop of Rome, and without his college of cardinals, in
which the visibilitie of your church consisteth.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   4. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  Be it knowen to all you, and to all the people of Israel, that
in the name of Iesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you did crucifie,
whom God hath raised from the dead, in this same this
man standeth before you whole.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  The name of Iesus, See annot. Phil. 1. 10.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Séeing you haue not expressed your popish meaning héere, you
shall be answered there.
               
            
            
               Acts. 4. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And seeing Peters constancie and Iohns vnderstanding that
they were men vnlettered, and of the vulgar sort, they maruelled,
and they knew them that they had been with Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Apostles constancie and wisedome after the comming of the holy
Ghost, being but idiots, that is, simple, vnlettered, and timorous before.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The woonderfull change and alteration that sensibly appé
                        •
                     red
in the Apostles, did plainly and euidently set foorth to vs that saluation
by Christ now preached, was set out mightily not by the
persuasorie words of mans wisedome, but by the might, power,
and miraculous working of God.
               
            
            
               Acts. 4. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  But Peter and Iohn answering; said to them, ⸫ if it be iust in
the sight of God, to heare you rather than God, iudge ye.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Their constancie and courage after their confirmation, being so weake
before. And if any magistrate 
                        〈◊〉
                      against God, that is to say, forbid
catholike Christian men to 
                        〈…〉
                      this 
                        •
                     ame must be
their answer, though they be whipped and killed for 
                        〈◊〉
                      labour. See
cap. 5. 29.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The constancie and courage and wise answer of the Apostles
is set out for the learning and incouragement of Christians of all
ages and times. But sedition, rebellion, treason, murdering of
princes, pro
                        •••
                     ing of forraine inuasions, and such like, in which
your constancie and courage consisteth, I pray you of whom haue
you learned them?
               
            
            
               Acts. 4. 27.
               
                  The text.
                  For there assembled indeed in this citie against thy holie
child Iesus whom thou hast annointed, Herod and Pontius Pilate,
with the Gentils and people of Israel, to do ⸫ what thy
hand and thy counsell decreed to be done.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christs death as needfull for mans redemption was of Gods determination,

but as of the malice of the Iewes it was not his act otherwise
than by permission.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By a blind distinction voide of all reason, you will set the holie
Ghost to schoole, to learne of you to speake. Herod, Pontius Pilate,
the Gentiles, and the people of Israel assembled to do what
Gods hand, and counsell had decréed to be done. It is plaine that
they, and all the diuels in hell, by their malice could execute nothing,
but the good wil, and pleasure of God, to the great comfort
of the godlie. So though God be not the author of the malice of
men, yet he can vse it, to bring to passe his will, to his praise, honor
and glorie.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  The text.
                  For as manie as were owners of lands o
                        •
                      houses, ⸫ sold and
brought the prices of those things which they sold, and laied
it before the feete of the Apostles.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Note the ardent charitie, and contempt of worthly things in the first
Christians: who did not onely giue great almes, but sold all their lands,
to bestow on the Apostles, and the rest, that were in necessitie, according
to Christs counsell, Matth. 16 21. Note also the great honor and credit
giuen to the Apostles, in that the Christian men put all the goods,
and possessions they had to their disposition.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The time was such, as wherein an expectation was, that Ierusalem
should by the iust iudgement of God be destroied, which
ere long followed, and therfore it had béene vaine to retaine their
possessions, the present necessity of the multitude of beléeuers,
which were poore, being not otherwise able to be supplied, by the
aboundance of the rich, which were but few, so that this example
neither fauoureth wilfull pouertie, nor 
                        〈◊〉
                      communitie.
The deserued credit, and honor of the Apostles, is an example
to the ministers of the word, to walke so carefully and
vprightly in their calling, as that they may gain the like amongst
the people committed to their charge.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  The text.
                  And there fell great ⸫ feare in the whole church, and vpon
all that heard these things.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Hereupon rose great reuerence, awe, and feare of the vulgar Christians

toward the holie Apostles, for an example to all Christian people,
how to behaue themselues toward their bishops and priests.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Nay rather toward their God, who so seuerely punisheth dissembling,
lieng, and hypocriticall dealing, as we sée in this example
of Ananias, and Sapphira.
               
            
            
               Act 5. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  So that they did bring foorth the sicke into the streets, and
laid them in bed and couches, that when Peter came ⸫ his shadow
at the least might ouer shadow any of them, and they all
might be deliuered of their infirmities.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Peters shadow.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you conclude hereof the lieng myracles that you attribute
to relikes, frame you reason we will shape you an answere.
               
            
            
               Act. 5. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  But an angell of our Lord by night opening the gates of
the prison, and leading them foorth, said.
               
               
                  The note.
                  An angell leadeth them out of prison.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Here we sée, when God will haue his Gospell published, the
power, and might of man can not suppresse it, prisons, and kéepers
be not strong enough, to kéepe in hold the ministers thereof.
And therefore your forcible attempts are but in vaine.
               
            
            
               Act. 5. 39.
               
                  The text.
                  For if this counsell or worke be of men, it wil be dissolued:
But if it be ⸫ of God you are not able to dissolue them, least
perhaps yee be found to resist God also.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Time and euident successe of Christs church and religion, prooue it to
be of God: no violence of the Iewes, no persecution of the heathen princes,
no indeuour of domesticall aduersaries, heretikes, schismatikes, or ill
liuers, preuailing against it. As on the other side manie attempts haue
been made by Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Luther and the like who
thought themselues some bodie: but after they had plaied their parts a
while, their memorie is buried, or liueth onely in malediction and infamie,
and their scholers come to naught. Therfore let no Catholike man
be scandalized that this heresie holdeth vp for a time. For the Arrians

and some other florished much longer than these, and were better supported
by princes and learning, and yet had an end.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Time, and euident successe make as much for Turkish religion,
as for poperie, for their continuance haue béene much alike.
But we know that whatsoeuer is of God, that men can not dissolue.
Hell gates cannot preuaile against the church of God. Experience
hath taught, and the attempts of enimies of all sorts
frustrated sheweth, that it is a vaine thing to assaile the people of
God. Of all other heretikes, the papists haue béene, and are the
most dangerous enimies of the church, which notwithstanding
hath at all times béene miraculou
                        •
                     lie vpholden by the almightie
power of God, euen then, when the might, power, princes, and
authoritie of the world were against it. And we do not doubt,
but as popery by the truth of God hath alreadie receiued a great
wound, so it shall when his good wil and pleasure is be killed, destroied,
and take an end. Leaue therefore your kicking against
the pricke.
               
            
            
               Act. 6. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Consider therfore brethren seauen men of you of good testimonie,
ful of the holie Ghost and wisedome, whom we may
appoint ouer this busines.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The election of the seauen first deacons.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  With whom▪ and your deacons there is almost nothing common
but the bare name.
               
            
            
               Act. 6, 7.
               
                  The text.
                  And the word of God increased, and the number of the disciples
was multiplied in Hierusalem exceedingly, a great multitude
also of the ⸫ priests obeied the faith.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Now also the priests and they of greater knowledge, and estimation
began to beleeue.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That the priests beléeued we sée, if it necessarily follow that
they were of great knowledge, and estimation, then they were
vnlike your ignorant sir Iohns, of which sort ten for one of the
priests of your church were. But I thinke the time and common
condition of the leuiticall priests then considered, that it is likely

enough, that most of these were men of small knowledge and
estimation. And this the rather confirmeth me in that opinion,
that we do not read of any one of these priests here mentioned,
to be cōuerted, that prooued a famous teacher in that first church,
which could not haue béene, if many of them had béene of great
knowledge and estimation.
               
            
            
               Act. 6. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  And all that sat in the councell beholding him, saw his face
as it were ⸫ the face of an angell.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Such is the face of all constant and cheerefull Martyrs, to their persecutors,
and iudges.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Then burne your Martyrolog, for in the traitors that haue
béene executed in England, there hath not appéered any chéereful
face, as I haue béene credibly aduertised by them that haue béene
present at their deaths.
               
            
            
               Act. 7. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And they were ⸫ translated into Sichem, and were laid in
the sepulchre, that Abraham bought for a price of siluer of the
sonnes of Haemor, the sonne of Sichem.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Translation of saints bodies agreeable to nature, and scripture. And
the desire to be buried in one place more then in another, which the holie
patriarches also had. Gen. 49, 29. 50, 24. Hebr. 11. 22. hath somtime
great causes. Augustine de cura pro mortuis cap. 1. & vlt.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The translation of the bodies of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , being in them
commanding it, and in others executing 
                        〈…〉
                      and euident
testimonie of their faith in the 
                        〈…〉
                     , for the inheritance
of the lande of Canaan, is no 
                        〈◊〉
                      for you to 
                        •
                     ake the

                        〈◊〉
                      children, and saints of God out of their graues, and for lucre
and couetousnes, to abuse the world with their bones: whereas
to rest in their sepulchres, is more agréeable to nature and Scriptures.
Saint Augustine speaketh not of translation of bodies, but
of the desire, that men had for themselues, or their friends to be
buried by this or that martyr, and holie man, which he thinketh
a very good motion. But the reasons wherby he séeketh to prooue
it, to be good, are friuolous, and the obiection, which Paulinus
brought out of Paul to the contrarie, standeth firme and vntaken
away.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  The text.
                  This Moyses, whom they denied, saieng, who hath appointed
thee prince and captaine? him God sent prince and ⸫ redeemer
with the hand of the angell that appeered to him in
the bush.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ is our redeemer, and yet Moyses is here called a redeemer, so
Christ is our mediator and aduocate, and yet we may haue saints our
inferiour mediators and aduocates also, See Annot. 1. Io. 2. 1.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You would faine finde some what to excuse, and hide your intolerable
sacriledge, and robbing Christ of his honor. Moyses is
called a redéemer in two respects: One in that he was a figure of
Christ, and bare therefore the name of him, whom he figured.
Secondly bicause he was Gods minister, and instrument raised
to redéeme, and deliuer the people of Israell from the seruitude
of Pharao, and thraldome of Egypt. What is this to those that
neither are figures of Christ, neither yet haue deliuered vs from
any temporall bondage? But if you could, you would leaue Christ
nothing proper or peculiar to himselfe. Your annotation shall
elsewhere be considered of.
               
            
            
               Act. 7. 
                     •
                  2.
               
                  The text.
                  And God turned, and ⸫ deliuered them vp to serue the host
of heauen, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  For a iust punishment of their former offences God gaue them vp to
worke what wickednes they would themselues, as it is said of the Gentiles,
Rom. 1.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If neither Iew, nor Gentile, in abhominable filthines haue
surpassed or excéeded your holie fathers of Rome, especially in
those things against nature, which euerie honest eare can not abide
to heare once named, then it is manifest that God also hath
giuen them ouer also into reprobate minds. You know who
hath set out a booke in praise and commendation of Sodomitrie,
is it not an argument, that where that is suffered they are past
all shame?
               
            
            
               Act. 7. 45.
               
                  The text.
                  Which our fathers with ⸫ Iesus receiuing, brought it also
into the possession of Gentils, which God expelled from
the face of our fathers till in the daies of Dauid.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  This is Iosue, so called in Greeke in type of our Sauiour.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And was Iosue a tipe, and Moises none? You might as well
by this example communicate the name of a sauiour to Saints,
as afore the name of a redéemer, sith in respect of sauing and redéeming
from sinnes, they are both proper & peculiar to Christ.
               
            
            
               Actes. 7. 55.
               
                  The text.
                  But he being full of the holie Ghost, looking stedfastlie into
heauen, saw the ⸫ glorie of God, and Iesus standing on the
right hand of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The comfort of all martyrs.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And of all other true faithful men. Wherefore we pray to God
most hartilie to graunt vs, that casting of all things that hang
heauilie on vs, wée may haue our eies onlie fixed on the glorie
that is set before vs.
               
            
            
               Actes 7. 60.
               
                  The text.
                  And falling on his knees, he cryed with a loud voice, saying,
⸫ Lord, laie not this sinne vnto them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Eusebius Emissenus saith, when he praieth for his persecutors, he promiseth
to his worshippers his manifest intercession and suffrages, in homilia
S. Stephani. And Saint Augustine, Si Stephanus non sic orasset ecclesia
Paulum non haberet. ser▪ 1. de Stephano.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Euerie one séeth that it is a very foolish collection, to gather a
promise of intercession to his worshippers out of this praier for
his persecuters, and therfore it is not the authoritie of Eusebi
                        •
                     s
Emissenus that can mooue vs, except he bring better reason with
him. But you would haue your ignorant followers to thinke
that Saint Augustine helpeth you in this case, and therefore you
haue set him downe in latine, that they might not espie that his
words make nothing to your purpose: for who euer mooued doubt
whether Saint Steuens praier did obteine at the hand of God,
mercie for some of his persecuters, or els the conuersion of the Ap
                        •
                     stle
Paul, but what maketh that for the intercession of saints,
when they are dead and gone?
               
            
            
               Actes 8. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  They therefore that were dispersed, passed thorow 
                        •
                     uangelizing
the word.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  This persecution wrought much good, being an occasion that the dispersed
preached Christ in diuers countries where they come.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  God turneth all things to good to them that loue him,Rom. 8. 28. and your
persecutions also haue had the like effect of spreading the Gospel,
which though you sée, and can not but confesse, yet you furiouslie
stil rage against God, and stirre vp what princes you can, to persecute
the Gospell and the professors thereof.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   8. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  And when the Apostles who were in Hierusalem, had heard
that Samaria had receiued the word of God, they sent to them
Peter and Iohn.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saepè sibi socium petens facit esse Iohannem, Ecclesiae quia virgo placet.
Arator apud Bedam in Act.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  How chaunce you set not downe your note in English, did you
meane that no bodie should know it, but such as could vnderstand
latine? If the ministerie of married men had not béene as wel accepted,
and liked of the church then, as the ministerie of others,
neither would Philips dealing at Samaria béene so well allowed
of as it was, neither yet had saint Peter béene a méete messenger
to haue bene sent about that businesse. But Iohn was liked
of bicause he was a virgin, it well appeareth that neither Philip
nor Peter were disliked, bicause they were married. But I praie
you tell me, what church now may be so bold, as to send the Pope
on their errand, or about their businesse? Either the Church then
had greater authoritie then now, and Peter lesse then his supposed
successors haue now, or els the Popes now are prouder, and
take more vpon them then hée did.
               
            
            
               Actes 8. 
                     •
                  7.
               
                  The text.
                  And behold, a man of Aethiopia, an eunuche of great authoritie
vnder Candace the Queene of the Aethiopians, who
was ouer all her treasures, was come to Hierusalem ⸫ to adore.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Note that this Ethiopian came to Hierusalem to adore, that is, on
pilgrimage. Wherebie we may learne that it is an accptable acte of religion,
to go from home to places of greater deuotion and sanctification.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  All that euer were Iewes borne or Iewes by conuersion, were

bound by the law of God to offer their sacrifices at Ierusalē,Deut. 16. 16. & at
certaine times in person to appéere there before him. Now if yo
                        •
                     
can shew any of your places of pilgrimage so by God himselfe
chosen & sanctified for that purpose, than we yéeld to you: Otherwise
your reason holdeth not, as being drawen from worship
commanded by God to will worship, that is, worship deuised by
men.
               
            
            
               Acts 8. 31.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said, Trowest thou that thou vnderstandest the
things which thou readest? Who said, And ⸫ how can I, vnles
some man shew me?
               
               
                  The note.
                  The scriptures are so written, that they cannot be vnderstood without
an interpreter, as easie as our protestants make them. See S. Hierom
Epistola ad Paulinum de omnibus diuinae historiae libris, set in the beginning
of Latin bibles.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  How easie do protestants make them? Do they not take continuall
paines to interpret the scriptures to the people? They are
hard, but not all. That it was not the custome of the church and
people of God, to fray men from them bicause of the hardnes of
them (which is the controuersie betwixt you and vs) appéereth in
that the eunuch read euen those scriptures, which he vnderstood
not. And that God blesseth such endeuors of humble harted Christians
appéereth also, in that God sent him an interpreter of that
which he vnderstood not. And what can you gather out of Ierom
to the contrarie of this?
               
            
            
               Acts. 9. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And falling on the ground, he heard a voice saieng to him,
⸫ Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
               
               
                  The note.
                  The heretikes that conclude Christ so in heauen, that he can be no
where else till the day of iudgement, shall hardly resolue a man that
would know, where Christ was when he appeered heere in the way, and
spake these words to Saul.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We answer shortly and plainly (as difficult a matter as you
make of it) that his bodie was then in heauen when his maiestie
appéered, and his voice was heard vpon earth. What can you oppose
to this?
               
            
            
               
               Acts. 9. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  And foorthwith there fell from his eies as it were scales, and
he receiued sight, and rising he was ⸫ baptized.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Paul also himselfe, though with the diuine and heauenly voice prostrated
and instructed, yet was sent to a man to receiue the sacraments,
and to be ioined to the church. Augustine in doctrina Christiana in
prooemio.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You néeded much a doctor for this, which euery man confesseth,
and no man denieth. But it is euident, that you hunt for nothing
but vainglorious estimation.
               
            
            
               Acts. 9. 31.
               
                  The text.
                  The ⸫ church truly through all Iewrie and Galile, and Samaria
had peace, and was edified, walking in the feare of our
Lord, and was replenished with the consolation of the holie
Ghost.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The church visibly proceedeth still with much comfort, and manifold
increase euen by persecution.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  God in the midst of persecution sendeth sometimes peace and
rest to his, as he hath done to his church of England, to your
great griefe (whose rage and furie God hath bridled) and to their
singular comfort.
               
            
            
               Acts. 9. 36.
               
                  The text.
                  This woman was full of ⸫ good works, and almes deedes
which she did.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Behold good works and almes deeds, and the force thereof reaching to
the next life.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Though this note be but sor
                        •
                     ly collected out of this place, yet
we confesse, that the dead resting from their labors, their works
follow them, and yet you neuer the nigher to the proouing of
your merits.
               
            
            
               Acts 9. 39.
               
                  The text.
                  And Peter rising vp came with them, and when he was come
they brought him vp into the vpper chamber: and all the widowes
stood about him weeping, ⸫ and shewing him the cotes
and garments which Dorcas made them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The praiers of our almes folke and beades men may do vs great good

euen after our departure. For if they procured hir temporall life, how
much more may they helpe vs to Gods mercie, and to release of punishment
in purgatorie?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You delight your selues with fond and foolish kinds of reasoning.
I pray you shew me some rule for the consequence of your
reason: Praiers of the liuing haue somtimes obtained restitution
to life of some newly dead: ergo they may procure release of punishment
after death. Your antecedent is confirmed by manifest
examples, the consequent is grounded and resteth onely vpon
your méer imagination, and hath not so much as a color of truth.
               
            
            
               Acts. 10. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  And a ⸫ voice came to him againe the second time, That
which God hath purified do not thou call common.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere God first vttered to Peter that the time was come to preach
also to the Gentils, and to conuerse with them for their saluation no lesse
than with the Iewes, with full freedome to eate all meats, without respect
of the prohibition of certaine made in the old law.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héere we sée that we know but in part, and that euerie man
hath but his measure in gifts, therefore it is but a vaine brag of
papists,Platina in vi
                           •
                        ta Pauli secundi. that all knowledge resteth in the popes brest, except they
can prooue the pope now to haue more knowledge than Peter
then had.
               
            
            
               Acts. 10. 30.
               
                  The text.
                  And Cornelius said, Foure daies since vntill this houre, I
was ⸫ praying the ninth houre in my house.
               
               
                  The note.
                  At the time of praier speciallie God sendeth comfortable visitations.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  So that God be praied to and not others: so mens petitions be
grounded vpon Gods promises, and so made in faith: so mens
mindes in praier be not wandering, and caried away with bythoughtes:
and so they be earnest, and importunate and giue not
ouer foorthwith: God doeth not onlie graunt them the comforts
they pray for, but also often pitieth their ignorance in asking, and
graunteth that which they could not aske: as héere to Cornelius,
the knowledge or our Sa
                        •
                     iour by the ministerie of Peter.
               
            
            
               Acts 10. 31.
               
                  The text.
                  And behold, a ⸫ man stood before me in white apparel, and

said, Cornelius, thy praier is heard, and thy almes deeds are in
memorie in the sight of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Note these apparitions and visions to Saint Peter, Cornelius and
others in the Scriptures verie often, against the incredulitie of our heretiks,
that will beleeue neither vision nor miracle not expressed in scripture:
these being beleeued of Christian men euen before they were
written.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Miracles crediblie reported at anie time, so they tend to the
glorie of God, and confirmation of his truth, deliuered to vs in
his word, we easilie admit. But others that bring with them no
profit, or vphold and giue credit to falsehood and vntruth, of which
sort all, or in a maner all the miracles of the popish church are, we
holde either for lies deuised by your selues, or for illusions of
Sathan.
               
            
            
               Acts. 10. 35.
               
                  The text.
                  But in euerie nation, he that feareth him, and ⸫ worketh iustice
is acceptable to him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not such as beleeue onlie, but such as feare God and worke iustice,
are acceptable to him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bée there (I pray you) anie infidels that worke righteousnes,
if there be,Hebr. 11. 6. then what is become of that, without faith it is impossible
to please God? If none can haue good works that hath
not faith, than whie also on the contrarie part doo ye not graunt,
that none can haue a true and a liuelie faith, but (as time and occasion
serueth) he must shew it foorth by the fruits and effects
thereof? Your reason from doing to being alone followeth not,
except you will say that the tongue speaketh not alone, because it
is not alone in the head, but I am wearie with oft answering
this fond cauill.
               
            
            
               Acts. 11. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  Hauing heard these things, they ⸫ held their peace, and glorified
God, saying, God then to the Gentiles also hath giuen
repentance vnto life.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Good Christians heare and obey gladlie such truthes as be opened
vnto them from God by their chiefe pastors, by vision, reuelation, or
otherwise.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Héere are verie manie things to be noted, which you are very
loath to sée, bicause they shake diuerse and principall pillars of
your religion. First, the church might and did call Peter to an accompt
of his doings and doctrine: How then hath the Pope that
prerogatiue that he may not be called in question for any thing?
Secondly, the multitude of the visible church do (notwithstanding
the promise of the holie Ghost) erre in a matter of so great
importance, as concerneth the saluation of the Gentiles: what
prerogatiue hath the church gotten since, that the multitude
thereof may not somtime in some matters erre? Thirdly, the
whole church espieth their fault, and yéeldeth to the truth at the
teaching and instruction of one. But with you consent of multitude
must preuaile, howsoeuer truth stand.
               
            
            
               Acts. 12. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  Whom when he had apprehended, he cast into prison, deliuering
him ⸫ to fower quaternions of soldiers to be kept.
               
               
                  The note.
                  As Peters person was more notorious than others, and therfore better
garded than other for feare he should escape: so Gods prouidence in
preseruing and deliuering him for the longer gouernment of his church,
is very maruellous.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We will not reason the matter how notorious the person of
Peter was. It is manifest that as yet he had not béene at Rome,
neither was possessed of a triple crowne. But this comfort we
reape out of this place, that (bicause the arme of God is not shortened,
nor his power lessened: he watcheth ouer his still, he sléepeth
not by day, nor slumbereth by night) therefore he will deliuer
his as maruellously still from the crueltie of the pope and his
adherents.
               
            
            
               Acts. 12. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  And considering, he came to the ⸫ house of Marie the mother
of Iohn, who was surnamed Marke, where many were gathered
and praieng.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is much for the praise of these good Christians, that the assemblie
to Gods seruice and praier was kept in their houses in the time of persecution,
and that the Apostle came thither straight out of prison, as his
first refuge. As now Christian people do much to their commendation
in places where heresie doth raigne.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  God increase the number of such Christians, and grant them
comfort and defence against all crueltie and rage of vnmercifull
papists.
               
            
            
               Acts. 12. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  And going foorth he went ⸫ into another place.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Though God had so miraculously deliuered him, yet he would not
tempt God by tarieng among his persecutors, but according to Christs
commandement fled for a time.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Why do you not tell vs whether he fled? If he went to Rome
and became bishop there, then belike he was bishop there afore
he was bishop of Antioch, which is contrarie to the report of
your stories. And he hied him maruellous fast, that was so
quickly at Ierusalem againe. But to let passe that fable, which
carieth no shew of truth, Peter did not set men a worke to
kill and murder Herod, for the iniurie offered him, but committed
vengeance to him to whom it belonged.As appeereth in the report of the death of doctor Parrie. Of whom then learned
the pope and his adherents to set men a work to murder the
Lords annointed, and to giue the murderers absolution afore
hand.
               
            
            
               Acts. 12. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And foorthwith an Angel of the Lord ⸫ strooke him, bicause
he had not giuen the honor to God: and being consumed of
woorms he gaue vp the ghost.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Princes that take delight in the flatterie and praises of the people so
much that they forget themselues to be men, and to giue the honor to
God, may be warned by this example.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The example is terrible, and hath preuailed with many princes
and great estates, who héerby haue béen admonished to learne
to know themselues. But the man of sinne, the child of perdition,
the bishop of Rome I meane, whom you his flatterers and clawbacks
aduance aboue all that is called god, and who most proudly
taketh vpon him that which was neuer granted to mortall man,
nothing can make him afraid.
               
            
            
               Acts. 13. 46.
               
                  The text.
                  To you it behoueth vs first to speake the word of God, but

bicause ⸫ you repell it, and iudge your selues vnwoorthie of eternall
life: behold we turne vnto the Gentils.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Iewes of their owne free will repelling the truth are vnwoorthie
of Christ, and woorthily forsaken. And the Gentils though they beleeued
specially by Gods grace and preordination, yet they beleeue also by their
owne free will, which standeth well with Gods prouidence.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That the Iewes repelled the grace of God offered them, and
would none of it, we manifestly sée. That the Gentils beléeued
also by Gods grace and preordination, that is also euident by the
text it selfe. For there beléeued as many as were preordinate to
life euerlasting. But that they beléeue by their frée will also, is
your addition without any warrant, bicause you cannot abide
that faith should be the méere gift and liberalitie of God.
               
            
            
               Acts. 14. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  Howbeit, he left not himselfe without ⸫ testimonie, being
beneficiall from heauen, giuing raines and fruitful seasons, filling
our harts with food and gladnes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The heathen might by the daily benefits of God haue knowen him at
the least to be their creator, and onely Lord, though the mysterie of our
redemption were not opened to them.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  All nations haue so much knowledge offered them in the creatures
and things which they sée, and are subiect to sense, as to
make their damnation iust,Rom. 1. 20. and themselues void of excuse for ignorance.
               
            
            
               Acts. 14. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  And when ⸫ they had ordained to them priests in euerie
church, and had praied with fastings, they commended them
to our Lord in whom they beleeued.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We see by this first that S. Paul and Barnabas were bishops, hauing
heere authoritie to giue holie orders secondly▪ that there was euen then
a difference betwixt bishops and priests, though the name in the primitiue
church was often vsed indifferently lastly, that alwaies fasting and
praieng were preparatimes to the giuing of holy orders.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We cannot sée by this that Paul and Barnabas were bishops,

but that the Apostles at the first planting of the churches had authoritie
to order them, and to appoint bishops and pastors to
them. Neither do we find héere any mention at all of sacrificing
priests, much lesse any difference betwéene bishops, and elders
that labour in the word, whom we also call priests. Your last obseruation
that in this example fasting and praier is commended
to vs in the election, choise, and appointing of pastors to particular
congregations, is true.
               
            
            
               Acts. 15. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And when they were come to Hierusalem they were receiued
of the church and of the Apostles, and ⸫ Ancients declaring
whatsoeuer God had done with them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Ancients heere and often in this chapter, are the same that priests
vers. 2. as Saint Hierom taketh it also, 1. Peter 5. and the Greeke approoueth,
being alwaies one. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , priests, Hierom in 1. ad Tit. & 4.
ad Galatas.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  For the name of priests, so your sacrificers thereby be not vnderstood,
we stand indifferent. But what reason can you shew,
why in English you flie the word Elders, and translate it Ancients.
               
            
            
               Acts. 15. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  And when there was made a ⸫ great disputation, Peter rising
vp said to them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotation verse 28. towards the end.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your annotation shall be answered with the rest.
               
            
            
               Act. 15. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  And God which knoweth the harts, gaue testimonie, giuing
vnto them the holie Ghost as well as to vs, and hath put no
difference betweene vs & them ⸫ by faith purifieng their harts.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By that faith that worketh by charitie, for a dead faith can not purifie
the hart of man, See chap. 16. 31.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Who doubteth of this. But here is a secret confession by force
of truth, of your manifold cauilling in these notes, in separating
those things from a true liuely iustifieng faith which can not be

sundered from it. For if here you vnderstande that faith which
worketh by charitie, why do you not so to, when we speak of iustification
by faith?
               
            
            
               Act. 15. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  Then it pleased the apostles and ancients with the whole
church, to choose men out of them, and to send to Antioch,
with Paule Barnabas, Iudas, who was surnamed Barnabas and
Silas, cheefe men amongst the brethren, ⸫ writing by their
hands.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Other latin copies and the Greeke read thus, writing by their hand
an epistle conteining these things.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Whether it be expresly added, or no, the sence is one, séeing
their epistle followeth verbatim. But yet this is to be marked,
that you make your choise in varietie of copies to follow those,
which furthest dissent from the Gréeke.
               
            
            
               Act. 15. 36.
               
                  The text.
                  And after certaine daies, Paule said to Barnabas, Let vs returne
and ⸫ visite our brethren in all cities wherein we haue
preached the worde of our Lord, how they do.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Hereof our catholike bishops tooke vp the necessarie vse of often visiting
their flocks, and cures committed to their charge, for confirmation
in faith, and vertue, and reformation of maners both of cleargie, and
laitie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The apostolicall office being vniuersallie to spread the truth,

                        〈◊〉
                      to laie the first foundation of Christian Religion, necessity
of doing their dutie compelled Paule and Barnabas to be
absent from the churches, which they had planted. The knowledge
of Sathans subtilties, and of humaine infirmitie, caused
this care to visite the churches againe, which they had planted,
and to confirme them. Your bishops (I doubt not) would faine
be Apostels in seeking euerie one to himselfe a little world to gouerne:
But their care is far vnlike, for they are seldome in their
charge, they visit once in thrée yéere most commonly by their deputes,
neither to reforme life nor maners, but either to shewe
themselues abroad like lords, or else to fill their purses. This I
am sure they neither learned of Paule nor Barnabas.
               
            
            
               
               Act. 15. 41.
               
                  The text.
                  And he walked thorough Siria and Cilicia, confirming the
churches, ⸫ commanding them to keepe the precepts of the
apostles and ancients.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not onely the things commanded by Christs expresse word, or
written in the Scriptures, (as our heretikes hold) but whatsoeuer the
apostles and rulers of the church command, is to be kept and obeied. So
these words repeated againe cap. 16. 4. and that in the Greeke, least any
man cauill▪ bicause here the Greeke hath them not.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You do well to ioine apostles with rulers, else no man would
beléeue you. But I pray you where may we 
                        •
                     inde those things
which the apostles haue commanded, and are not expressed in
the scriptures? If you obtrude those things which you falsely call
the canons, and constitutions of the apostles, then we bid you first
reforme your church by them. For though there be some corruptions
in them, vnknowen in the apostles time, yet your church
if it had no more should want at least thrée quarters of her corruptions.
It were woonderfull if other men should credite your
forgerie which you your selues haue small regard to. If you alledge
this present text, it is manifest that the precepts which the
apostles commanded to be kept, were sent in writing by the
hands of Paule, and Barnabas, which writing is set downe by
Luke word for word: How then can you gather from hence anie
defence of your vnwritten verities, or any credite to your deuises
not warranted by the Scriptures?
               
            
            
               Act. 16. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And when they passed through the cities, they deliuered vnto
them to keepe the ⸫ decrees that were decreed of the Apostels
and ancients at Hierusalem.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Here againe they take order, that the decrees and articles of faith agreed
vpon in the councell of Hierusalem, should be executed and obserued,
whereby we see both the great authoritie of councels, and the diligence
that all prelates ought to haue, to see the decrees, and canons of
the councels put in execution.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In the former note these decrées you did insinuate to be matters
vnwritten, and now in this note they are articles of our

faith, and so consequently some articles of our faith are not written.
O miserable men! What state are they in whom you lead?
When you pull from them the foundation and groundworke of
their faith? The authoritie of lawfull councels we reuerence,
as much as is lawfull to reuerence men. But by this councel we
gather that a councell may be lawfully called, though the bishop
of Rome call it not, and that it is not néedful that he or his legate
à latere should be president in councels, and that it is not of necessity
requisite, that he should confirme and ratifie councels. For
it is manifest that no bishop of Rome bare stroke in this councel.
               
            
            
               Acts. 16. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And passing through Phrigia, and the countrie of Galatia,
they were ⸫ forbidden by the holy Ghost to preach the word
in Asia.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This people had not the Gospell denied vnto them altogither, but for
a time, bicause (as venerable Bede thinketh) God foresaw they would
not beleeue, and so should haue bee
                        •
                      more grieuously damned.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Modestie requireth, that you leaue the Lords secrets to himselfe.
The holie Ghost hath not reuealed the cause why he forbad
them to preach in Asia, and permitted them not to go into
Bithinia, and therefore we are to leaue it as a thing which God
hath not thought necessary for vs to know. But this is manifest,
that the good desires of Gods saints are not in their owne power
to bring to passe when they will.
               
            
            
               Acts. 16. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  And from thence to Philippie, which is the first citie of Macedonia,
a ⸫ Colonia.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Colonia is such a citie where the most inhabitants are strangers, sent
thither from other great cities and states, namely from the Romans.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your interpretation of Colonia we receiue as a thing wherof
our Grammar boies are not ignorant.
               
            
            
               Acts. 16. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  The same following Paul and vs, cried saieng: These men are
the seruants of the high God, which preach vnto you the waie
of saluation.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Either the diuell was compelled by vertue of Paules presence to saie

truth, or else (as such do often times) he spake truth now, that they might
the more trust him, and he better beguile them at other times.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your later coniecture I receiue as a thing that you can speake
in by great experience, as hauing learned that péece of cunning
of the diuell, neuer to vse truth, but to the end to giue color and
credit to lies withall.
               
            
            
               Acts. 16. 3
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  Masters, what must I do to be saued? But they said, ⸫ Beleeue
in the Lord Iesus, and thou shalt be saued and thy house.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is none other faith that saueth, but that which worketh by charity.
August. Enchirid. cap. 67.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Grant vs that that faith is the onely hand, whereby we take
hold of Christ our saluation, and then a great part of our controuersie
is at an end.
               
            
            
               Acts. 16. 33.
               
                  The text.
                  And he taking them in the same hower of the night, ⸫ washed
their wounds, and himselfe was baptized and all his house
incontinent.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Happie gailers that do mercie toward their godly prisoners, and receiue
againe by them such spirituall benefits.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It was the greatest happines that could fall vpon him, and his
house to receiue such vnder his 
                        •
                     oofe, by whom God so blessed him
and his. On the contrarie side, it is a dangerous matter for gailers
and keepers to be cumbred with wicked, seditious, and traiterous
Iesuits, and seminarie priests.
               
            
            
               Acts. 17. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  But the Iewes ⸫ enuieng, and taking to them of the rascall
sort certaine naughtie men, and making a tumult, stirred the
citie, and besetting Iasons house, sought to bring them foorth
vnto the people.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Zelantes. This is the zeale of heretikes, and a liuely paterne of their
dealing at this day against the catholike priests and preachers, and the
good Iasons that receiue them.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Looke vpon the late storie of France, and there you shall sée

that it is the practise of you papists, to stir vp the rascall sort to
misuse, nay to kill and cut the throtes of Gods déere saints.
               
            
            
               Acts. 17. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  For passing by and seeing your idols, I found an altar also
whereupon was written, To the vnknowen God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The aduersaries (in the new Testament 1580.) translate your deuotions
most corruptly against the nature of the Greeke word, (2. Thes.
2. 4.) and most wickedly against the laudable deuotion of good Christians,
calling the pagans idolatrie and superstition their deuotions.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héere is a blind quarrell, to vphold blind deuotion of blind papists.
Why may not that which is deuoutly worshipped, be called
his deuotion that worshippeth? Except you can prooue that
the word deuotion, ought not to be vsed but in good part, which
will be hard for you to do. But this fond quarrell hath béene afore
broched by Martinius, and learnedly answered by master doctor
Fulke.
               
            
            
               Acts. 17. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  The God that made the world, and all things that are in it,
he being Lord of heauen and earth, dwelleth ⸫ not in temples
made with hands, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  God is not concluded in temples, nor needeth them for his necessitie
of dwelling, or other vses of indigence. See annot. c. 7. Acts. ver. 48.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If God cannot be concluded in temples, much lesse can he be
shut vp in pixes, or expressed by the art of your painters and caruers.
Your babish annotation I passe ouer to the general answer
of the annotations.
               
            
            
               Act. 19. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  But he said, in what then were you baptized? Who said ⸫ in
Iohns baptisme.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Iohns baptisme not sufficient.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Conclude this out of the text if you can? You thinke that these
were baptized againe by Paule. And we thinke that Paule onely
instructed them in the doctrine, that Iohn did teach them,
whom he did baptise. Your error groweth in referring the participle

that signifieth, they hearing, to these to whom Paule
speaketh to: where as it ought to be referred to them, that heard
the doctrine of Iohn, and were baptized by him. Which reference
maketh the text plaine, and taketh away a number of scruples,
and doubts which rise vpon the other reference.
               
            
            
               Acts. 19. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  Hearing these things, they were baptized in the name of
our Lord Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christs baptisme necessarie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And who doubeth of that.
               
            
            
               Acts. 19. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And when Paule had imposed ⸫ hands on them, the holie
Ghost came vpon them, and they spake with toongs and prophesied.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Paul ministred the sacrament of confirmation, See ann. c. 8. 17.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Saint Paule laide his hands on them, the holie Ghost came
vpon them, and they were myraculouslie endued with the gift of
toongs. That this was the ministration of a sacrament we deny,
and you haue nothing to prooue it with all. Your annot. we refer
as we haue done the rest.
               
            
            
               Acts. 19. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  And manie of them that beleeued came confessing and declaring
⸫ of their deeds.
               
               
                  The note.
                  They made not onely a geuerall confession, wherin all men shew themselues
alike to be sinners, as our protestants do, but euerie one confessed
his proper deeds and faults.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  There was then no auricular confession or shrift: Otherwise
you slander the protestants, when you make this difference betwéene
them and these beléeuers. For we hold that confession of
sins in particular, is also necessarie, as appéereth in all enioined
penances. But the numbring vp of all a mans sins in particular,
as it is impossible, so I holde also vnnecessarie.
               
            
            
               Acts. 19. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  And when these things were ended, Paule purposed in the

spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to
go to Hierusalem saieng, After I shall haue beene there I must
see ⸫ Rome also.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Of taking awaie the Gospell from Hierusalem the head citie of the
Iewes, and giuing it to Rome the head citie of the Gentiles.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note is printed in a letter by it selfe, that it may be noted
aboue all the rest. Therefore a man would thinke that it should
be soundlie and substancially collected and gathered out of this
place. And yet here is nothing in this text once sounding towards
the taking away of the Gospel from one, and giuing it to
another. But we may sée that you can stretch the text on the
tenters, and make it stretch to what please you.
               
            
            
               Acts. 19. 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  For one named Demetrius a siluer smith that made siluer
⸫ temples of Diana, procured to the artificers no small gaine.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The protestants translate shrines anno 1577. to make the people
thinke that it toucheth the holie shrines of saints: most corruptly, in the
Greeke signifieng plainly temples, and that of heathen Gods.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  What name soeuer it had by reason of some similitude, or portraiture
that it was framed vnto, yet the circumstances of the
place are plaine, that temple it was not. But as your shrines and
such superstitious toyes were gainfull to your workemen, so
these brought in dailie profit to Demetrius and his companie.
               
            
            
               Acts. 19. 35.
               
                  The text.
                  And when the Scribe had appeased the multitudes, he saith:
Yee men of Ephesus, for what man is there that knoweth not
the citie of the Ephesians to be a worshipper of great Diana,
and ⸫ Iupiters childe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Here heretikes adde to the text this word image more then is in the
Greeke, to put a scruple into the peoples minde concerning holy images.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Small quarrels must serue, where better want. The addition
of a substantiue vnderstood to an adiectiue expressed is, when you
you list an heinous fault. I praie you tell me was it not the
image or idole of Diana that was there spoken of? And may we

not now call an image an image? We néede not put scruples into
the heads of the people against your holie images, for they detest,
and abhorre them. And good cause why: For sacrifices excepted,
what madnes did the Gentiles about their images, which
you did not about yours?
               
            
            
               Acts. 20. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  And in the first of the sabaoth, when we were assembled to
⸫ breake bread, Paule disputed with them, being to depart on
the morow, and he continued the sermon vntill minight.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Paul did heere breake bread on the sunday, as it is broken in
the sacrament of the bodie of Christ, and had both before and after the
celebrating a sermon to the people. August. ep. 86. ad Casulalum. Vener▪
Bed. in 20. Act.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To what purpose do you cite héere Augustine and Bede? To
prooue that the sacrament was héere ministred by the Apostle
Paul? We confesse it, your proofe is superfluous. Or to prooue
that the sacrament then and there was ministred vnder one kind
and no more? That is a matter that neither of them euer thought
of. Paul brake bread, doth it follow thereof, that he did not minister
the cup also? Your maner of breaking bread was in their
daies vtterly vnknowen and vnheard of.
               
            
            
               Acts. 20. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  And sending from Miletum to Ephesus, he called the ⸫ ancients
of the church.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is, priests, as Act. 15. 4. See the marginall annot. there.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The word or name of priest being deliuered from your abusiue
signification, we abhorre not. Your marginall annotat. hath
béene alreadie answered.
               
            
            
               Acts. 20. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  Testifieng to the Iewes and Gentils ⸫ penance toward God,
and faith in our Lord Iesus Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Apostolike preaching commendeth not faith onely, but penance also
to the people.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And we preach repentance and faith, therefore our doctrine is

apostolike. But it is a woonder to sée how you dally with faith
onely, to make the preaching of iustification by faith to be odious
amongst the ignorant. And nothing more plainly bewraieth that
you impugne the truth against your own consciences and knowledge,
than your foule dealing in this point. For you know that
we preach somwhat besides faith.
               
            
            
               Acts. 20. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  Take heed to your selues, and to the whole slocke wherein
the ⸫ holie Ghost hath placed you bishops to rule the church
of God, which he hath purchased with his owne blood.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Bishops or priests (for then these names were somtime vsed indifferently)
gouernors of the church of God, and placed in that high roome
and function by the holie Ghost.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Then those names were alwaies vsed indifferently: for the
distinction grew after when one was set aboue the rest, for auoiding
of scismes (as saint Ierom telleth) but I pray you tell me
what priuilege Peter had more than Paul?Ieronimus E
                           •
                        uagrio. or Rome more than
Ephesus? that rauening woolues might not rise amongst them
that succéeded Peter at Rome, as well as amongst those that succéeded
Paul at Ephesus?
               
            
            
               Acts. 21. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  And entring into the house of Phillip the Euangelist, which
was one of the seuen, we taried with him. And he had ⸫ fower
daughters virgins that did prophesie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  As saint Peter had a wife, but vsed hir not after his calling, as it is
noted else where out of S. Ierom, Luke 4. 38. so it may be said of Saint
Phillip being deacon.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is easie to make a great shew of fathers, when one for one
and the same thing is alledged so often, and to no purpose. The
Apostles left all, therefore they left also their wiues, saith Saint
Ierom. And we say they left their houses also, or else they did not
leaue all. And if they might so leaue their houses, that it was notwithstanding
lawfull for them both to retaine the possession of
them, and also to haue the vse of them, for themselues and their
friends, as this place doth plainly declare, then much rather
might they both kéepe and vse their wiues. As therefore afore

you dreamed of Peter, so héere you dreame of Phillip, that being
married me
                        •
                     , they liued not vnder the rules and lawes that the
holie Ghost hath giuen to married men, which is as great an iniurie
as you can do them.
               
            
            
               Acts. 22. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  And now what tariest thou? Rise vp, and be baptized, and
⸫ wash away thy sinnes inuocating his name.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The sacrament of baptisme doth it selfe wash away sinnes (as heere is
plaine) & therefore doth not onely signifie (as the heretikes affirme) that
our sins be forgiuen before, or by faith only remitted. Wherby the churches
doctrine is prooued to be fully agreeable to the scriptures, that the
sacraments giue grace ex opere operato, that is, by the force and vertue
of the worke, and worde done and said in the sacrament.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That we affirme that sacraments onely signifie is a slander
deuised by your selues, as is also the odious name & terme of heretikes,
which you giue vs. We know that our God kéepeth iust
promise, and therefore doth giue the things which he promiseth, to
woorthie & méet receiuers of his sacraments. Your plaine proofe of
your churches doctrine, that the sacraments giue grace ex opere operato,
prooueth no such thing, to them which vnderstand the vsuall
forme and maner of sacramentall spéeches, most commonly vsed
in the scriptures. And therefore it can deceiue but onely those,
who haue made ignorance the mother of their deuotion.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And when the blood of Steeuen thy witnes was shed, ⸫ I
stood by and consented, and kept the garments of them that
killed him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not onely principals but all that consent to the death or vexation of
Christian men for the catholike faith, do highly offend, which the Apostle
confesseth here, that Gods mercy may be more notoriously glorified
in him hereby.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Though it hath pleased God to abridge your power here in
England, that your crueltie could not so shew it selfe as other
times it hath done, yet no doubt your good will, and consent hath
béene in those most horrible murders of Gods witnesses in those
countries, where you haue soiourned. Therefore I would that

all you counterfet catholikes would earnestly marke this, and
while time serueth earnestly repent with Paule, that the greatnes
of Gods mercy in your, and by your conuersions might be
glorified. This is all the hurt I wish you.
               
            
            
               Acts. 23. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Then Paule said to him, ⸫ God shall strike thee thou whited
wall.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He said not this through perturbation of minde, or of a passion, but
way of prophesie, that this figuratiue high priesthood, then 
                        •
                     rimmed like
a whited wall, was to be destroied, whereas now the true priesthood of
Christ was come. Beda in hunc locum.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Although there be both learned, and godly of an other minde,
yet for my part I like Bedaes exposition hereof.
               
            
            
               Acts. 23. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And Paule knowing that the one part, was of Sadduces, and
the other of pharisies, ⸫ he cried out in the councell, men and
brethren, I am a pharisee, the sonne of a pharisee: of the hope
of the resurrection of the dead I am iudged.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Such prudent euasions from danger, are lawfull, (which Saint Chrysostome
calleth specially in this apostle) the wisedome of the serpent, as
otherwise in his teaching, preaching and patience, he vsed the simplicitie
of a doue.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Wise and prudent escaping of danger is verie lawfull, and for
that purpose the wisedome of serpents, is verie necessary for the
church of God, especially against the extréeme crueltie of papists.
               
            
            
               Acts. 23. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And the night following our Lord standing by him said, be
constant: for as thou hast testified of me in Hierusalem, so
⸫ must thou testifie at Rome also.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Though God who could not lie had promised that he should go to
Rome: yet the apostle omitteth not humane meanes to defend himselfe
from his enimies and otherwise. Neither said he as the heretikes called
predestinates, Let them do what they wil, they can not hurt me, for I am
predestinate to go to Rome. See his doings and saiengs to saue himselfe
in the chapter following.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  You are good fellowes, you can make your selfe sport in confuting
your shadowes. He that were not acquainted with your
cogging, and lieng, would thinke by this spéech of yours that som
newe heretikes, neuer afore heard of, were lately risen, that held
this that you confute. But I praie you where doth these predestinates
dwell? What bookes haue they written? By what euidence
may it appéere that you truely charge them? For till you
shew vs some that vnder pretence of predestination, do refuse the
ordinarie meanes which God hath appointed for their safegard,
we can not beléeue you, but must néedes score vp this amongst
your lies.
               
            
            
               Acts. 23. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ And he taking him, brought him to the tribune, and said,
The prisoner Paul desired me to bring this yoong man to thee
hauing something to say to thee.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the curtesie, and equity of heathen officers toward their prisoners,
to saue them from all iniurie and villanie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And compare on the other side the barbarous and sauage crueltie
of popish bishops, and other officers, and kéepers towards
them that were their prisoners for the testimonie of the truth,
in the late daies of Quéene Marie, and thou shalt euidentlie sée,
that poperie hath exiled from the professors thereof, all kinde of
humanitie.
               
            
            
               Acts 24. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  But this I confesse to thee, that according to the ⸫ sect,
which they call heresie I do so serue the father my God, beleeuing
al things that are written in the law & in the prophets.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Bicause Tertullus the Iewes orator called Christian religion the sect
or (as it is there verse 5. in the Greeke) the heresie of the Nazarens:
Saint Paule answereth and sheweth that it is no heresie. And as for the
word Sect in this place: it is in the Greeke, according to the way which
they call heresie, as also Acts. 9, 2. 24, 22. And therefore the worde
Sect is heere so taken. See annot. cap. 28, 22.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By this note we sée that you read the Gréeke text, and otherwise
it is vtterly to no purpose. For there is nothing in it, but

                     
                        •
                     hat euerie boie, that hath learned his Gréeke Grammer may
sée. As for the ioie that heretikes take of this, that Christian religion
is called here, and else where a sect, or heresie, it may reioice
papists as much as any other.
               
            
            
               Acts. 24. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  And he disputing of ⸫ iustice and chastitie, and of the iudgement
to come, Felix being terrified answered. For this time
go thy waie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Apostolike teaching was not of onely, and speciall faith, but of
iustice and chastitie and iudgement, that is to saie, of the terror of hell,
and other Gods iudgements in the next life answerable to our deedes in
this world: by which the hearers were first terrified, and so induced to
penance, how saie heretikes that then such things make men hypocrites.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If there be any that teach so onely, and speciall faith that they
omit to teach other Christian duties, tell vs I praie you, tell vs
who they be. Otherwise we shall thinke this to be an ordinarie
cast of office with you, to induce your ignorant followers to
thinke that iustice, chastitie, and iudgement to come, are not
taught now a daies. Againe if you can shew vs any that deny the
preaching of the iudgements of God to be profitable for the conuersion
of men, frō wicked waies, tell vs that we may also detest
them. Yet we saie that they which neuer learne to yéeld obedience
to God of sonnelike dutie, but of seruile feare, are but hypocrites
when they are at the best.
               
            
            
               Acts. 25. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  But if none of those things be whereof they accuse me, no
man can giue me to them, ⸫ I appeale to Caesar.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If Saint Paule both to saue himselfe, both from whipping and from
death, sought by the Iewes, doubted not to crie for succor of the Romain
lawes, and to appeale to Caesar the prince of the Romaines, not yet Christened,
how much more may we call for aide of Christian princes and
their lawes, for the punishment of heretikes, & for the churches defence
against them. Augustine epist. 50.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is lawfull for man being wronged at an inferior magistrates
hand, to séeke for defence, and protection at the hands of
the superior, and higher. It is lawfull also for true catholikes to

vse the defence of their owne princes, and soueraignes against
the violence of heretikes, and to vse the benefit of their lawes
for the punishment of them. But it is vnlawfull to séeke to set
princes togither by the eares one with another, and to constreine
other mens subiects, and their dominions by force of armes, to
accept and embrace religion. For this neither the example of
Paul approueth, neither yet Augustine alloweth.
               
            
            
               Acts. 25. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  Of whom, when the accusers stood vp, they brought no
cause which I thought till of: but certaine questions of their
owne superstition which they had against him, and of one ⸫ Iesus
deceased whom Paule affirmed to liue.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This whom he tearmeth by contempt one Iesus, hath now made al the
Romaine Emperours and princes of the world to know him, and hath
giuen the seate of the Caesars to his poore seruants Peter and his successours.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Saint Peter neuer vsurped Caesars seate. Those whom you
vntrulie tearme his successors, like traitors haue by treason displaced
their soueraigne Lords, and by force and fraude set themselues
in their place. But that this was giuen them by Christ is
your surmise, which you can neuer prooue.
               
            
            
               Acts. 26. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  Whereupon, king Agrippa, I was not incredulous to the
heauenly vision: but to them first that are at Damascus, and at
Hierusalem, and vnto al the country of Iurie, and to the Gentiles,
did I preach that they should do ⸫ penance, and turne to
God, doing works woorthie of penance.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Penance often inculcated, and works agreeable to the same.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Repentance, which you corruptly call penance, and workes
woorthie of the same, we inculcate in our sermons oftener, more
earnestly, and more fruitfully then you. And yet we foster no
such confidence in the merits of mens works and doings, as you
flatter, and puffe vp men withall.
               
            
            
               Acts. 27. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  And when much time was spent, and wheras now it was not
safe sailing, bicause the ⸫ fast now was past, Paule comforted
them saieng to them.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  It may signifie the Iewes fast of the seauenth moneth September, after
which the nauigation was perilous winter approching.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is verie likely that Luke reckoned the time according to the
maner, and custome of the Iewes, and that therefore it is their
fast in the feast of reconciliation, that is here spoken of. Which
if you would haue vouchsafed to haue cited Master Beza or Master
Caluine for, you should haue done well, for of them or one of
them you learned this. But whatsoeuer you reape by them, you
haue not any good maners to be thankfull to them for it.
               
            
            
               Acts. 27. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  Feare not, Paul, thou must appeere before Caesar: and behold
God hath ⸫ giuen thee all that saile with thee.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Paul (saith S. Hierom) had so many soules in the ship giuen him, that
is, so many men saued for his sake, and after he is with Christ shall he shut
his mouth, and not be able once to speake for them that haue beleeued in
his Gospell? Hierom aduer. Vigil. Whereby he prooueth, that if God do
much for the merits of saints in this life, much more at their intercession
and praier in heauen.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You should say; Whereby S. Ierom goeth about, or indeuoreth
to prooue: For euery word he speaketh is not by and by a
proofe. What the saints of God do in heauen for men that are aliue,
is a secret, which God hath kept to himselfe, and not reuealed
to men. Therefore the reasons from their dealings héere to
their doings there are blinde, hauing no ground to frame them
on, but mans wisedome. There we do not beléeue S. Ieroms
conclusions, but where he hath better ground for his reasons.
               
            
            
               Acts. 28. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And when we had escaped then we knew that the ⸫ Iland
was called Mitilene.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This iland (now Malta) is the seate of the knights of the Rhodes.
The inhabitants wherof haue a speciall deuotion to saint Paul: to whom
both the cheefe church (being the bishops seate) is dedicated, and the
whole iland (as they count it) is consecrated. Where the people shew yet
to strangers, his prison, and other memories of his miracles.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To leaue the manifest grosse error of your old interpretor in

the name vntouched, and to leaue your selues, which will amend
no errors nor vntruthes be they neuer so manifest: To your note
we say, that we easily beléeue the inhabitants of Malta to be papists,
full of blind and ignorant deuotion.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  For the hart of this people is waxen grosse, and with their
eares haue they heauily heard, and their eies ⸫ they haue shut:
least perhaps they may see with their eies, and heare with their
eares, and vnderstand with their hart, and be conuerted, and I
heale them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere also (as Matth. 13.) it is plaine, that they would not see nor
heare, and that their excaecation is to be attributed to themselues, and
not to God. See annot. Iohn. 12, 40.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Their excecation as their fault is to be attributed to themselues
and none other: and to God as a iust iudgement and punishment
for their former sinnes.
               
            
         
         
            ROMANS.
            
               Roman. 1. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  By whom we haue receiued grace and apostleship ⸫ for obedience
to the faith.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Faith must not be subiect to sense, reason, arguing, or vnderstanding,
but must command and be obeied in humilitie and simplicitie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that euery word of the Lord is with reuerence to be
receiued, beléeued, and obeied in humility and simplicity, though
it be neuer so far beyond our capacitie, and the reach of our reason,
or the compasse of our sense or vnderstanding. But yet so as
that we beléeue not white to be blacke, sower to be swéet, neither
yet that the whole bodie of man may be contained within the
compasse of two or thrée inches. For in things subiect to sense we
are no where commanded not to beléeue and trust our senses.
               
            
            
               Rom. 1. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ In all nations, for the name of him among whom are you
also the called of Iesus Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine vseth this place and the like against heretikes

which would draw the common catholike faith of all nations, to some certaine
countries and corners of the world. August. ep. 161.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Whosoeuer hold any faith, that was not vniuersally planted
by the Apostles in all nations, and which hath not béene since generally
imbraced of all true Christians, the same hold not the
true catholike faith. And therefore the faith, which the church of
Rome at this day holdeth, is not the true catholike faith. For
what Apostle taught, or what church in their time beleeued, that
Christ after his ascension was bodily héere vpon the earth, and
that his bodie might be in many places at once: in one place hauing
the quantitie of a bodie, in another place void of all quantitie?
I would our controuersies about the church and the bishop of
Romes authoritie might be decided by this epistle. For he is
plaine in both cases.
               
            
            
               Rom. 1. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  For God is my witnes, whom I serue in my spirit in the Gospell
of his sonne, that without ⸫ intermission I make a memorie
of you alwaies in my praiers, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He praieth without intermission, that omitteth no day certaine times
of praier. Aust.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  He praieth for men without intermission, that being diligent
in praier, is therein alwaies mindefull of them. But your citing
now of Augustine to what end is it, but to make a shew of your
reading.
               
            
            
               Rom. 1. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  For I desire to see you, that I may impart to you some spirituall
grace, to ⸫ confirme you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Romaines were conuerted, and taught by Saint Peter before.
Therefore he vseth that speech to confirme them in their faith, Author
Commen. apud Hieronimum. Theodoret. in 16. Rom. & Chryst.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That the Romaines to whom Paule wrote were conuerted
afore, it is manifest, but by whose ministerie that doth not certainely
appéere. We know that diuers fathers are of opinion
that Peter tooke paines at Rome, afore Paule wrote thither.
But bicause the time they assigne of his comming thither, and

of his continuance there, can neither stande with the scriptures,
neither with other things, which they report of him, there is iust
cause, why in this point we should not beléeue them. But bicause
it is not material by whom they were conuerted, I let this passe.
But one thing I muse of, and I would faine be resolued in. Why
the holie Ghost, so diligently setting out Paules writing to the
Romaines afore he went thither, & Paules iourney thither, his
paines, and diligence there, doth not once signifie any thing to vs
of Peters being there, séeing there could be nothing more necessarie
for a christian to know, then that: If poperie be good Christianitie,
and if by Peters being there, such woonderfull priuiledges
be left vnto the bishops there, as they at this day chalenge.
               
            
            
               Rom. 1. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  For the iustice of God is reuealed therin by faith into faith,
As it is written, And the iust man liueth by faith.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth not Gods owne iustice in himselfe, but that iustice wherwith
God endueth man when he iustifieth him. Aug. de spir. & lit. cap. 9.
Whereby you may gather the vanitie of hereticall imputatiue iustice.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Whereby you may gather the impudencie of the papists, in
applieng fathers to that they ment not. The whole scope and
circumstances of the place are against inherent iustice, and for
the righteousnes of Christ imputed to vs. But God endueth
man, with righteousnes, when he doth iustifie him. It is true:
But that righteousnes whereby he maketh men iust, is the righteousnes
of Christ. The other wherewith he indueth vs, which
we call sanctification, being gods gift, is not sufficient to make vs
iust before God, but to declare vs iust before men.
               
            
            
               Rom. 1. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And they changed the glorie of the incorruptible God, into
a ⸫ similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of
fowles, and foure footed beasts, and of them that creepe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Lo these and the like are the images or idols so often condemned in
the Scriptures, and not the holie images of Christ and his saints.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Lo here be popish images manifestlie condemned, for you can
not denie, for all the world knoweth it, that you change the glory
of the incorruptible God, into the image of a corruptible man.

There were at that time no images of Christ, and his saints to
speake against. But the reasons by which the prophets, and apostles
condemned the former images of the Gentiles, do beate
downe also the images, and idolatrie of the papists.
               
            
            
               Rom. 1. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  For the which cause God ⸫ hath deliuered them vp vnto the
desires of their hart, into vncleannes, for to abuse their owne
bodies among themselues ignominiouslie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Ephes. 4. 19. he saith they haue deliuered or giuen vp themselues to
all vncleannes. By which conference of Scriptures we learne that themselues,
are the cause of their owne sinne and damnation, God of his iustice
permitting and leauing them to their owne will, and so giuing them
vp into passions, &c.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By conference of Scriptures we learne, that the matter and
cause of sinne, and so consequently of damnation, resteth in the
wicked themselues, and that God also in iustice punisheth sinne
by sinne. As in this chapter God punisheth the idolatrous, with
a most filthy sinfull life. Peruse ouer your stories of Rome, and
sée, whether euer this iudgement of God vpon men for idolatris
were more manifestly laid vpon any people, then it hath béene
and is vpon Rome. And tell vs what other people haue set out
the praises of Sodomitrie in print most impudently to the face
of all the world.
               
            
            
               Rom. 2. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  To them truly that according to patience in good works
seeke glorie and honor, and incorruption; life eternall.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Good men also according to the merits of their good will shall haue
their reward. August. ep. 47.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And why do you not adde that their good will is the gift of the
grace of God, séeing Augustine addeth it? Further, merits with
Augustine are taken simply for works, and not as it commonly
soundeth with the papist for a desert equiualent and correspondent
to the reward. Lastly, he acknowledgeth that God rewardeth
and crowneth his owne gifts in vs. How this can make for
your doctrine of merits I pray you tell vs.
               
            
            
               Rom. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  Thou therefore ⸫ that teachest another, teachest not thy
selfe: that preachest, men ought not to steale, thou stealest, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  It is a shamefull and a damnable thing, for preachers, teachers, or other
guides of mens life, to commit the same things themselues, which
they reprooue in other.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And can the pope and his cardinals be damned? or must we
secretly except them? I pray you tell vs whether. For in the
whole world it is impossible to find any mans sinnes more plain
or more monstrous.
               
            
            
               Rom. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ the name of God is blasphemed through you among
the Gentils.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is a great sinne, that by the ill life of the faithfull our Lords name
should be ill spoken of among the misbeleeuers, and manie withdrawen
from the true religion thereby.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I do not take it, that you meane, that murdering of princes,
treason, periurie, sedition, rebellion, to set vp popish religion, to
be any sinne at all, and yet it maketh your profession euill spoken
of, and alienateth therefrom all that carrie not bloodie minds and
harts.
               
            
            
               Rom. 2. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  Circumcision indeed profiteth, if thou obserue the law:
but if thou be a preuaricator of the law, thy circumcision is
become ⸫ prepuce.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Prepuce is the foreskin not circumcised, and therefore signifieth the
Gentils, or the state or condition of the Gentils, as circumcision the
Iewes and their state.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You can find in your hart to borrow of master Beza, but not
to be thankfull for that he lendeth you.
               
            
            
               Rom. 3. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  God forbid, but God is true: and euery man a lier: as it is
written; That thou maist be iustified in thy words, and ouercome
when thou art iudged.
               
               
                  The note.
                  God onely by nature is true, all men by nature may lie, deceiue, and be
deceiued: yet God by his grace and spirit may and doth preserue the Apostles,

and principall gouernors of his people, and the church and councels
in all truth, though they were and are meere men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you meane by these principall gouernors the pope and his
cardinals, as I do not doubt but you do, then we answer: That
as they are méere men, so they shew themselues: for they both
haue erred,Platin
                           •
                        s
                           •••
                         that Liber
                           ••
                         was an Arrian. and do erre. I would faine see one plaine place in all
the ancient fathers, that no bishop of Rome can err in saith. That
position is a late heresie vnknowen for a whole thousand yéeres
after Christ. And the generall consent of the diuines of Christendome
against it, till within these two hundred yéeres,Sessione 34. as may appéere
in the councell of Basill, where pope Eugenius was condemned
for an obstinate heretike, and therefore deposed.
               
            
            
               Rom. 3. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  The venim of aspes vnder their lips.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Aspidum a little kind of serpents.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We acknowledge it.
               
            
            
               Rom. 3. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  And the iustice of God by faith of Iesus Christ vnto all, and
vpon all that ⸫ beleeue in him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To beleeue in him, heere compriseth not onely the act of faith, but of
hope and charitie, as the Apostle explicateth himselfe. Gilat. 5. 6.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I neuer saw so loose dealing of any, but of such as both willingly
deceiue themselues, and labour to beguile others. The Apostle
telleth that faith worketh by charitie, and you thereupon
conclude, that to beléeue compriseth the acts of faith, hope, and
charitie. How this conclusion followeth, neither I sée, neither can
you make it euident. But let it he granted you, then how can you
excuse your selues of intollerable lieng and slandering, when almost
euery where you speake of the doctrine of iustification by
faith and beléeuing, as though hope and charitie were from faith
exiled and banished. But your shifts are foule, and manifest
slanders where you may, and when by plaine euidence of the
text you are beaten from them, then it is not ynough for hope
and charitie to accompanie faith, but they must be also comprised
of faith.
               
            
            
               
               Rom. 3. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  Iustified ⸫ gratis by his grace, by the redemption that is in
Christ Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  No man attaineth his first iustification by the merits either of his
faith or workes, but meerelie by Christs grace and mercie: though his
faith and works proceeding of grace be dispositions and preparations
thereunto.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Is Pelagius aliue againe, or why do ye not cite him, that your
followers may know your doctrine to be ancient, and also whom
you follow therein? In all that Augustine wrote against Pelagius
and his adherents, let vs sée somewhat to iustifie your note.
First, you acknowledge Christs méere grace and mercie in our
first iustification, and then by and by in a maner with the same
breath you ouerthrow it again, finding in our selues dispositions
and preparations thereunto, which if it be true, then how is it
fréelie and méerlie by his grace, when that grace is by our selues
preuented? But this faith and works preparatorie procéed out of
grace also. I maruell what grace you meane,August. de peccato originali. cap. 1. is it not the same
that Pelagius deceiued the Bishops withall in his subscription?
If it be not that, I know not what to make of it. For to shunne
pelagianisme, and yet to maintaine your heresie of merits, you
make your doctrine an hoch poch, and a mingle mangle, and by
no means will yéeld your selues in such order guiltie before God,
as that he may haue the whole glorie of your instification.
               
            
            
               Rom. 4. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  But to him that worketh not, yet beleeueth in him that iustifieth
the impious, his faith is ⸫ reputed to iustice according
to the purpose of the grace of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The word reputed doeth not diminish the truth of the iustice, as
though it were reputed for iustice being not iustice indeed, but signifieth
that as it was in it selfe, so God esteemed and reputed it, as the same
Greeke word must needs be taken verse 4. next going before, and 1.
Corinth. 4. 1. and els where.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If the faith of Abraham were iustice in déede and in it selfe,
and could abide the rigour of Gods examination, then this imputation
or reputation were to it as to a due dette. How then holdeth
the Apostles opposition of faith to works, & of dette to grace?

Or how commeth it imputed or reputed of grace? It is no fauour
to repute that to man which is trulie and reallie in him. It is
one thing simplie to repute, it is another thing of fauour to repute,
so that your labour about the signification of the word, is
but méere wrangling and cauilling. Besides, if Abraham had iustice
reallie and trulie in him selfe, whether it were by faith or
works, how can he be excluded from glorieng, when he may chalenge
of God his iustification as his due dette? Lastlie, this iustice
of Abraham, being the same that Dauid describeth in an happie,
blessed, or iustified man, how is it inherent in the man, when it
consisteth in pardon, remission, and couering of sinne? But you
doo nothing els but whet your wits to obscure and darken the
glorie of the grace of God.
               
            
            
               Rom. 
                     •
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And he receiued the ⸫ signe of circumcision, a seale of the iustice
of faith that is in prepuce: that he might be the father of
all that beleeue by the prepuce, that vnto them also it may be
reputed to iustice.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Our Sacraments of the new law giue ex opere operato, that grace and
iustice of faith which here is commended, whereas circumcision was but
a signe and marke of the same.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Liars are not to be beléeued though they sweare, much lesse
you when you bring but your bare word, for other proofe héere is
none. Circumcision is a seale of the iustice of faith, Ergo our Sacraments
of the new law giue grace ex opere operato, or els circumcision
was but a signe or marke of grace. These are strange
maners of concluding, and farre fetched.
               
            
            
               Rom. 5. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  By whom also we haue accesse through faith in this grace
wherein we stand, and glorie ⸫ in the hope of the glorie of the
sonnes of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christian men do not vaunt them selues of the certaintie of their
saluation, but glorie in the hope thereof onlie, which hope is here insinuated
to be giuen in our iustification, and is afterward to be confirmed by
probation in tribulation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is wonderfull, that you are not ashamed to cut off all assured

comforts from christian men. It were a vaine glorious vaunting
in déede, if this certaintie staied vpon anie matter in vs, but
when it resteth vpon the goodnesse of God and his gracious promises,
it were a péece of infidelitie not to glorie and reioice in it.
We will consider therefore the effects and fruits of faith in beléeuers,
as the Apostle setteth them downe in this place: First iustification,
then the sweete and inward féeling of our reconciliation
and attonement with God, which he calleth peace toward God.
Thirdlie, our constant standing and perseuering in this grace
and fauour, into the which we are receiued. Fourthlie, the ioy
and reioicing that this bréedeth through the assured hope and expectation,
that we shalbe partakers of the glorie of the children of
God, which ioy through hope assured, is so great in them that
haue a continuall eie to the glory set before them, that no trouble
nor tribulation can abridge or breake it off, but that our hope
and expectation is still more and more confirmed and assured.
But you to ouerthrow all this, make hope a doubtfull and vncertaine
expectation of the things which God hath promised, and so
call the truth of God into doubt.
               
            
            
               Rom. 5. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  For whie did Christ, when we as yet were ⸫ weake according
to the time die for the impious?
               
               
                  The note.
                  The heretikes falselie translate of no strength, to take away all free
will. No. Testam. 1580.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Rather then you will loose fréewill, you will contend for sinners,
wicked men, and enemies of God, and in them there must
be a greater force of frée will then in Paul: for Paul was not able
of himselfe to thinke a good thought,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . & yet these are not so weake,
but that there is some strength and abilitie left in them. For the
Gréeke word here signifieth weaknesse, and doeth it not so in the
1. Corinths. 15. verse 43. It is sowen in weakenesse, being spoken
of the dead bodie of a man? And I pray you tell me, did anie
strength remaine in dead carcasses, and is not the case alike with
the wicked and vngodlie? are not they dead in sinne or by sinne?
               
            
            
               Rom. 5. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  For as by the disobedience of one man, manie were made
sinners: so also by the obedience of one, manie ⸫ shall be made
iust.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Here we maie see against the heretikes, that they which be borne of
Christ, and iustified by him, be made and const
                        •••
                     ted iust indeed, and
not by imputation onlie: as all that be horne of Adam be vniust and
sinners in truth, and not by imputation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By the obedience of one manie shall be made iust: Is this obedience
in vs or imputed vnto vs? If it be in vs, then it is the obedience
of many, but the text is manifest that this obedience resteth
in the person of one, that is, of Christ, and by grace it is imputed
vnto vs and made ours. You do but beguile the simple, and such
as are not able to espie your fraud with the contrarie part of the
Antithesis. For Adams onlie transgression was sufficient to
make al his posteritie sinners, & subiect to the iust sentence of condemnation.
And therefore death the reward of sinne did not only
rage and raigne ouer actuall transgressors,Rom. 5. 1
                           •
                        . but also ouer infants
and babes skant borne.
               
            
            
               Rom. 6. 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ we are buried together with him by baptisme into
death, that as Christ is risen from the dead by the glorie of the
father, so we also may walke in newnesse of life.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Remission of sinne, new life, sanctification and iustification are giuen
by baptisme, bicause it resembleth in vs, and applieth to vs Christs death
and resurrection, and ingraffeth vs into him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And whie doo you not say that these are giuen vs by baptisme
ex opere operato, for that I know is your meaning? And otherwise
we do know that God doeth trulie exhibite his promised
graces to beléeuing receiuers.
               
            
            
               Rom. 6. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  But thankes be to God, that you were the seruants of sinne,
but ⸫ haue obeied from the hart vnto that forme of doctrine,
into the which you haue bene deliuered.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere againe is signified, that our discharge from the bondage of
sinne, is by the Christian faith, and by obedience to the whole doctrine
of Christes religion: in that the Apostle attributeth this their deliuerance
from sinne, to their humble receiuing of the Catholike
faith.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Here is signified that sanctification, and hartie obedience to the
catholike doctrine, 
                        〈◊〉
                      consequents of iustification by faith, and so
of our fréedome from sinne. But that their humble receiuing and
obeieng that doctrine is the cause of their deliuerance from sin,
is your dreame, and neither the apostles spéech nor meaning.
               
            
            
               Rom. 6. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  For as you haue exhibited your members to serue vncleannes,
and iniquitie vnto iniquitie: so now exhibite your members
to serue ⸫ iustice, vnto sanctification.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He signifieth that as when they were subiect to sinne by continual and
often working wickednes, they encreased in iniquitie: that so also nowe
being iustified, they may and should by externall works of iustice encrease
their iustice and sanctification.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Under the ambiguous name of iustice you séeke to confounde
iustification and sanctification, to the end you may giue the better
colour to your inherent righteousnes. Therefore to auoide
your fraude, I distinctly answere, that as iniquitie is increased
by continuance in euill works, so sanctitie begun in the children
of God is augmented, and encreased by all maner of holie exercises.
               
            
            
               Rom. 
                     •
                  . 2.
               
                  The text.
                  For the woman that is vnder a husband, ⸫ her husband liuing
is bounde to the law: but if her husband be dead, she is
loosed from the law of hir husband.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Nothing but death dissolueth the band betwixt man and wife: though
for fornication, one may depart from an others companie. Therefore to
marrie againe is adulterie, during the life of the partie separated.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That death dissolueth the bande of matrimonie, is in this
place manifest: but that nothing but death dissolueth it, that is
your addition, and hath no iust, or good ground. If you woulde
vouchsafe to giue vs a definition of the band of matrimonie, the
matter would quickly be made manifest, and plaine. In the
meane space your conclusion (which is, that it is adultery to marrie
againe during the life of the parfie separated) followeth after
your woonted maner, that is, like a stragler.
               
            
            
               
               Rom. 7. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  Therefore my brethren ⸫ you also are made dead to the
law by the bodie of Christ: that you may be an other mans,
who is risen again from the dead, that we may fructify to god.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Being now baptized, and dead to sinne, and engraffed in Christs mystical
body, you are discharged of the law of Moyses & are free in Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you vnderstand this our death to the law, and so consequentlie
our discharge from it, not absolutely, but as it is the strength
of sinne, then I allow and like of your note.
               
            
            
               Rom. 7. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  But now we are loosed from the law of death, wherein we
were deteined, in so much we serue in ⸫ newnes of spirit, and
not in oldnes of the letter.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By baptisme we haue not Christs iustice imputed to vs, but an inward
newnes of spirit giuen vs, and resident in vs.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  How prooue you your negatiue? Why haue we not both? Do
not they which are baptized put on Christ? If they put on Christ,
are they not adorned, and beautified with his righteousnes imputed
to them? Or doth God giue Christ to them, and not the
benefits of Christ togither with him? Nay this newnes of spirit
giuen vs and resident in vs, is a necessarie consequent of the
former imputed to vs by faith. But you would faine exclude the
former, to leaue place alone for your inherent iustice.
               
            
            
               Rom. 7. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ occasion being taken, sinne by the commandement
wrought in me all concupiscence. For without the law sinne
was dead.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Sinne or concupiscence, which was a sleepe before, was wakened by
prohibition, the law not being the cause thereof, nor giuing occasion therunto,
but occasion being taken by our corrupt nature to resist that which
was commanded.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The corrupt nature of man is prone to doo that which is forbidden,
no maruel then though occasion of sinning be taken from
whence it is not giuen. But your blindnes is maruellous, that

you can not sée this corruption of nature, to be aswell sin, as the
cause of sinne in all men.
               
            
            
               Rom. 8. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  For that which was impossible to the law, in that it was
weakened by the flesh: God sending his sonne in the similitude
of the flesh of sinne, euen of sin condemned sinne in the
flesh, that the ⸫ iustification of the law might be fulfilled in vs,
who walke not according to the flesh, but according to the
spirit.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This conuinceth against the churches aduersaries, that the law, that
is Gods commandements may be kept, and that the keeping thereof is
iustice, and that in Christian men that is fulfilled by Christs grace, which
by the force of the law could neuer be fulfilled.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Who are so blinde, as they which will not sée? The text and
circumstances thereof are plaine, that whereas it is impossible
for any to be iustified by obseruing or kéeping the law, for that it
was of no strength or (as you translate it) to weake for that by
reason of the flesh: God hath prouided a remedie for that in his
Christ, who being sent in our nature, hath fulfilled the law for
vs, which benefite of his is made ours by grace of imputation,
and so the iustification of the law fulfilled in vs. This conuinceth
that the law may be kept, not by others, but by Christ, and that
the kéeping thereof is iustice and our iustice, but inherent in
Christ, and ours by imputation and grace, and therefore is not
saide to be fulfilled of vs, but in vs.
               
            
            
               Rom. 8. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  For whosoeuer ⸫ are by the spirit of God, they are the sons
of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth not that the children of God be violently compelled against
their wils, but that they be sweetely drawen, mooued and induced
to do good. August. Euchiridion, cap. 64. de verb. domini ser. 43. ca. 7.
de verb. Apost. ser. 13. cap. 11. 12.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Here you bring authorities thicke, where néede none. Who
euer expounded this leading of the spirit, of forcible constreining
men against their wils? Bicause your fréewill is denied, you
would haue your followers to beléeue, that we make men blocks

and stocks. As for you, you are so far from being led by the spirit,
that you haue no sence, nor féeling of it, and therfore dare not say
that you haue the spirit of God. And good reason why you should
not, bicause the holy Ghost hath not wrought in you any change,
or alteration from your superstitions follies.
               
            
            
               Rom. 9. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  For when they were not yet borne, nor had done any good
or euill (that the purpose of God according to election might
stande) not of works, but of the caller, it was said to her, That
the elder shall serue the yoonger.
               
               
                  The note.
                  S. Hierom q. 10. ad Hedibiam. All the Epistle surely to the Romaines
needeth interpretation, and is enwrapped with so great obscurities,
to vnderstand it we neede the helpe of the holie Ghost, who by the
Apostle did dictate these same things, but especially this place. Howbeit
nothing pleaseth vs but that which is Ecclesiasticall, that is the sense of
the Church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Saint Hierome did not vse this spéech to fraie any from reading
anie part of the scriptures, and inquiring the sense of them.
For he himselfe séeketh to satisfie the questions propounded, and
that to a woman whom he scarcely knew. That this epistle néedeth
interpretation, and especially the illumination of that spirit,
which caused it to be written, it hath common with the rest of
the Scriptures. For the naturall man vnderstandeth not the
things of the spirit of God, which are spiritually discerned. We
would be loath to please our selues with any priuate interpretation,
not receiued nor allowed of the true church of God. But
you would gladly haue this whole Epistle out of the way, and
especially this chapter, bicause it setteth out plainely Gods frée
election, and choise without respect or regard had to works, either
aforegoing, or following. Which sense though contrarie to
the sense of your church, Saint Hierome holdeth as the sense of
the church then. And therefore he concludeth that question, that
Hedibia should for euer hold her peace from inquiring anie causes
of Gods will, why he is mercifull to one, & seuere to another.
               
            
            
               Rom. 9. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  And if God willing to shew wrath, and to make his might
knowne, ⸫ susteined in much patience the vessels wrath apt to
destruction, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  That God is not the cause of any mans reprobation or damnation,
otherwise then for punishment of his sins, he sheweth by that he expecteth
all mens amendment with great patience, and consequently that they
haue also freewill.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The cause and matter of mans damnation is in himselfe. And
yet God did prepare the wicked, or damned to be vessels of ignominie,
or dishonor. It is wel that you rake so diligently amongst
the vngodly and reprobate for your fréewill: For they sin frankly
and fréely. And if you finde it not amongst the slaues of sinne,
you shall finde it no where. But I haue told you, and do tell you
againe that this fréedome to do euill, is the seruitude of sinne,
and that therefore this fréewill cannot do any thing but sinne.
               
            
            
               Rom. 10. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  For the end of the law is Christ: vnto ⸫ iustice to euery one
that beleeueth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The law was not giuen to make a man iust or perfect by it selfe, but
to bring vs to Christ to be iustified by him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If the law were not giuen to make a man iust, then how can
a man be iustified by his owne works, and obedience? Againe,
how then do you holde it possible to be fulfilled by men, for no
doubt it maketh iust the fulfillers thereof? Though you bring all
your suttle shifts, and euasions togither, yet if you holde fast this
note, your inherent iustice to make a man iust withall, shall be
iust woorth two strawes.
               
            
            
               Rom. 10. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  For Moyses wrote ⸫ that the iustice which is of the law, the
man that hath done it, shall liue in it.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The iustice of the law of Moyses, went no further of it selfe but to
saue a man from temporall death and punishment prescribed to the
transgressors of the same.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Were not the ten commandements part of the law of Moses?
And doth not Christ answer the yoong man that would know by
what doing he should haue life euerlasting, Kéepe the commandements?
Did the curse of the law from which Christ deliuered

vs, extend no further than to temporall punishment? Perfect
righteousnes bringeth perfect life. The law is a perfect rule of
righteousnes: therefore if it could be fulfilled of vs, it should
bring vs to perfect eternall life. What meaneth Paul by his opposition
of those two sentences; The iust shall liue by faith: And
he that doth these things shall liue in them; if one and the same
life eternall be not promised in both, in the one to beléeuers, in
the other to doers? Againe, if this your note were true, the law
of it selfe, and in it selfe, had béene too weake to iustifie or sanctifie,
but saint Paul saith not it was too weake in it selfe, but it was
weakened by the flesh, and therefore could not iustifie. But as all
poperie is patched togither of old and new heresies, so this patch
was borrowed of the Manicheans.
               
            
            
               Rom. 10. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  For euerie one ⸫ whosoeuer shall inuocate the name of our
Lord, shall be saued.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To beleeue in him and to inuocate him, is to serue him with all loue
and sincere affection. All that so do shall doubtlesse be saued, and shall
neuer be confounded.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If to inuocate him be to serue him, then why teach you men
to inuocate others, and so consequently to serue others which are
but men? And thus whilest you are loth to attribute saluation to
faith alone, but would make it common to works also, you cut
your owne throtes, and shew your selues to all the world, to be
manifest impostors and deceiuers.
               
            
            
               Rom. 10. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  But all ⸫ do not obey the Gospell.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We see then, that it is in a mans freewill to beleeue or not to beleeue,
to obey or disobey the Gospell or truth preached.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your sight is sharpe, you can sée far into a mill stone: no reasonable
man can sée how your consequence followeth. All do not obey,
ergo they haue frée will to obey, or not to obey. It is like this:
All papists go not whither they list, ergo no papists are in prison,
or restrained of libertie.
               
            
            
               Rom. 11. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  I haue left me seuen thousand men that haue not bowed
their knees to ⸫ Baal.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  The heretikes adde heere image to the text, as Acts. 19. 35.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  A very great corruption sure to call an image an image. Your
owne consciences do accuse you of grosse idolatrie, of bowing to
the works of your owne hands, and therefore you wince and
kicke if a man put his hand but nigh the sore. But I pray you
what meaneth the feminine article in the Gréeke text ioined
with Baal? Doth it not inforce vs to vnderstand the word, Image?
               
            
            
               Rom. 11. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  I say then, haue they so stumbled ⸫ that they should fall?
God forbid. But by their offence saluation is to the Gentils
that they may emulate them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Iewes are not reiected wholy and incurably for euer, but for a
part, and for a time suffered to fall, which God did turne to the Gentils
generall good.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you would alwaies borow your notes from such as in simplicitie
and singlenes of hart haue sought to lead the people into
truth, as you haue done this, the blotting of much paper, and the
losse of much time might be spared.
               
            
            
               Rom. 11. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  And if the offence of them be the riches of the world: and
the diminution of them ⸫ the riches of the Gentils: how much
more the fulnesse of them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If God could, and did turne their fall and sinne into the good of the
Gentils, much more will he worke good of their general conuersion, which
shall be at length the accomplishment of the church consisting of both
the nations.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  God which doth turne all things to the good of those which are
his, hasten if it be his will their conuersion, and so the comming
of his sonne, to abolish Antichrist, and end our miseries.
               
            
            
               Rom. 11. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  Well. Bicause of incredulitie they ⸫ were broken, but thou
by faith doest stand: be not too highly wise, but feare.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We see that he which standeth by faith may fall from it, and therfore

must liue 
                        〈◊〉
                      feare, and not in the vaine presumption and securitie of heretikes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I see no such thing, but onely this, that the seuere iudgment
of God against others, should make men walke more carefully
in their calling, and to feare and tremble at the sight and view of
God heauie iudgments: but you as you haue not the spirit of
adoption,1. Ioh. 4. 18. so you know no feare but seruile, which the loue of God
exileth and banisheth from it. For the sonnes of God though they
know and are well assured, that they shall abide in their fathers
house for euer, yet feare, tremble, and quake at euery threat of
his. Therefore this feare and certaintie of saluation are not opposed
one against the other. But to turn home your note to your
selues: God hath not spared the Iewes, nor Ierusalem, how shal
he then spare the Romans and Rome? Which therefore doth
aptly agrée with the scope and purpose of the Apostle, bicause he
compareth not ech particular man with other, but nation with
nation. For many particular men of the Iewes were not reiected,
and in other nations multitudes haue not the faith, which
they professe themselues to haue. And therefore it followeth, that
as God reiected the Iewes, so he may reiect any other nation of
the Gentils. Which is the more diligently to be considered of
you, for that the holie Ghost by the Apostle made speciall choise
to set downe this threat to the Romans, who as you imagine
can neuer erre or fall.
               
            
            
               Rom. 12. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  For I say by the grace that is giuen me, to al that are among
you, ⸫ not to be more wise, than behooueth to be wise, but to
be wise to sobrietie, to euery one as God hath diuided the
measure of faith.
               
               
                  The note.
                  None must presume to meddle aboue the measure of God gift, or
out of the compasse of his state and vocation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your note is true. And if your proud Antichrist tooke not vpon
him without this compasse, then there had not béen at this day so
much war and bloodshed, so many mischiefes & miseries throughout
Christendome, as now there is through his procurement and
setting on.
               
            
            
               Rom. 12. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And hauing gifts, according to the grace that is giuen vs,
different either ⸫ prophesie according to the rule of faith, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Prophesie is interpretation of the scriptures, which is according to the
rule of faith, when it is not against the right faith, or when it is profitable
to edifie charitie, as saint Augustine speaketh. Lib. 3. doct. Christ. c. 25.
& lib. 1. c. 36. and in effect he saith the same, Lib. 12. Confess. cap. 18.
vnto cap. 32.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  How happeneth it that you haue left all Augustines rules of
interpreting, and left vs one onely rule of your owne deuising to
interpret by, that is, the sense and vnderstanding of your church
of Rome? And if that faile, howsoeuer it agréeth with the rule of
faith, how profitable soeuer it be to edifie withall, howsoeuer it be
vpholden with most plaine and manifest texts of scripture, what
consent of antiquitie soeuer there be for it, you reiect it, Rome
with you must be the rule of truth: whatsoeuer procéedeth from
thence must be holden for an oracle.
               
            
            
               Rom. 1
                     •
                  . 14.
               
                  The text.
                  Blesse them that persecute you: blesse, and ⸫ curse not.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Cursing is a vice whereunto the common people is much giuen, who
often curse them, on whom they cannot otherwise be reuenged: they may
see heere that it is a great fault.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The common people learned of your holie father of Rome to
curse them on whom they cannot otherwise be reuenged. And
that they haue not espied this to be a great fault, the fault hath
béen in you, which haue kept till now of late this, and other scriptures
from the eies of the common people, to the end they should
not sée it. And we sée yet at this day, that this vice there rageth
and raigneth most, where the people are most ignorant, and most
inclined to poperie.
               
            
            
               Rom. 13. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  For he that loueth his neighbor hath ⸫ fulfilled the law.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere we learne, that the law may be and is fulfilled by loue in this
life, against the aduersaries saieng, it is impossible to keepe the commandements.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The Apostle héere doth commend vnto vs the loue of our
neighbor, not as a particular precept, but as a generall, comprehending
the whole law. Therefore he that loueth as he ought,

fulfilleth the law, but that any man (Christ onely excepted) loueth
his neighbor in that perfection that he ought, neither the Apostle
affirmeth, nor you can prooue. Therefore your aduersaries
may and do truly hold, that it is impossible to fulfill the law by
exact obedience, and kéeping of the commandements.
               
            
            
               Rom. 14. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  I know and am persuaded in our Lord Iesus Christ, that nothing
is ⸫ common of it selfe, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Common, that is vncleane. See the annotation, Marke 7. 2.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  An Hebraisme, bicause they thought that the things vsed commonlie
of vncircumcised nations were vncleane, as also they
estéemed of the vncircumcised persons them selues.
               
            
            
               Rom. 14. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  But to him that supposeth anie thing to be common, to
him it is common.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Though he wish the weake to be borne withall, yet he vttereth his
minde plainlie, that in deed all the meates forbidden and vncleane in the
law, are now through Christ clensed and lawfull for euery man to vse.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  As Paul was plaine in deliuering his doctrine concerning
daies and meats, so the papists doctrine thereof is obscure, darke,
and doubtfull, so that the greatest number of their simple followers
haue their consciences snarled and intangled in daies and
meates, and know not the indifferencie of them.
               
            
            
               Rom. 15. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ what things soeuer haue bene written, to our learning
they are written: that by patience and consolation of the
scriptures we may haue hope.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth all that is written in the old Testament,Pope Paul the second esteemed all that were learned for heretiks, & d
                           •
                        dwish the Romanes to set their children no longer to schoole, but till they could write & reade, Platina. much more all
things written in the new Testament are for our learning and comfort.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If both the Scriptures of the old & new Testament be written
for our learning, what meaneth the church of Rome neither
to prouide teachers in number sufficient, nor yet to suffer the
people to reade them in a language that they may vnderstand:
is it not bicause you are content to haue men nusseled in ignorance,

and so spoiled of the comfort which God hath prouided for
them. I thinke pope Paul and you be of one iudgement.
               
            
            
               Rom. 15. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And the God of patience and of comfort giue you to be of
one mind one toward another according to Iesus Christ, that
of ⸫ one minde with one mouth you may glorifie God, and the
Father of our Lord Iesus Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Vnitie in religion commended.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Popish vnitie consisteth in this, that seruice bée in one language
through Christendome, whether people vnderstand it or
no: Otherwise what vntie is and hath bene in your religion,
they that are acquainted with your writers and stories can tell.
As for example your great professor Martinius, whilest he is caried
with an enuious stomacke to carpe at our English translations,
doeth condemne yours in more then an hundred places.
But I confesse howsoeuer you haue dissented in other things,
you haue held, and do hold a marueilous vnitie against al verity,
and that is the cause that not one of you maketh anie conscience
of lieng. And though there are amongst vs also some contentions,
yet they are not about waightie points of doctrine, for therein is
a verie great consent, but such as hath happened amongst the Apostles
them selues, and are all about bearing with, or rooting
out some leauings of yours.
               
            
            
               Rom. 15. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  For I say Christ Iesus to haue bene ⸫ minister of the circumcision,
for the veritie of God to confirme the promises of the
fathers.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ did execute his office and ministerie onlie towards the people
of circumcision, that is, the Iewes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note is true, but yet so as that in diuerse Christ afore
shewed the calling of the Gentiles.
               
            
            
               Rom. 15. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  Now therefore I will go to Hierusalem to minister to the
⸫ Saints.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth the holie persons, that hauing forsaken all their goods
for Christ, were wholie conuerted to serue the Lord with all their mind.

Saint Hierome against Vigilantius the heretike, reprehending the almes
giuen to such, as do the heretikes also of our time.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  What heretikes of our time finde fault with reléeuing the
néedie saints of God, but you meane them that iustlie finde fault
that a great number of roging Friers, being lustie, and able to
get their liuing by the sweat of their browes, should be reléeued,
and so deuoure and consume that which is due to the poore, néedie,
sicke and impotent people, contrarie to the precept of Paul:
He that laboureth not, let him not eat. But at Hierusalem there
were then none of those, that professed witfull pouertie.
               
            
            
               Rom. 15. 30.
               
                  The text.
                  I beseech you therefore brethren by our Lord Iesus Christ,
and by the charitie of the holie Ghost, that you ⸫ helpe me in
your praiers for me to God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  In that the Apostle desireth to be praied for, we may be mooued to
seeke the same as a great benefit.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The praiers of the faithfull are very forcible helps to aduance
forward the good desires and endeuors of Gods ministers.
               
            
            
               Rom. 16. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Salute Prisca and Aquila my helpers in Christ Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The onely salutation of so woorthie a man is sufficient to fill him with
great grace that is saluted. Chrysost. in 2. Timoth. 4.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I maruell you are not ashamed to alledge the doctors for that
which you your selues beléeue not. Can any man by saluting bestow
Gods graces, where it pleaseth him to salute? The fathers
prooue the holie Ghost to be God, bicause the gifts and graces of
God are distributed as he will. And I pray you how much inferior
do you make Paul to the spirit of God, if his salutation be
sufficient to fill with graces, whom it pleaseth him to salute?
Wel let your note haue that credit, that Chrysostoms bare word
without further matter may giue it.
               
            
            
               Rom. 16. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  Who for my life haue laid downe their necks, to whom not
onely I giue thanks, but also the churches of the Gentils, and
their domesticall church.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  This domesticall church was either that faithfull and Christian
houshold, or rather the Christians meeting togither there, and in such
good houses to heare diuine seruice, and the Apostles preaching in those
times of persecution.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Why do you not in stead of diuine seruice, say mattens and
masse? For we now vnderstand by diuine seruice, that they praied
togither in a toong they vnderstood, and that likewise some parcel
of scripture was read, which was by their Apostles or pastors
interpreted to them. Which how far it disagreeth with the maner
and custome of your church, he that hath halfe an eie may sée
               
            
            
               Rom. 16. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  Salute Philologus, and Iulia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympias,
and all the saints that are with them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The protestants heere reason thus: Peter is not heere saluted, Therfore
he was neuer at Rome. See the annotation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You slander the protestants. Their maner of reasoning is not
so loose. They reason thus: Paul who so carefully reckoned and
saluted the chéefe and principall Christians at Rome by name,
would not haue forgotten Peter as the principall and chéefe, if he
had then béene there. Therefore it is very likely, that he was not
then there, bicause he was not then saluted. We know that it is
not materiall, whether Peter were at Rome or no, or whether
he were bishop there or no. And therfore they are not points that
we greatly sticke on. But those that tell the time of his comming
thither, and how long he liued, they are manifestly confuted by
the truth of the word, against which no credit of men can stand.
For his being bishop there, the consent is not so great as you
Thrasonically brag of. For some hold that neither he was bishop
there, nor made the first bishop there. Some make Paul as much
bishop there as Peter. That Peter might then be out of the citie,
                        
                           ••
                        emeus. Eusebius lib. 4. cap. 6. Ecclesiasticae historiae.
either for persecution, or busines, or else that being there, Paule
might write other letters, wherin this might be inclosed, are but
your surmises, wanting both testimonie of antiquitie, and al probabilitie.
               
            
            
               Rom. 16. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  And I desire you brethren, to marke them that make dissentions

and scandals contrarie to the doctrine which you haue
learned, ⸫ and auoid them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Of the prince of the Apostles saith Theodoret vpon this place.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Why we should thinke they learned of Peter, I sée no reason.
But for that which you would haue the simple beléeue, that by
the word which it pleaseth you to translate prince, Peters supremacie
aboue the other Apostles is meant, they are to be admonished
that the fathers giue the same name to Paule as well as
to Peter, whereby it appéereth, that they thought not of any such
supreme power or authoritie: which also is not onely manifest
by the continual practise of the first church, but also by plaine spéeches
of the fathers. Eusebius saith,Ecclesiastica historia. lib. 20. cap. 1. that neither Peter nor Iohn
tooke vpon them to be chéefe ouer the Apostles, but gaue the primacie
to Iames whom they made bishop of the Apostles. Cyprian
saith, that all the Apostles were equal in authoritie. Ambrose
cannot tell of Peter and Paul whether of them he may preferre.
By this it is euident,De simplicitate praelatorum sermone. 66. that the fathers meant not by reuerend titles
they gaue Peter, to exalt him in authoritie aboue the rest.
               
            
            
               Rom. 16. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  For such do not serue Christ our Lord, but their owne bellie:
and by ⸫ sweete speeches and benedictions seduce the
harts of the innocents.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The speciall way that heretikes haue euer had to beguile was and is
by sweete words & gaie speeches, which their sheeps coate see before described
particularly in the annotation vpon Saint. Matthew. cap. 7.
vers. 15.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Is there any way of beguiling that papists want? Did euer
any in the worlde prouide better for their bellies? Did you not
make of Saint Peters keies, picklockes to rob euerie mans coffers
with them? Extraordinarie tokens of fained holines where
shall a man looke for them, if he finde them not in your Iesuites,
and friers? filed and fine spéeches are your studie. And
that they may be more admired, and better able to deceiue, you
kéepe from the people the key of knowledge, you nuzell them in
ignorance to the ende, they should not be able to discerne words
from matter.
               
            
         
         
            
            1. Corinthians.
            
               1. Cor. 1. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And I meane this, for that euerie one of you saith, ⸫ I certes
am Paules, and I Apollos, but I Cephas, and I Christs.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The beginning of schismes is ouer much admiring, and addicting
mens selues to their owne particular masters.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue one master, that is to saie Christ, him we professe to
follow, and of him to learne: others of what godlines or estimation
so euer we follow, but so far foorth as they followed Christ.
If admiring of men, and addicting mens selues to particular masters,
be the beginning and cause of schismes: Then what can
you say for your Austen friers, your Dominicans, your Franciscans,
your Iesuites, your schoolemen, your Thomists, your Scotists,
why they should not go for schismatikes? Haue they not the
authors of their their sects in admiration? Haue they not addicted
themselues to their particular masters?Antoninus de Dominico. Haue they not deuised
a number of vntruthes to bring their masters into admiration,
and estimation? What though there be some kinde of consent
amonst them, yet that excuseth them not from being schismatikes,
no more then the consent of Pharisies, Sadduces, & other
sectaries of the Iewes against Christ, and his truth, did excuse
them.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 3. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  As it were to litle ones in Christ, I gaue you ⸫ milke to drink,
not meate: for you could not as yet. But neither can you now
verily, for yet you are carnall.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The church onely hath truth both in her milke, and in her bread, that
is whether she instruct the perfect or imperfect, who are called carnall.
Aug. lib. 15. cap. 3. contra Faustum.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you went not about with the name of the church to beguile
the simple, as though thereby your church were vnderstood, wée
néeded not to giue this any answer. But now to auoide your deceite
we (as we learne of Augustine) admonish all men by the
scriptures to iudge of the church,Augustin. de 
                           ••
                        mtate Ecclesie capite. 4. least therin being deceiued, they
in stéed of milke and bread receiue strong poison.
               
            
            
               
               1. Cor. 3. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  For we are Gods coadiutors: ⸫ you are Gods husbandrie,
you are Gods building.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A maruellous dignitie of spirituall pastors, that they be not the onely
instruments, or ministers of Christ, but also Gods coadiutors in the worke
of our saluation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I haue not hitherto neither carped at your old translator, neither
yet at your translation, neither will I begin here, though I
might. Onlie this I would haue all men to obserue diligently,
that in this dignitie, which God hath bestowed vpon men to vse
their labor,1. Cor. 3. 5. and paines in his worke, men do vse strength not naturall
but conferred by grace, that they may be apt, and fit instruments
to aduance forward Gods worke, so that they haue nothing
of themselues, in themselues to glorie of. And further, that
all that which is chéefe in this worke,1. Cor. 3. 7 as all encrease of goodnes,
saluation, and life do so procéede from God, as that therein he vseth
no mans helpe, but his owne.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 4. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  But these things ⸫ brethren I haue transfigured, into my
selfe and Apollo for you: that in vs you may learne, one not
to be puffed vp against another, aboue that is written.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Lo when he named himselfe, and Apollo, and Cephas: he ment other
seditious and factious preachers, whose names he spared.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We sée rather that those which are seditious and factious, doo
for their better winning of credit, shroud them selues vnder the
names of those which be famous for godlines and learning. And
so it is like that they did at Corinth, & that the Apostle correcting
the fault, was content to spare their names, that by that milde
dealing he might the better winne them, if it were possible.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 4. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ if you haue ten thousand paedagogues in Christ, yet
not manie fathers.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So may Saint Augustine our Apostle say to vs English men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The reader is here to vnderstand, that our papists meane Augustine

the monke, & not Augustine the famous doctor, and that
this Augustine was no Apostle, for that he was not sent vs immediatlie
from God, but from a méere man. This Augustine
found in this Iland better Christians then he made anie, whom
bicause they could not like that gallie mawfrie which he brought
from Rome, he caused to be most cruellie murdered in great
numbers. And yet this is to be noted also, that a great number of
our popish corruptions in his time were neither bred nor borne,
as for example the vniuersalitie of the popes power and transubstantiation.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 5. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  And you are puffed vp, and ⸫ haue not mourned rather,
that he might be taken away from among you, that hath done
this deede.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christian men should be sorowfull to see greeuous offences borne
withall, and ought zealouslie to seeke the offenders punishment by excommunication.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note agréeth not with the open practise of your church
of Rome, wherein not onlie Curtisans are maintained for money,
but also the sinne of Sodom both fréelie practised, and also
praised and commended.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 5. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  I wrote to you in ⸫ an Epistle, not to keepe companie with
fornicators.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Either this epistle in the words before, or some other.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I take it to be some other, for that I sée no reason to lead me
to thinke it to be this.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 5. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  But now I wrote to you, not to keepe companie, if he that
is named a brother, be a fornicator, or a couetous person, or a
⸫ seruer of idols, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner:
with such a one not so much as take meate.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A notorious wilfull corruption in the Bible 1562. translating in
the verse before idolaters, and here worshippers of images, the Apostles
word being one 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , idolater.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  A marueilous iudgement of God is vpon you, that contrarie

to the expresse commandement of God, & contrarie to the whole
course of scriptures, you maintaine that worshipping of images
is not idolatrie. Your quarrell to the translation is answered by
Doctor Fulke against Martinius. As for your selues you bow to
the wood, whereof part hath serued to warme men,Esai. 44. 18, 19. and part to
dresse their meat: denie it if you can.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 6. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  Or know you not that the ⸫ saints shall iudge of the world?
               
               
                  The note.
                  The faithfull iudge and giue sentence with God at the latter daie,
speciallie the Apostles and the perfect Christians that haue forsaken all
for Christs sake.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The promise of iudging the world is generall to all true christians,
and not restrained to perfect Christians. But that is intollerable,
that you plant the perfection of Christians in them
selues, that is, in their owne doing, whereas our perfection is the
doing and perfect obedience of our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 6. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  Do not erre, neither fornicators, nor ⸫ seruers of idols, nor
adulterers, nor the effoeminate, nor the liers with mankinde,
nor theeues, nor the couetous, nor drunkards, nor ra
                        ••
                     ers, nor
extortioners shall possesse the kingdome of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  For this the English Bible 1562. falselie translateth worshippers of
images.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  A foole must be alwaies plaieng with his bable, your quarell is
not woorth the answering so oft. An idol in Gréeke is the same
that we call image in English: but you can not abide that an
image should be called an image, but you can abide to commit as
grosse and foule idolatrie, as euer there was anie in the world.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 6. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  Euerie sinne whatsoeuer a man doeth is without the bodie:
but he that doeth fornicate, sinneth ⸫ against his owne bodie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Fornication is not onely an enimie to the soule, but wasteth, weakeneth,
corrupteth, and defileth the bodie, more properly and directly than
any other sinnes do.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your note is true, and yet some of your side do prefer fornication

before marriage in some persons, and all your priests refuse
the remedie,Smith de votis & cae
                           •
                        batu. that God himself hath ordained against fornication.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 7. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  Defraud not one another, except perhaps by consent for a
time, ⸫ that you may giue your selfe to praier: and returne againe
togither, least sathan tempt you for your incontinencie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If the lay man can not pray, vnlesse he abstaine from his wife: the
priest that alwaies must offer sacrifices, and alwaies pray, must therefore
alwaies be free from matrimonie. Hierom lib. 1. c. 19. cont. Iouin.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Will you admit all Ieroms reasons in that booke to be good?
I know you will not. Amongst other this is a very loose one: Remember
I pray you your owne note vpon the first to the Romans.
He is said to pray continually, that euery day at some certaine
time praieth. Therefore there is no such necessitie for anie
man to abstaine continually from marriage, bicause married
men may very well haue time for both the duties.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 7. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ But I say to the vnmarried, and to widowes: it is good for
them if they so abide euen as I also.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Before he treated of the continencie of such as were married, now he
giueth lessons for the vnmarried also.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But you refuse to learne both the one and the other. For neither
you will admit euery man to haue his owne wife, neither
yet will you leaue the profession of virginitie to be taken or left,
as euery man feéeleth in himselfe strength, for that to be giuen to
him, or not to be giuen to him of God.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 7. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  You were bought with price, be not made the ⸫ bond men
of men.
               
               
                  The note.
                  You must not serue men, so that you obey or please them more than
God.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The pope exacteth that seruice, his extollers, flatterers, and
clawbacks bestow it vpon him: and generally all papists vnder
that color and pretence, withdraw euen their lawfull obedience
from their soueraignes and lawfull princes.
               
            
            
               
               1. Cor. 7. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  Art thou loose from a wife, seeke not a wife. But if thou take
a wife ⸫ thou hast not sinned.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Virginitie counselled as the better, marriage not forbidden, bicause it
is no sinne.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Why haue you not thrust virginitie in amongst your sacraments,
sith you hold it absolutely better than matrimonie? You
speake very nicely of marriage, being one of your sacrements:
Uirginitie counselled, marriage not forbidden. The reasons, bicause
virginitie is the better, but marriage no sinne. Is that the
best reason you can giue for the not forbidding of marriage, or
can you affoord it no better commendation? Is marriage a sacrament,
and no where counselled nor commanded? Sure that were
very strange. The admirers of virginitie make marriage no better
than sinne. For the end of it is death, saith Ierom in his first
booke against Iouinian. But to leaue your fansies of marriage
and virginitie, this I say, that either of them is better than other,
as time, place, persons, and other circumstances do serue for
the choise of the one or the other. Marriage is the holie ordinance
of the almightie, commanded to all that haue not the gift of continencie.
Uirginitie is a vertue rare onely to be kept of those, to
whom God hath giuen speciall gifts for that purpose.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 7. 40.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ more blessed shall she be, if she so remaine according to
my counsell. And I thinke that I also haue the spirit of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The state of widowhood more blessed than the state of matrimonie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This also is not absolute, but in respect of many encumbrances
that commonly accompanie the married.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 8. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Knowledge puffeth vp, but charitie edifieth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Knowledge without charitie puffeth vp in pride, and profiteth nothing
at all: when it is ioined with charitie then it edifieth. Aug. lib. 9. ciuit.
Dei. cap. 20.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héere againe saint Augustine might haue béen spared, for you
haue giuen testimonie sufficient of your reading.
               
            
            
               
               1. Cor. 9. 5.
               
                  The note.
                  Haue not we power to lead about a woman a sister, as also
the rest of the Apostles, and our Lords brethren, and ⸫ Cephas?
               
               
                  The note.
                  He nameth Cephas (that is Peter) to prooue his purpose by the example
of the chiefe and prince of the Apostles. Saint Ambrose. Saint
Chrysost. Oecum. vpon this place.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You plaie altogether the sophisters, to racke a word or two beyond
the meaning of the writers. I haue told you before that it
was no péece of their meaning to giue to Peter anie soueraignty
ouer the rest of the Apostles, aswell bicause they giue those additions
to others as to Peter, as also for that in expresse words they
make all the Apostles equall in authoritie, & of Paul and Peter
they know not whether of them to preferre. But what néede we
fathers, are not the scriptures in this case plaine? did not Iames,
Peter,Galat. 2 9. and Iohn giue to Paul and Barnabas the right handes
(not of soueraigntie) but of societie,2. Cor. 11. 5. and Paul estéemed not him
selfe inferior to the best and chiefest of the Apostles? And if your
desire for Peter were graunted, yet for the Bishop of Rome you
were neuer the nigher your purpose.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 9. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  For it is written in the Law of Moises, Thou shalt not muzzel
the mouth of the oxe that ⸫ treadeth out the corne.
               
               
                  The note.
                  In that countrie they did tread out their corne with oxen, as we do
thresh it out.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  A néedlesse note, for what could anie man els imagine of it?
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 9. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  Know you not that they which worke in the holie place,
eate the things that are of the holie place, and they that serue
⸫ the altar participate with the altar?
               
               
                  The note.
                  The English Bible (1562) here and in the next chapter saith thrise
for altar, temple most falselie and hereticallie against holie altars, which
about the time of that translation were digged downe in England.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  An ouersight we graunt, but false or hereticall meaning we
denie. For if these places make nothing for your altars, howe
could the leauing out of the word altar be of purpose against

your altars. Besides, the translator sufficientlie cleareth him
selfe of anie such purpose, in that in diuers and sundrie places, he
translateth altars, as he findeth it. For it had béene to verie small
purpose in a place or two to shunne the name of altars, and to reteine
them in infinite other places.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 9. 2
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  To all men ⸫ I became all things, that I might saue all.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not by fiction or simulation, but by compassion of the infirmities of
all sortes. August. epist. 9.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  A verie good and necessarie example for those which labour in
the word, to beare so farre as they lawfullie may, or can with
the infirmities of manie, to the end to winne and gaine them to
God.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 10. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  Therefore he that thinketh him selfe to stand, let him take
heed ⸫ least he fall.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is profitable to all, or in a maner to all for to keepe them in humilitie,
not to know what they shalbe, saith Saint Augustine, which maketh
against the vaine securitie of the protestants.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You alledge Saint Augustine at randon without telling vs
where we might finde this place, which maketh me to doubt
that it is but some patch of a place, which being violentlie pulled
from that which goeth before, and from that which followeth,
may séeme to make for that which he meant not. In which coniecture,
whether in this place true or false, yet I do you none iniurie.
First, because Augustine giueth me occasion so to coniecture,
whom I suppose in this point not to be against him selfe,
who alwaies teacheth christians not to doubt of that which God
hath promised them. Secondlie, your selues haue often giuen occasion
of this coniecture, who manie times make the fathers
seeme to speake that, which they neuer meant, as both alreadie
hath bene shewed, and héerafter shall be shewed in these answers
to your marginall notes.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 11. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  And I praise you brethren, that in all things you be mindefull
of me: and as I haue deliuered vnto you, you keepe my
⸫ precepts.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  In the Greeke traditions 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Could not your vulgar translator abide traditions, or hath
the Gréeke worde some other signification? Against vs Martinius
maketh manie and mightie outcries if we do not alwaies
translate it tradition. He cannot abide that we should learne any
more significations of the word. And all the stur is to giue some
colour to your vnwritten verities.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 11. 
                     •
                  5.
               
                  The text.
                  For I receiued of our Lord that which also I haue deliuered
vnto you, ⸫ that our Lord Iesus in the night that he was betraied
tooke bread, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Apostles drift in all that he saith here is against vnwoorthy receiuing
(as S. Augustine also noteth ep. 118. cap. 3.) and not to set out
the whole order of ministration, as the heretikes do ignorantly imagine.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Saint Augustine doth not saie, that the whole order of the
administration of the Lords supper is not to be gathered hence.
For if the whole institution of Christ, be not a direction to vs for
that, whence shall we haue it? But it is best for you to stand vpon
deniall of this, bicause you break the whole institution of Christ.
How did Paule deliuer that which he receiued of the Lord, if he
deliuered not the order of the administration of the sacrament?
did not Christ leaue vnto his church an order for it? Though the
Apostles drift here be agianst vnreuerent and vnwoorthy receiuing,
yet that could not be better reformed, then by teaching the
reuerende and orderly vse of it. But bicause you haue in your
larger annotations bestowed great labor about this point, therefore
I refer it ouer to the answer of them.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 12. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  To one certes by the spirit is giuen ⸫ the word of wisdome,
and to another the word of knowledge according to the same
spirit: to another faith in the same spirit, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All these gifts be those, which the learned call gratias gratis da
                     
                        •
                     as,
which be bestowed often vpon euill liuers, which haue not the other
graces of God, whereby their persons should be gratefull, iust, and holie
in his sight.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  That these graces which are here recited are fréely giuen many
times to the wicked is manifest, and confessed of all. But that
which you would secretly insinuate, that the other graces wherby
men are made gratefull, iust, and holie in Gods sight, are not
fréely giuen, but to those that procure them by works preparatorie,
or to them that deserue them by inherent iustice, is manifestlie
and directly opposite to the Scriptures, Romaines 3. 24.
Ephes. 2. 8.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 12. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  For as the bodie is one, and hath manie members, and all
the members of the bodie wheras they be manie, yet are ⸫ one
bodie: so also Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A maruellous vnion betwixt Christ and his church, and a great comfort
to all catholikes being members thereof, that the church and he the
head and the bodie make and be called one Christ. Aug. de vnita Eccl.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  A maruellous good note, wherin onely this héed is to be taken,
that men be not deceiued by ioining themselues to those that are
catholikes in name, and not in déede. Which it is impossible otherwise
to auoide, then by holding fast the societie of them, that
imbrace and keepe that forme of doctrine, which was deliuered
to the church by the apostles, whom all parts confesse to be true
catholikes.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 12. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all doctors? ⸫ are all
myracles? haue all the grace of doing cures, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine ep. 137. giueth the same reason, why myracles and
cures be done at the memories or bodies of some saints, more then at others,
and by the same saints in one place of their memories, rather then
at other places.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Augustine was a man, sometimes, as well as others, deceiued
by illusions. For why should not the same saints memories bée
honored with myracles in Affrica, as well as in Italie? For it
was not to places, but to persons, that the gift of doing myracles
was granted. How much trulier wrote Augustine that myracles
were not suffered to endure to his time,August. 1. r
                           •
                        
                        tract. cap. 13. least men should alwaies

séeke visible confirmations, and least men should waxe
cold by the commonnes of those things, by the strangenes wherof
they were first enflamed.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 13. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  And if I should haue prophecie, and knew all mysteries, and
all knowledge, and if I should ⸫ haue all faith, so that I could
remooue mountaines, and haue not charitie I am nothing.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This prooueth that faith is nothing woorth to saluation without
works, and that there may be true faith without charitie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is strange that when in the former chapter you haue set
faith among the gifts that are giuen often vnto the wicked, now
the same faith being spoken of, you would haue it to be taken for
the faith we speake of in the cause of iustification, and so consequently
that it might be without charitie: Whereas there is as
much difference betwéene that faith, and this, as is betwixt the
beléefe of the omnipotent power of God, and affiance in his goodnes.
But admit that that were granted you, which you so much
desire, that a true faith were here ment, how followeth your reason?
Is euerie supposition a proofe? Saint Paule saith, if an angell
from heauen teach an other gospell, &c. doth it follow that an
angell from heauen may teach an other Gospell? do you not sée
the vanitie of your proofe?
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 13. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ when that shall come that is perfect, that shal be made
voide that is in part.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By this text Saint Augustine lib. 22. Ciu. cap. 29. prooueth that the
saints in heauen haue more perfect knowledge of our affaires here, then
they had whiles they liued here.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Saint Augustine there entreateth of the knowledge and sight
of God, which the godly shall haue after the resurrection of their
bodies. And he speaketh in that place no word of the knowledge,
that dead men haue touching the affaires of men liuing here,
whiles this world endureth. But touching that matter his mind
is,Despiritu & 
                           •••
                        ma. cap. 29. as he expresseth it else where, that the saints in heauen know
no more what we do here, then we know what they do there.
But you care not how you lie, so you may turne men from God,
to put confidence in creatures.
               
            
            
               
               1. Cor. 13. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  And now there remaine faith, hope, and charitie, these three.
But the ⸫ greater of these is charitie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Charitie is of all three the greatest. How then doth onely faith, being
inferior to it, saue, and iustifie, and not charitie?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I will not at all touch that charitie is not simply the greatest,
but in some certaine respects. But I will come to your reason.
If faith iustified by the vertue and merite of it self, then your
reason were somewhat, for then charitie being the greater vertue,
should rather iustifie. But now when it is but an instrument,
to lay hold vpon Christ our righteousnes, your reason holdeth
not. Our hands are inferior to some other parts of man, yet
our hands are the onely instruments, whereby we lay holde on,
and vse such weapons as serue for our defence: And therefore
men are called men of their hands.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 4. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  But if thou blesse in the spirit, he that supplieth the place of
the ⸫ vulgar, how shall he say Amen, vpon thy blessing, bicause
he knoweth not what thou saiest?
               
               
                  The note.
                  By this word are ment all rude vnlearned men, but specially the simple,
which were yet vnchristened, as the Catechumens, which came into
those spirituall exercises, as also infidels did at their pleasures.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By this word are ment all priuate men, for it is euident that
except they vnderstoode the publike praier and thankesgiuing,
they could not shew foorth their assent by saieng, Amen.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 15. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ I deliuered vnto you first of all, which I also receiued:
That Christ died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This deliuerie in the Latine, and Greeke importeth tradition, and so
by tradition did the Apostles plant the church in all truth, before they
wrote any thing.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The controuersie is not whether tradition, or writing was
first: but whether the apostles did not write as much as is necessarie
for vs to know, and kéepe: and whether traditions, which

vnder their name you obtrude, be to be iudged by their writings,
or not. As for that tradition he speaketh of here, he specifieth
most plainly in writing, and therefore this can not make for
your vnwritten verities, to the which you would faine impropriate
the name of traditions.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 15. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  But by the grace of God I am that which I am: and his
grace in me hath not been ⸫ voide: but I haue labored more
aboundantly then all they: yet not I but the grace of God
with me.
               
               
                  The note.
                  In him Gods grace is not voide, that worketh by his freewill according
to the motion, and direction of the same grace.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  As you haue drawen fréewill from philosophie, so you plant
grace in the roome of that, which the philosophers called right
reason, and you giue vnto it no more then they did to right reason,
that is to mooue and direct the will. But Paule on the contrary
side so attributeth all to grace, that he leaueth nothing to
himselfe. I haue labored (saith he) yet not I, but the grace of God
with me, that is to saie, which is with me.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 15. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  And if Christ be not risen againe, then vaine is our preaching,
vaine also is your faith, and we are found also ⸫ false witnesses
of God, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So we may say, if the catholike faith in all points be not true, then our
first apostles were false witnesses, then hath our countrie beleeued in
vaine, all this while are all our forefathers dead in their sins, & perished,
which presupposing Christ to be God, were the greatest absurditie in the
worlde.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And whie did you not say, if the faith which the church of
Rome at this day professeth, be not in al points true? for that we
know you meane by the Catholike faith: but you would haue
your words true, howsoeuer your meaning was. But we denie
your Romish faith to be the catholike faith. By our first Apostles
also you meane neither Peter nor Paul, nor anie of Christes Apostles,
but Augustine the monke pope Gregories apostle: but if
his doctrine were Catholike, neither yours nor ours is in all

points Catholike. For our forefathers which you speake of, you
meane those which liued of late yeeres: for those of elder time
knew not your faith, they could not tell that the Pope could not
erre, they thought him subiect to the whole church, they knew
nothing of transubstantiation, of concomitance, and of a number
of such toies as you of late haue coined. And therefore let men vnderstand
that the Catholike faith is that, which Paul and Peter
and the other Apostles of Christ left vnto vs, taught in the scriptures,
and that which the first church of Christ beléeued and embraced
at their hands, and which the church of Rome at this day
persecuteth, and then your note may stand vntouched.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 15. 42.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ starre differeth from starre in glorie, so also the resurrection
of the dead.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The glorie of the bodies of saints shall not be all alike, but different
in heauen according to mens merits.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The Apostle putteth no difference here betwéene the glorified
bodies of the saints: but betwéene the state of our bodies afore
the resurrection and after the resurrection: betwixt which two
states of the selfe same bodies, there shalbe as great difference, as
betwixt the glorie of the sunne, & the glorie of anie other starre::
& therefore you do but according to your accustomed order, wrest
this text to bring men to put confidence in their owne merits.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 15. 44.
               
                  The text.
                  It is sowen a naturall bodie, it shall rise a spirituall bodie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  As to become spirituall doeth not take away the substance of the bodie
glorified, no more when Christes bodie is said to be in spiritual sort in
the sacrament, doth it import the absence of his true bodie & substance.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Hungrie dogges eate durtie puddings, this stuffe must serue
where better can not be had. Our bodies though spiritual and
configured (as you call it) to the bodie of his glorie, yet are true
bodies, & not in manie places at once, whereof it followeth that
Christes bodie being a true glorified bodie, is not in manie places
at once: for that can not stand with the trueth of his bodie.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 15. 5
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  This I say (brethren) that flesh and blood can not possesse

the kingdome of God, neither shall corruption possesse incorruption.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Flesh and blood signifie not here the substance of those things, but the
corrupt qualitie incident to them in this life by the fall of Adam.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you should light on men as froward and contentious as
your selues, they might with as great reason contend with you,
for the litterall sense of flesh and blood, as you do for the litterall
sense of, This is my bodie, which spéech being of a Sacrament,
you will by no means admit to be of the same nature, and to haue
like interpretation as all other spéeches of Sacraments haue.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 16. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  In ⸫ the first of the Sabaoth, let euerie one of you put a part
with him selfe, laying vp what shall well like him: that not
when I come collections be made.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is Sunday. Hierome q. 4. Hedibiae. So quickelie did the Christians
keepe Sunday holie day, and assembled to diuine seruice on the
same.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  For Sunday, that it was appointed by the Apostles to bée
kept for the Saboath, & that it was so solemnized in their times
it is manifest, you needed not Saint Hieroms authoritie for it,
sauing that you loue to vse the fathers where you least need them.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 16▪ 8.
               
                  The text.
                  But I will tarie at Ephesus till Pentecost.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The heretikes and other new fangled striue amongst themselues,
whether Pentecost signifie here the terme of fiftie daies, or els the Iewes
holie day so called. But it commeth not to their minds, that it is most like
to be the feast of Whit suntide, kept and instituted, euen then by the Apostles,
as appeareth by the fathers. See Augustine epist 119. cap. 15.
and 16. Ambrose in cap. 17. Lucae.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In Augustine I find certaine mysteries in the number of fifty
noted as well out of the new testament, as out of the old, and that
the feast of Pentecost was in his time kept of Christians: but
what was meant by it in this place, or whether the Apostles did
institute that feast to be kept of Christians or not, I find nothing
there. In Ambrose I find, that the beginning of the eighth wéeke

after Easter maketh the Pentecost, and that Paul in this place
promised to tarrie till that time, and that they kept all the fiftie
daies as Easter, but whether by the apostles tradition or no, that
is left vncertain. So we sée not by your fathers, that the apostles
instituted the feast of Whitsuntide. But we sée that you loue to
trouble your selues and others with trifles.
               
            
            
               1. Cor. 16. 2
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  If any man loue not our Lord Iesus Christ, be he Anathema,
⸫ Maran-atha.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is, our Lord is come. Hierom ep. 173. Therefore Anathema to
all that loue him not, or beleeue not. Theophilact. vpon this place.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In matter not in controuersie betwixt vs you make vnnecessarie
shew of reading. If you did either in loue or in faith wait
for the comming of the Lord, you would not wilfully serue his enimie,
and oppose your selues to his knowen truth.
               
            
         
         
            2. Corinthians.
            
               2. Cor. 2. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  For, my selfe, also that which I ⸫pardoned if I pardoned any
thing for you in the person of Christ: That we be not circumuented
of satan. For we are not ignorant of his cogitations.
               
               
                  The note.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Though he did great penance, saith Theodoret, yet he calleth
this pardoning, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a grace, bicause his sinne was greater than his
penance.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is happie you will confesse one man pardoned of grace,
which had not by gretnes of penance deserued it. Theodorets
meaning was not to part his pardoning betwixt penance and
grace. And the text pr
                        ••
                     ueth cléerly, that how great testimonies so
euer man giueth of true repentance, yet remission and pardon of
sinnes is not merited, but procéedeth méerely of grace and fauor.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 4. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  For that our tribulation, which presently is momentanie
and light, worketh aboue measure exceedingly an eternall
waight of glorie in vs, we not considering the things that are
seene, but the things that are not seene.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The English bible 1577 doth falsely translate Prepareth.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  This translation although not so proper in word, yet all one
in sense with the rest, is alreadie iustified by master D. Fulke against
Martinius. The reason which he yéeldeth for your fault
finding is to be noted: for it sheweth that you would haue that,
which is momentanie and light, to deserue that, which is eternal
and of great waight, and so make a small matter to deserue eternall
life and glorie. So lightly you thinke to come by heauen.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                   Cor. 5. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  But we are bold, and haue a good will to be pilgrimes rather
from the bodie, and to be ⸫ present with our Lord.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This place prooueth, that the saints departed now since Christ sleepe
not, till the day of iudgement, and that they be not holden in any seuerall
place of rest from the fruition of God, till the resurrection of their bodies,
but that they be present with God in their soules.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You would say that this prooueth, that the soules of the saints
sléepe not with their bodies till the day of iudgement. I maruell
much why the apostle speaketh nothing héere of purgatorie, sith
by your churches doctrine, the soules of the greater part of Gods
saints, after the earthly house of this habitatiō is dissolued, go for
a time to the paines of purgatorie: which is directly against the
apostles doctrine in this place deliuered. For he immediately after
our dissolution, appointeth vs an house to dwell in, not for a
time, but eternally; nor in pugatorie, but in heauen; not seuered
from the fruition of God, but in the presence of our Lord: from
which he placeth none absence, but whiles we are héere in the
bodie.
               
            
            
               1▪ Cor. 5. 2
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  Him that knew no sin, for vs he made sinne, that we might
be made the iustice of God in him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is to say, a sacrifice and an host for sinne. See the last annot. of
this chapter.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If men should héere without all reason sticke vpon the letter,
as you do in, This is my bodie, what can you say for this exposition,
that might not be iustly returned against you in that? Your
annotation you send vs vnto, is a childish cauill grounded vpon
this, that the scripture calleth him iust that doth iustice. But doth

it call none else so.Luk. 18. 14. The publican departed better iustified than
the pharisie, I pray you what iustice had he done? God iustifieth
the wicked.Rom. 4. 5. He is iust, or blessed to whom God imputeth no sin.
The iust man liueth by faith.Psal. 33. 1. So obteined the théefe vpon the
crosse to be iustified and saued. You sée then that the Scripture
speaketh of some other kind of iustice, besides that which
consisteth in our owne doings. Leaue therefore your foolish cauilling.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 5. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  As sorrowfull, but alwaies reioicing: as needie but enriching
manie: as ⸫ hauing nothing, and possessing all things.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine (in Ps. 113) gathereth hereby, that the Apostles
did vowe pouertie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Wilfull pouertie bicause you sée no reason to gather it out of
this place, you make Saint Augustine your buckler for it: but I
thinke your note booke deceiued you. I take it that there is no
such matter in the exposition of that Psalme. But he saith there,
that in calling images by the names of those whom God created,
men turne the truth of God into a lie, and that their forme, and
shape, their honorable placing, and setting a loft in the church
hath more force to draw people to idolatrie, then the consideration
that they haue no life, nor vse of their parts and members
hath to induce men to the contrarie. I do not remember that I
haue reade any thing in Augustine that fauoreth wilfull pouertie.
But in his booke of the worke of moonkes, he is verie earnest
against such idle bellies, as thought it vnlawfull for them to
gaine any thing by worke or labor, but would liue altogither vpon
the offerings and liberality of others, and he both telleth them
that they refuse to obey the Apostle Paul, and confuteth their foolish
reasons.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 6. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Beare not the yoke with infidels.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is not lawfull for catholikes to marrie with heretikes, and infidels.
See S. Hier. c
                        •
                     ont. Iouian lib. Cocil. Laod. cap. 10. & 31.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is not lawfull for catholikes to marrie with papists, or other
heretikes, or infidels. For this there néedeth no authority of men,
for the word of God is plaine, and it is not called into question.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 7. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ the sorow that is according to God, worketh penance
vnto saluation that is stable: but the sorow of the world worketh
death.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Contrition, or sorowfull lamenting of our offences, is the cause of saluation.
Not onely faith then saueth as the heretikes affirme.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You deceiue your selues, and others whiles of euerie consequence
you make a cause. It is verie true that faith and repentance
must be ioined companions in them that shall be saued,
and yet neither of both properly the cause of saluation.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 8. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  And not as we hoped, but their owne selues they gaue first
to the Lord, then ⸫ to vs by the wil of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The principall respect next after God is to be had of our masters in
religion, in all temporall and spirituall duties.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If there were not iust cause of suspicion of your euil and lewd
minde, and meaning, this note might passe without controlement,
as an hyperbolicall spéech, tending to the reuerence and credit
of Gods ministers. But bicause your whole course of dealing
bewrateth manifestly, that you séeke to preferre your pope, and
your selues to be regarded and respected aboue princes in temporall
duties, therefore the reader is to be admonished, that that
meaning procéedeth out of diuellish pride, and hath no ground
nor warrant out of this place. For the Apostle héere doth nothing
else, but commend the liberalitie of the Macedonians, in contributing
to the reléefe of Gods afflicted saints. Whereby they gaue
good testimonie, that they had wholy addicted themselues to God,
to be ruled, and aduised by the Apostle, and other ministers of
Gods word. All which the Apostle doth to that end to stirre vp
them of Achaia to the like liberalitie.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 9. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  Least when the Macedonians shall come with me, and find
you vnreadie, we (that may not ye) may be ashamed in this substance.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is, in this matter of almes. Chrysost. Theophilact.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  This is well noted, you might haue spared your fathers.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 9. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  As it is written, he distributed, he gaue to the poore, his iustice
remaineth for euer.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The fruit of almes is the increase of grace in all iustice and good
works to life euerlasting: God giuing these things for reward and recompence
of charitable works, which therefore be called the seed or meritorious
causes of these spirituall fruits.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I pray you tell vs how you collect this? What necessarie consequence
out of this place you can make thereof? Otherwise wée
must estéeme it, as we estéeme of the most part of your other
notes, as of collections tied to your texts with poynts, that will
scant hold the tieng.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 11. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  For I haue ⸫ despoused you to one man, to present you a
chaste virgin vnto Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Apostles and their successors did despouse the people whom they
conuerted, to Christ, in all puritie and chastitie of truth, and wholy vndefiled,
and void of error and heresie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The pope and his cleargie do despouse the people whom they
seduce, to the purpled whoore of Babylon, in all spirituall impuritie
and fornication, and vntruth full of error and lies.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 11. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  For if he that ⸫ commeth, preach another Christ, whom we
haue not preached, or you receiue another spirit, whom you
haue not receiued: or another Gospel which you haue not receiued:
you might well suffer it.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The note of a false teacher to come, that is without lawfull calling or
sending to thrust and intrude him selfe in another mans charge.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note is true, but not well collected out of this text. For I
suppose you do not thinke, that false teachers may well be suffered.
But howsoeuer you haue gathered it, your note doth most
liuely describe your wandering Iesuits and seminarie priests,

which without all lawfull calling or sending, do secretly thrust
themselues into other mens charges, preach a new Christ, and a
new Gospell vnheard of in the daies of Paul.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 11. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  For such Apostles are ⸫ craftie workers, transfiguring themselues
into Apostles of Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A proper terme for heretikes, that shape themselues into the habit of
true teachers, specially by often allegation and commendation of the
scriptures. Read the notable admonition of the ancient writer Vincentius
Lirinensis in his golden booke, against the prophane nouelties of all
heresies.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is indéed a proper terme, and no heretike euer did beare a
more glorious shew than the papist. Uincentius Lirinensis was
carefull both to auoid all heresies himselfe, and also to admonish
others to take héed thereof. His lessons be good, such as we practise,
and you refuse. For first he alloweth the canonical scriptures
as perfect and sufficient to determine al controuersies, which you
refuse. Secondly, to auoid the wrangling of heretikes about the
true interpretation of them, he adioineth tradition: which he
doth not take to be vnwritten verities not spoken of in the scriptures
(as you do) but for the sense and interpretation of them,
which was held and beléeued in the first churches planted by the
Apostles, by the Apostles I say, and their coadiutors direction.
Thirdly, he thinketh that not only the men of greatest fame and
estimation in the church might erre, but also that the whole or
greatest part of the visible church might erre (contrarie to your
assertion) which hold that the church cannot erre, and that in
that case he that will not be caried into error with multitude and
companie, must repaire vnto antiquitie, which is far from suspition
of prophane noueltie, euen as we at this day appeale to the
scriptures, and primitiue church. Now then if you will be iudged
by his rules, it will appéere that papists are craftie workers, and
so consequently heretikes, and bringers in of profane nouelties.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 11. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  My daily ⸫ instance, the earefulnes of all churches.
               
               
                  The note.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , S. Chrysostom and Theophilact interpret it of daily conspiracie
against him. Others of the multitude of cares instant, and vrgent
vpon him.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Your latter exposition whereof you kéepe close the authors, is
the better, and to be preferred bicause it is Paules owne, who so
interpreteth his owne meaning in the next words following.
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 12. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  I know a man in Christ aboue fourteene yeeres ago, whether
in bodie I know not, or out of the bodie I know not, God
doth know, such a one ⸫ rapt euen into the third heauen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By this we may prooue that it is neither impossible, incredible, nor indecent,
that is reported by ancient fathers, of some that haue beene rauished,
or rapt (whether in bodie or out of the bodie God knoweth) and
brought to see the state of the next life as well of the saued, as of the
damned.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bicause that which hath béene done may be done, and it is neither
impossible nor incredible, must we therefore beléeue all fabulous
narrations, whereof great number are forged vnder the
names of fathers, others too readilie receiued and beléeued of
men, not espieng at that time the subtiltie of the diuell in working
those illusions? If this foundation faile you, your purgatory
goeth to the ground. Paul vttereth nothing of that he heard and
saw there, bicause they were secrets vnlawful to be vttered. Shal
not that condemne the rash boldnesse of others, that take vpon
them to vtter and tell all, and more then all?
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 12. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  Least againe when I come God humble me amongst you,
and I mourne manie of them that sinned before, and ⸫ haue
not done penance for the vncleannes, fornication, and incontinencie
that they haue committed.
               
               
                  The note.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which Saint Augustine (epist. 108.) is spoken
heere of doing great penance for hainous sinnes, as paenitents did in the
Primitiue church. So that it is not onlie to repent or amend their liues
as protestants translate it.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You haue béene often inough answered for our translations in
this case. If amendment of life & true repentance could be without
anie tokens or testimonies of heartie griefe, and sorrow for
sinnes passed, then your quarrell might haue some probable shew

in it, but now it hath vtterly none. Penitents in the primitiue
church did but giue testimonie vnto the church of their heartie
and vnfained repentance, and not (as you would haue men imagine)
satisfie for their sinnes, and deserue at Gods hand remission
and pardon therof. Augustine neuer dreamed of any such matter:
but he wrote against the Nouatians, who denied repentance to
them that sinned after they were baptized, against whom he prooueth
by the example of Peter which had denied Christ, & by the
authoritie of this present text, that men after baptisme were not
to be excluded from repentance, and so maintaineth the custome
of the church in admitting penitents, which had béene afore for
their faults excommunicated: what is this to that you alledge
him for against our translation?
               
            
            
               2. Cor. 13. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  Therefore these things I write absent, that being present I
may not deale hardly, according to the power which our Lord
hath giuen me vnto edification, and not vnto destruction.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Ecclesiastical ⸫ power to punish offenders by the censures of the church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Which power we reuerence and kéepe offenders in awe withall,
though we contemne and despise the vsurped power of the
Romish church, and care not for her thunderbolts.
               
            
         
         
            GALATHIANS.
            
               Galat. 1. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  I maruell that you are so soone transferred from him that
called into the grace of Christ, vnto another Gospel, which is
not another vnlesse there be some that trouble you, and will
⸫ inuert the Gospel of Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  New Gospellers that peruert, corrupt, or alter the one onlie true and
first deliuered Gospell are to be auoided. See Saint Augustine contra
Faust. libro 32. cap. 27.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The Gospel of God is the power of God to saluation to euery
beléeuer, whosoeuer therefore doeth preach any power of pope, of
man, of fréewill, or of anie other creature or thing whatsoeuer,
to saluation, preacheth a newe Gospell, and not the Gospell of
God, and therefore are to be auoided. The whole doctrine therefore

of the Popes church is to be auoided, for it is nothing els but
a new coined Gospell. Your note booke still deceiueth you, there
are not so many chapters in that booke.
               
            
            
               Galat. 1. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  But other of the Apostles sawe I none, sauing Iames ⸫ the
brother of our Lord.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Iames was called our Lords brother, after the Hebrew phrase
of the Iewes, by which neere kinsemen are called brethren, for they were
not brethren in deede, but rather sisters children.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If vpon this you should méete with men as froward as your
selues are, in expounding this is my bodie, they might make you
worke by not admitting any interpretation, and therefore you
might sée how fond a thing it is so to sticke to the letter, that you
will not admit the mind of the speaker.
               
            
            
               Galat. 2. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And when Cephas was come to Antioch I resisted him ⸫ in
face, bicause he was reprehensible.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is, in presence before them all, as Beza him selfe expoundeth
it, yet the English Bezites to the more disgracing of saint Peter, translate
to his face. No. Testamen. anno 1580.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is somwhat that once in your liues you are content to acknowledge
that you haue learned somwhat of master Beza: but
I thinke he should not haue béene spoken of héere, but to take occasion
by him to vtter your choller, and to ease your stomacke a
little vpon those, whom you call English Bezites, whose intent
(as you surmise) was in their translation, to disgrace S. Peter:
As if it had béene greater disgrace to saint Peter, to be told of his
fault to his face, than to be told of it, & reprooued for it in the presence
of the multitude. But howsoeuer it was, we sée plainly S.
Peter went awry, and brought others into the like danger. And
further we sée that his authoritie was not so great, but he might
be reprooued. Yet though the pope go headlong to hell, and lead
thousands of souls with him thither, no man may say, Why dost
thou this?
               
            
            
               Gal. 2. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  But knowing that a man is not iustified by the ⸫ works of

the law, but by the faith of Iesus Christ, we also beleeue in Iesus
Christ, that we may be iustified by the faith of Christ,
and not by the works of the law: for the which cause, by the
works of the law no flesh shall be iustified.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By this, and by the discourse of the whole epistle you may perceiue,
that when iustification is attributed to faith, the works of charitie are
not excluded, but the works of Moises law, that is, the ceremonies, sacrifices,
and sacraments thereof principally, and consequently all works
done meerly by nature and free will, without the faith, grace, spirit and
aide of Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Helpe, helpe, Paul hath set the popes kitchin on fire. Our Rhemists
bring water, but it runneth out by the way. For both by
this, and the whole course of this epistle, we sée that this new
Gospell into the which the Galathians were translated, was a
péece of poperie: Namely, that they ioined in the cause of iustification
& saluation their works with Christ, & the law with the gospel.
But our Rhemists tel vs first, that not the works of charity,
but the works of the law are excluded by S. Paul. As who should
say, that there were any works of loue, that are not commanded
in the law. And therefore if the works of the law be excluded, the
works of loue and charitie must be excluded also. But to helpe
this, they adde that ceremonies, sacrifices, and sacraments are
meant principally. But against that, Paul maketh him accursed,
that abideth not in all that is written in the law to do it. If blessednes
and iustification be our deliuerie from that curse, who séeeth
not that the whole law, and euery part of it, and euery worke
of it must be excluded? But further they adde, that al works done
méerely by nature and frée will are excluded: wherein the word
méerely is to be noted, bicause it expresseth that their meaning is,
if there be a little helpe of faith or grace, that then works be not
excluded. To the which I say, this was the case of the Galathians,
and the very matter against the which the Apostle bendeth
his whole force, for that they being Christians, and so beléeuers
did not exclude their works, and méerely ascribe their iustification
to the grace of Christ: for that they parted the matter as the
papists do, betwixt Christ and their works, the whole maner of
the Apostles reasoning in the next chapter, doth plainely shew.
And therefore I will conclude with the Apostle;Ephes▪ 2. 8. By grace we

are saued through faith, and that not of our selues, for it is the
gift of God, not of works, that no man glorie.
               
            
            
               Galat. 3. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  O senselesse Galathians, who hath ⸫ bewitched you not to
obey the truth, before whose eies, Iesus Christ was proscribed,
being crucified among you?
               
               
                  The note.
                  For any people or person to forsake the faith of their first Apostles and
conuersion, at the voice of a few nouellaries, seemeth to wise men a very
bewitching and senselesse brutishnes. Such is the case of our poore countrie,
Germanie, and others.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That Rome hath forsaken the faith and doctrine taught by
their first Apostles Paul and Peter, as this Epistle doth most euidently
testifie, at the voice of their most proud prelats: and
that other countries haue from thence tasted of the same cup, séemeth,
(not to wise worldlings) but to the spirit of God, and to
those that are thereby led and guided, a very bewitching, and yet
withall the iust iudgement of God vpon those, that had not,
or haue not any loue to the truth. Thus haue you most manifestly
your note returned vpon your selues. For Paule and Peter
were out of all doubt the Apostles of God, and the doctrine deliuered
by them voide of all filth, and corruptions.
               
            
            
               Galat. 3. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  Know yee therefore that they that are of ⸫ faith, the same
are the children of Abraham.
               
               
                  The text.
                  This faith wherby Abraham was iustified, and his children, the Gentiles
beleeuing in Christ, implieth all Christian vertues of the which the
first is faith, the ground and foundation of all the rest, and therfore here
and else where often named of the Apostle.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Sée your foule shifts, when we say faith iustifieth, then you
vrge against vs a dead faith voide of all Christian vertues, yea
you go farther, for you affirme that all faith, and so consequently
a true liuely faith, may be without charitie. Againe on the contrarie
side when the force, and plainnes of the text driueth you to
confesse iustification by faith, then faith implieth all Christian
vertues. So when it may serue your turne, things inseparable
as true faith, hope, and charitie must be separated: and againe for

the like aduantage, things distinct must be confounded, and one
must imply and comprehende an other. But for answer we confesse
that faith is accompanied with all Christian vertues, but
neither they, nor faith do iustifie by their owne vertue, or merit,
as qualities inherent, or resiant in vs. But faith is said to iustifie,
bicause by it we apprehend, and lay hold vpon Christ, and his
righteousnes, which is thereby made ours, by Gods imputation.
And this office is proper to faith, and not to any other vertue.
               
            
            
               Galat. 4. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  So we also, when we were litle ones, were seruing vnder the
elements of the world.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is, the rudiments of religion wherein the carnall Iewes were
trained vp, or the corporall creatures, wherin their manifold sacrifices,
sacraments, and rites did consist.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If the corporall creatures vsed in the multitude of their sacrifices,
sacraments, and rites, were an argument of their seruile
estate vnder the law: then consider the great heape of rites, and
ceremonies in your church, and sée whether they doo not serue to
bring Christians into seruitude, and bondage againe, by making
them to serue, vnder the elements of the world againe. Naie the
state of the Iewes was lesse seruile, and more tolerable, both in
respect of number, and multitude of ceremonies, and in respect
of the commander. For the greater the dignitie of the commander
is, the more tolerable, and better is the condition and state
of the seruant.
               
            
            
               Galat. 4. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  And your tentation in my flesh you despised not, neither reiected,
but as an ⸫ Angell of God, you receiued me as Christ
Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So ought all catholike people receiue their teachers in religion, with
all dutie, loue, and reuerence.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The name of catholike being to true catholikes applied, wée
imbrace your note.
               
            
            
               Galat. 4. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ as then he that was borne according to the flesh persecuted
him that was after the spirit, so now also.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This mutuall persecution is a figure also of the church, iustly persecuting

heretikes: and contrariwise of the heretikes (which be the children
of the bond woman) vniustly persecuting the catholike church▪
Augustine epist. 48.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The text is plaine, that he that is after the flesh, persecuted
him which is after the spirit, a plaine figure of your persecuting
church. The casting out of the bondwoman and her sonne, done
by Abraham, may be drawne by Augustin, or some other father,
to that purpose that you alledge it.
               
            
            
               Galat. 5. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  For the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh, for these are aduersaries one to another, ⸫ that not
whatsoeuer things you will these you do.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere men thinke (saith Saint Augustine) the apostle denieth that
we haue free libertie of will, not vnderstanding that it is said to them,
if they will not hold fast the grace of faith conceiued, by which onely
they can walke in the spirit, and not accomplish the concupiscences of
the flesh, in cap. 5. Gal.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The text is plaine against both libertie, and abilitie of will.
And Saint Augustine, as you know, confesseth, that when he
wrote this, he did not vnderstand that the words were verified of
them, which were vnder grace, and not vnder the law. Bicause
that though such do not consent to the concupiscence of the flesh,
against the which in spirit they long, yet they would not haue
any of those corruptions of the flesh, if they might, and they do
not whatsoeuer they would, bicause they would want them, and
can not. But then they shall not haue them, when they haue not
corruptible flesh. Do yée not sée what a patron you haue of S.
Augustine, and are you not ashamed to alledge that as his, which
you know he himselfe hath reuoked?
               
            
            
               Galat. 5. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  Which I foretel you, as I haue foretold you, that they which
⸫ do such things shall not obtaine the kingdome of heauen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine sheweth hereby that not onely infidelitie is a damnable
sinne.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Wherein we not onely agrée with Saint Augustine, but also

say farther that willing ignorance, the mother of popish deuotion,
in the which you were woont to nussell your followers, is a
great, and damnable sinne.
               
            
            
               Galat. 6. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  And doing good let vs not faile. For in due time we shall
⸫ reape not failing.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The works of mercy be the seede of life euerlasting, and the proper
cause thereof, and not faith onely.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is plaine blasphemie, to place the proper cause of eternal
life, and saluation not in Christ, but in our selues, and in our
owne works of mercie, which you here most plainely do. Your
reason is taken out of the metaphor of séede, and sowing: The vanitie
of it is in this, that you racke the metaphor beyond the scope
and meaning of the apostle. For the apostle exhorteth them to
liberalitie, especially towards their teachers, and instructers in
the faith. To incourage men therunto, he telleth them that they
shall be as sure, or more sure of the rewardes promised of God,
then the sower shall be to reape, that which he soweth: and to
that end applieth the borrowed spéech of sowing, and reaping. To
racke those spéeches beyond this his meaning, is most plainely to
abuse him, and bewraieth the wickednes of your doctrine, which
cannot carrie any probable shew, without racking and wresting
the scriptures.
               
            
            
               Galat. 6. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ God forbid, that I should glorie, sauing in the crosse
of our Lord Iesus Christ: by whom the world is crucified to
me, and I vnto the world.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ (saith Saint Augustine) chose a kind of death, to hang on the
crosse, and to fixe or fasten the same crosse in the foreheads of the faithfull,
that the Christian may say, God forbid that I should glorie sauing
in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, Expos. in Euang. Io. tract. 43.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bicause your superstitious abusing the signe of the crosse can
not be warranted by Paule, therefore Augustine must helpe,
wil he nill he. But he meaneth none other thing, then the cōmon
vse of the first christians, who to shew how litle they were ashamed
of Christ crucified, did vse to crosse themselues on the forehead.

This will prooue but a poore proofe of your manifolde abuses
of the crosse.
               
            
         
         
            EPHESIANS.
            
               Ephes. 1. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  As he chose vs in him, before the constitution of the world,
that we should be holie & immaculate ⸫ in his sight in charity.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We learne here that by Gods grace men be holie and immaculate not
onely in the sight of men, nor by imputation, but truely and before God,
contrarie to the doctrine of the Caluinists.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  What father hath affirmed this before you? This is not onely
contrarie to Caluins doctrine, but also to the doctrine of our
Lorde Iesus Christ, and his Euangelist Saint Iohn. For our
Lord and Sauiour Christ teacheth the children of God, to praie
alwaies for forgiuenes of their trespasses. And saint Iohn saith,
if we say we haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues, and there is no
truth in vs. Then I pray you tel vs, if trespasses & sins be spots,
how are we truely and in Gods sight immaculate, otherwise
then by the not imputing of our sinnes vnto vs, and the imputing
vnto vs of Christs righteousnes? But herein you deceiue
your selues and others, that you estéeme not this imputed righteousnes
for true righteousnes, when and whereas it is the onely
righteousnes, in confidence wherof we may boldly appéere without
spot in the presence of our God.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 1. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  In whom also, when you had heard the word of truth (the
Gospell of your saluation) in which also beleeuing you were
⸫ signed with the holie spirit of promise, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Some referre this to the grace of baptisme, but to manie learned it
seemeth that the Apostle alludeth to the giuing of the holie Ghost in
the sacrament of confirmation, by signing the baptized with the signe
of the crosse and holie chrisme. For that was the vse in the apostles time,
as else where we haue prooued, annot. Acts. 8.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The many learned that you speake of, are but such as haue
sold themselues, and bent al their wits to defend the fornications
of the whoore of Babylon. And so you endeuor your selues, & do

your best to prooue that, which you speake of. But lies and vntruths
are not so easie to be prooued, as you imagine, but onlie to
such as do beléeue euerie word you speake, to be an oracle. Your
chrisme, and your sacrament of confirmation, were vnknown to
to the apostles: and not vsed by them to any such ende, or purpose
as you haue vsurped them vnto.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 1. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And he hath subdued all things vnder his feete: and hath
made him head ouer all the church, which is his bodie, the
⸫ fulnes of him which is filled all in all.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ is not full, whole, and perfect without the church, no more
then the head without the bodie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note is good, true, and comfortable, if it be vnderstoode of
his perfection in his mysticall bodie, and not otherwise.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 2. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  For by grace you are saued through faith (and that not of
your selues, for it is the gift of God) ⸫ not of works, that no
man glorie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is said not of works as thine, of thy selfe being vnto thee, but as
those, in which God hath made, formed, and created thee. August. de
gratia, & lib. arbit. cap. 8. & seq.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bicause your owne credit will not stretch to qualifie the plain
spéeches of the Apostle, you craue aide at Augustines hand. But
he is your sworne enimie: and therefore meaneth to giue you
verie slender helpe. For in the same place he telleth vs, that our
good life is the grace of God fréely giuen vs: & that life eternal is
also the grace of God fréely giuen to vs. And that God in Paule,
and others his déere children, and saints, crowned his own gifts,
and not their merits: be you not then ashamed to enforce his
spéeches against his minde?
               
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  phes. 3. 
                     •
                  7.
               
                  The text.
                  Christ ⸫ to dwell by faith in your harts.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ dwelleth in vs by his gifts, and we be iust by those his gifts remaining
and resident in vs, and not by Christs proper iustice onlie as heretikes
affirme.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  You wrangle for inherent iustice without all reason, Christ
(you saie) dwelleth in vs by his gifts, and we are iust by those
his gifts. The gift that Christ dwelleth in vs by, is faith, as S.
Paul here telleth, and you assume that thereby we are iust, therfore
we conclude that we are iust by faith. Therefore you must
either confesse your manifold wrangling heretofore, in reiecting
iustification by faith alone, bicause it is against your imagined
inherent iustice, or else you must confesse that you do but cauill
héere, when you go about to prooue inherent iustice, bicause
Christ dwelleth in vs by faith.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 3. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  Rooted and founded in ⸫ charitie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not faith onely must be in vs, but charitie which accomplisheth all
vertues.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Who euer taught that no more vertues must be in Christians,
then faith onely? you can not shew one. And yet you are not ashamed
to make your ignorant followers beléeue, that wée spoile
Christians of all other vertues.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 4. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  And that he ascended, what is it, but bica
                        •
                     se he descended
first into the ⸫ inferior parts of the earth?
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth specially of his descending to hell.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  He meaneth by his descending into the inferi
                        ••
                      parts of the
earth his incarnation, or abasing of himselfe, to take vpon him
our nature in the wombe of the virgin, which by an Hebraisme
is called the lower parts of the earth. And Dauid so termeth his
mothers wombe in the 139. Psalm. vers. 15.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 4. 2
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And be ⸫ renued in the spirit of your minde: and put on the
new man, which according to God is created in iustice, and
holines of the truth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Apostle teacheth vs not to apprehend Christs iustice by faith
onlie, but to be renued in our selues truly, and to put on vs the new man
formed and created in iustice and holines of truth. By which freewil

also is prooued to be in vs to worke with God, and to consent vnto him
in our sanctification.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Who doth so teach iustification by faith onely, that he doth not
also teach sanctification, as the ioined companion thereof? But lieng,
and slaundering is your delight, which I do not saie, bicause
you haue expresly vttered your minde, but bicause you do couertly
insinuate so much to your blinde followers. Your proofe for
fréewill is woorth thrée skips of a louse. You may conclude it out
of euerie exhortation as well as out of this, it will follow all alike.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 5. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  For vnderstanding know you this, that no fornicator or vncleane
or couetous person (which is ⸫ the seruice of idols) hath
inheritance in the kingdome of Christ and of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the hereticall corruption of this in the annot. Col. 3. 5.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue séene your annotation, and finde your quarrel stale,
as being mooued afore by master Martinius, and answered by
master Doctor Fulke. And farther we sée that idolaters are beholding
to you, for you take as great paines, as men may do, to
vpholde them in their idolatrie, which in plaine English signifieth
worshipping of images.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 5. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  Let women be subiect to their husbands as to our Lord: bicause
the man is the head of the woman, as Christ is the head
of the ⸫ church.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is much to be noted that in the first English Bibles there is not once
the name of Church in all the Bible, but in steede thereof Congregation,
which is so notorious a corruption, that themselues in their later Bibles
correct it for shame, and yet suffer the other to be read and vsed still,
See the Bible printed 1562.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Surelie Martinius was to blame that left you no quarel vnmooued
to our translation: it hath béene answered that our first
translators translated aptlie and trulie, when they translated
congregation, and that they therein committed no fault, whereof
they or others ought to be ashamed. That the word Church

was not shunned in anie sinister respect or meaning, the translating
of the same word church in the créede, the vsing of the worde
church in the notes of those first Bibles, in our Catechismes alwaies,
in our latter translations as you confesse, do manifestlie
shew. The cause whi
                        •
                      the translators did vse the word congregation
rather then the word church, was bicause in those times
ignorance raigning, the word congregation was more plaine,
and lesse ambiguous and doubtfull, and therefore lesse danger in
it of misconstruing or mistaking then in the other: thus is your
notorious corruption come to nothing.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 6. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  Knowing that euerie one, what good soeuer he shall do, that
shall he ⸫ receiue of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
               
               
                  The note.
                  God leaueth no good worke vnrewarded.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is verie true, and yet you neuer the nigher your merit.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 6. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  Stand therefore hauing your loines girded in truth, and
⸫ clothed with the brestplate of iustice, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If man could not be trulie iust, or h
                        ••
                     e iustice in him selfe, how could
he be clothed with iustice?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Men after this life are clothed with their habitation in heauen:2. Cor. 5. 2.
their habitation in heauen is not in them selues. In like
maner may they be clothed with the righteousnesse of Christ,
which though it make them trulie iust, yet is in Christ and
not in them selues. The whole armour is Gods, and by him giuen
vs to defend our selues withall. I maruell that you finde
neither holiwater, nor crosse, nor anie such deuise of poperie among
all this armour. I thinke therefore that it followeth manifestlie,
that those péeces of armour neuer came out of Gods storehouse.
               
            
            
               Ephes. 6. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  Peace to the brethren, and ⸫ charitie with faith from God
the Father, and our Lord Iesus Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine noteth in sundrie places vpon this same text, that
faith without charitie serueth not to saluation. Lib. 50. hom. 7.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  As for that faith which is without charitie, we (as we haue
often told you) estéeme it not woorth two strawes: otherwise that
a true faith onlie and alone iustifieth,
                        
                           〈…〉
                         6. Saint Augustine will tell
you, if you will vouchsafe to sée it. It is necessarie for a man that
not onlie when he is wicked he should be iustified, that is, of a
wicked man made iust, when good things are rendered to him for
euill: but also when he is now iustified by faith, that grace should
walke with him, and he rest thereupon, least he fall. And againe,
that Paul should be called from heauen,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      and be conuerted by so
great and effectuall a calling, the grace of God alone was the
cause thereof, for his merits were great, but euill.
               
            
         
         
            PHILIPPIANS.
            
               Philip. 1. 
                     •
                  7.
               
                  The text.
                  And in nothing be ye terrified of the aduersaries, which to
them is ⸫ cause of perdition.
               
               
                  The note.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      a manifest proofe and euidence.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We thinke you can interpret a Gréeke word right if you list,
as you haue done this.
               
            
            
               Philip. 2. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  Conteining the word of life ⸫ to my glorie in the day of
Christ, bicause I haue not runne in vaine, nor in vaine labored.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Such as haue by their preachings gained anie to Christ, shall ioy and
glorie therein exceedinglie at the day of our Lord.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And what shall they do that gaine from Christ to Antichrist?
               
            
            
               Philip▪ 2. 
                     •
                  7.
               
                  The text.
                  But and if I be ⸫ immolated vpon the sacrifice and seruice
of your faith, I reioice and congratulate with you all.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Pastors ought to be so zealous of the saluation of their flocke, that
with Saint Paul they should offer themselues to the death for the same.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Such example gaue the prince of pastors, such strength hath
God giuen to a number of faithfull ministers, as our eies haue
séene, and infinite multitudes are able to testifie, and the booke or
monument of martyrs hath recorded to all posteritie.
               
            
            
               
               Philip. 2. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ all seeke the things that are their owne, and not the
things that are Iesus Christs.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Manie forsake their teachers when they see them in bonds and prison
for their faith, bicause most men preferre the world before Christes
glorie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is verie true, and yet the text rather speaketh of them
that should be carefull ouer the flocke, that a number of them
shranke away after the world, and prouided rather for them
selues then for the flocke. And consider you well vpon this spéech,
whether Peters being at Rome then, when Paul wrote this
were likelie or no, when Paul had there none like minded to
him selfe. And it is a very simple shift to say that Peter might
then be absent from Rome for persecution or for businesse, séeing
that both the actes of the Apostles, & the Epistle to the Romains,
& euery epistle that Paul wrote from Rome, minister good reasons
against Peters being there, so that if he were bishop so long
as your stories testifie of him, he was a notable non Resident:
but I had rather imagine that he came thither, but a litle afore
his death.
               
            
            
               Philip. 3. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  See the dogges, see the euill workers, see the ⸫ concision, for
we are the circumcision which in spirit serue God, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By allusion of words he calleth the carnall Christian Iewes, that yet
boasted in the circumcision of the flesh, concision: and himselfe and the
rest that circumcised their hart and senses spirituallie the true circumcision.
Saint Chrisostome. Theoph.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Either you should set downe nothing without authorities alledged,
or els if you would spare your paines in anie place, you
should do it in those whereof the sense is not in controuersie,
but confessed on both parts.
               
            
            
               Philip. 3. 1
                     ••
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And may be found in him not hauing my iustice which is of
the Lawe, but that which is of the faith of Christ, which is of
God iustice in faith, to know him and the vertue of his resurrection,
& the societie of his passions configured to his death,
⸫ if by anie meanes I may come to the resurrection, which is
from the dead.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  If Saint Paul ceased not to labour still, as though he were not sure to
come to the marke without continuall indeuour, what securitie may we
poore sinners haue of heretikes perswasions, and promises of securitie and
saluation by onlie faith?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We are verie sure that they which after they are called to
knowledge do not continuallie indeuour to walke in those good
workes, which God hath prepared for men to walke in, shall not
come to the marke of life euerlasting, which is set before all chrians.
And we know none but papists that teach such securitie, to
make men trust to that faith which is idle, and doeth not worke
by loue a diligent indeuour of obedience to Gods holy lawes. And
yet this continuance of our indeuour, is no argument of doubtfulnesse
of our saluation, neither yet of trust in our deserts, but
that Christ liueth in vs, and by his spirit leadeth and guideth vs
effectuallie. And it is not to be passed ouer, (though you be not
disposed to sée it) that the Apostle for all his indeuour, yet flieth
from his owne righteousnesse to the righteousnesse of Christ,
which God hath made his by faith: so that it is euident, that the
Apostles confidence rested vpon the righteousnesse of Christ imputed
to him.
               
            
            
               Philip. 3. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  Be followers ⸫ of me brethren, and obserue them that walke
so as you haue our forme.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is a goodlie thing when a pastor may say so to his flocke. Neither is
it anie derogation to Christ, that the people should imitate their Apostles
life and doctrine, and other holie men. Saint Augustine, Saint
Benedict, Saint Dominicke, Saint Frauncis.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is a verie good thing, when the Pastors are examples to
their flocke in life and doctrine, but yet the best men are to be followed
with exception, namelie, no further then they follow
Christ. As for your frierlie fathers whom you recken and whom
you follow in wilworship, are vnméete to be matched with Paul
and others, partners of Christian obedience to them, among
whom they liued.
               
            
            
               Philip. 4. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Yea and I beseech thee my sincere companion, helpe those

women that haue laboured with me in the Gospel, with ⸫ Clement
& the rest my coadiutors, whose names are in the booke
of life.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This Clement was afterward fourth Pope of Rome, from Saint Peter,
as Saint Hierome writeth according to the common supputation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is to be marked, that the reckoning and supputation of
Popes succéeding one another, is a matter not agréed on, though
it be the maine foundation and principall pillar, whereupon the
Romish church will séeme to staie her selfe. For as it is a matter
verie vncertaine, whether Peter was euer Bishop of Rome, so
is it also vncertaine,Clemens lib. 7. cap. 16. who was first, second, third, or fourth. If we
may beléeue the constitutions ascribed to the Apostles, (the testimonie
whereof you can not refuse, citing the authoritie of them
in other matters verie often) then Peter was neuer Bishop
there,Ecclesiast h
                           •
                        st. lib. 3. cap. 34. but Linus was the first ordeined by Paul and not by Peter,
& Clemens the second. Eusebius reckoneth Clemens third,
and Euaristus fourth, after both Peter and Paul. For I do not
perceiue that he reckoned one of them more for bishop there then
the other.Tomo 3. cap. 
                           •
                        . Nicephorus maketh Peter the first, Linus the second,
and Anacletus third,In catalog
                           •
                         scriptorum. and Clemens fourth. Hierome reckoned in
the same order, sauing that he addeth, that manie of the Latines
did count Clemens next after Peter. Sabellicus writeth that
Peter, Linus, Cletus and Clemens were all Bishops of Rome
at once,Libro. 3. contra haereses. cap. 3. Lib. 2. aduersus Donatistas. and striketh quite out Anacletus out of the number. Ireneus
reckoneth next after Linus, Anacletus. And Optatus Mileuitanus
setteth him, that is Anacletus, next after Clemens.
And thus your famous succession whereof you so greatly glorie,
resteth vpon a rotten vncertaine foundation, the progresse thereof
if it were examined, is more diuerse and vncertaine and that
manie waies, and therefore no maruell though so vncertaine a
succession must serue to vphold so vile a congregation, as the
church of Rome is at this day: which bicause you know, you referre
the matter to the common supputation, which must be that
which you commonlie at this day follow.
               
            
            
               Philip. 4. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  And I also reioiced in our Lord exceedingly, that once at the
length, you haue ⸫ reflorished to care for me, as you did also
care: but you were occupied.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  This reflorishing is the reuiuing of their old liberalitie, which for a
time had beene slacke and dead. S. Chrysostom.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This was Paules thankfulnes, as well for the care they presently
had of him, as for their liberalitie afore time bestowed on
him.
               
            
            
               Philip. 4. 1
                     •
                  
               
               
                  The text.
                  And you know also (O Philippians) that in the beginning of
the Gospell, when I departed from Macedonia no church cō
                     municated
vnto me, in the account of gift and ⸫ receipt but
you onely, for vnto Thessalonica also once and twise you sent
to my vse.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He counteth it not meere almes, or a free gift, that people bestoweth
on their pastors, or preachers, but a certaine mutuall traffike as it were,
and interchange, the one giuing spirituall, the other rendering temporall
things for the same.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your note is true, though the pastors of your church giue
stones for bread, for fish scorpions, and in stead of milke strong
and ranke poison.
               
            
         
         
            COLOSSIANS.
            
               Colos. 1. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  That is come vnto you, as also ⸫ in the whole world it is, and
fructifieth and groweth, euen as in you, since that day that
you heard and knew the grace of God in truth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He sheweth that the Church and Christs gospell should daily growe,
and be spred at length through the whole world, which cannot stand with
the heretikes opinion of the decay thereof so quickly after Christs time,
nor agree by any meanes to their obscure conuenticles. See S. Augustine
epist. 80. in fine.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that Christs faith did grow and spread in the whole
world: yet you your selues will confesse, that it doth not alwaies
spread alike. For I know you will except our times. And we wil
except the times, wherein the Arrians florished, who (as you report)
continued longer, and was better defended by princes and
worldly power than we are now. Then it cannot be a question
how quickly some corruptions grew, but whether any great diminution,

or lessening of the number of true Catholikes may be.
But the ancient testimonies of stories do also put that out of
doubt. This repugnance you speake of we sée not. Neither haue
our conuenticles (as it pleaseth you to terme them) béene at any
time more obscure than the assemblies of Christians in the primitiue
church, as you your selues cannot choose but confesse. S.
Augustine whose authoritie you alledge, in his latter daies saw a
greater decay of the Christian faith, by the cruel inuasion of many
barbarous nations that did ouerrun both Europe and Affrike,
than he did thinke, when he wrote that Epistle, possible to
haue béene in so short a space. And further, if we consider the stories
of the times since, we shal find that, that the bounds of Christendom
haue béene greatly lessened, and diminished since saint
Augustines time: Flat contrarie to his opinion in that Epistle.
               
            
            
               Colos. 1. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  That you may walke ⸫ worthie of God, in al things pleasing.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See S. Ambrose, and the Gr. doctors. Or thus woorthily pleasing God.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  What néed you haue of Ambrose, or any other great doctors for
this I cannot imagine.
               
            
            
               Colos. 1. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  Fructifieng in ⸫ al good works, and increasing in the knowledge
of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Many things requisite, and diuers things acceptable to God besides
faith.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is your accustomed dealing, to make ignorant men beléeue
that your aduersaries allow of nothing, but faith. When as
we confesse many things requisite for Christians, and acceptable
to God, besides faith, but nothing without faith.
               
            
            
               Colos. 1. 
                     ••
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  Giuing thanks to God, and the father who hath made ⸫ vs
woorthie vnto the part of the lot, of the saints in the light.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We are not onely by acceptation or imputation partakers of Christs
benefits, but are by his grace made woorthie thereof, and deserue our saluation
condignly.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You prate much of your owne woorthines, and prooue nothing▪
The benefits of iustification and saluation we haue by imputation

onely: other benefits, as newnes of life, sanctification, and
whatsoeuer pertaineth to that change & alteration, which God
by the gracious working and guiding of his holy spirit, maketh
in those which be his, be really and actually in vs. We are made
woorthie indéede in respect of Christs righteousnes, wherewith
we are adorned, and in respect of our selues, none otherwise than
the hungrie are said to be woorthie of meate, and the thirsty woorthie
of drinke, not bicause they deserue it, but bicause they earnestly
desire it. The deseruing therfore of our saluation condignly
(as you haue learned of your schoolemen to terme it) might
haue béene kept in your purse, for héere is no place to vent it in,
our market serueth not for the sale thereof.
               
            
            
               Colos. 2. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  But this I say ⸫ that no man deceiue you in loftinesse of
words.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heretikes do most commonly deceiue the people with eloquence, namely,
such as haue it by the gift of nature, as the heretikes of all ages had,
and lightly all seditious persons, which draw the vulgar sort to sedition
by the allurement of their toong. Nothing (saith saint Hierom ep. 2
                        •
                      ad
Nepotian) is so easie as with volubilitie of toong to deceiue the vnlearned
multitude, which whatsoeuer it vnderstandeth not, doth the more
admire and woonder at the same. The Apostle heer calleth it 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
persuasible speech.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héere is long labour about washing of a tile. Who knoweth
not that papists and such heretikes as they are, by fine, retoricall,
persuasible spéeches do carrie poore ignorant men after them, and
to the intent they may (as saint Ierom saith) be the more admired,
and woondered at of the people that vnderstand not: they not
onely endeuor to kéepe the people without knowledge, but also
hunt after strange and vnwoonted words, such as the eares of the
people haue not béene acquainted withall, and their intelligence
reacheth not vnto, whereof this your translation is a good euidence.
Turne therefore this note against your selues, & examine
well your owne consciences, and repent whiles you haue time.
               
            
            
               Colos. 2. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  Let no man seduce you, ⸫ willing in the humilitie and religion
of Angels, walking in the things which he hath not seen,
in vaine puffed vp by the sense of his flesh.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  That is wilfull or selfe willed in voluntarie religion. For that is, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
whereof commeth the word following 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Superstition,
v. 23. See annotations, v. 21.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If voluntarie religion and will worship were quite and cléere
banished from amongst all those that call themselues Christians,
then where should poperie become? For you your selues cannot
for the greatest part of it, shew any other ground, but the will
and deuise of men.
               
            
            
               Colos. 2. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  And not holding the head, whereof the whole bodie by
ioints and bands ⸫ being serued and compacted, groweth to
the increase of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , That is, taking subministration of spirituall life, and
nourishment by grace from Christ the head.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The Gréeke word signifieth our strait coniunction in Christs
mysticall bodie, as our bodies are ioined and knit togither by
ioints and sinewes, and so your note declareth the consequence of
that ioining, being drawen from the truth of the signification of
the word.
               
            
            
               Colos. 3. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  And let the peace of God exult in your harts, wherein you
are also called in one bodie: and be thankfull.
               
               
                  The note.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , triumph and haue the victorie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By a metaphor drawen from the games of the Ethnikes,
wherein some had pricke and praise for actiuitie and strength.
               
            
            
               Colos. 3. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  Knowing that you shall receiue of our Lord the retribution
of inheritance.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Retribution or reward for good works, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which signifieth rendering
one for another.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Out of Gods rendering or rewarding, meriting cannot be collected,
and in this place the word of inheritance cléereth all. For
if it be our inheritance, we haue it not by our deseruing.
               
            
            
               
               Colos. 4. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Be instant in praier: watching in it with thansgiuing: praieng
withall ⸫ for vs also, that God may open to vs also the
doore of speech to speake the mysterie of Christ (for the which
also I am bound) that I may manifest it, so as I ought to speak.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Paul euer much desireth the praiers of the faithfull, whereby
we learne the great efficacie of them.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The praiers of the faithfull preuaile much with God:
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      for his
eares be euer open to them, and therefore as they are very néedfull,
so are they excéedingly desired of all Gods saints. But I pray
you tell me one thing, why Paul neuer willed them to take héed
of being ouer bold, or saucy with God, but to make some dead
saint or other their meanes to offer their praiers to God? For in
so often repetition of this exhortation, I thinke he would not alwaies
haue forgotten this point, if it had béene necessarie or expedient.
               
            
            
               Col. 
                     •
                  . 13.
               
                  The text.
                  For I giue him testimonie, that he hath much ⸫ labour for
you, and for them that be at Laodicea, and that are at Hierapolis.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He did not onely praie, but tooke other great paines, to procure Gods
grace for the Colossians, perhaps by watchings, fasting, and doing other
penance of body, that God would not suffer them to fall from their receiued
faith, to the sect of Simon Magus, or the Iudaizing christians.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  No doubt Epaphras omitted nothing, that became a painfull
and a carefull minister of the worde to vse, for the procuring of
Gods graces, and the aduancement and setting forwarde the
knowledge of Christ, and his holie Gospell amongst those congregations,
or churches héere named. What your meaning is by
penance of bodie, whether to satisfie for other mens sins, as well
as for his owne, I know not. And for such imaginations of yours,
Epaphras had nought to do with them.
               
            
         
         
            1. Thessalonians.
            
               1. Thes. 1. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  For they themselues report of vs, what maner of entering we
had to you: and how you are turned to God ⸫ from idols to
serue the liuing and true God.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  In this and the like places the heretikes maliciously and most falsely
translate, construe, and apply all things ment of the heathen idols, to the
memories and images of Christ and his saints, namely the English Bibles
of the yeeres, 1562. 1577. See the annot. 1. Io. 5. 21.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We translate truely, when in stéede of idols, we say images.
Our construction and application also is true, bicause both your
hauing of images in churches, and also all maner worship you
vsed about them procéeded, and came from Gentilisme, so that the
spéeches and reasons, which the apostles & prophets vsed against
them, are aptly applied against your images, and the follies you
commit about them. Your annotation you referre vs to, is like
your selues, matter whereof you might be ashamed, if you had
any shame in you. For it hath béene often answered, and it is
enough for you barely to repeate it againe. Your councel of Nice
were impudent, & shamelesse asses, & beasts, giuing that to images,
which you your selues dare not defend.Ecclesiast hist. l. b. 7. cap. 14. Eusebius in the place
you cite, though he aloweth of that image, yet sheweth that that,
& the like grew out of the corrupt customes of the Gentils, wherof
he saith, that is no maruell, that some did sticke in new conuerted
Christians. And you can not shewe for fower hundred
yéeres after Christ, the hauing of images in the churches for
laie mens books. But I refer your annotation to farther answer
wherein it will be better displaied.
               
            
            
               1. Thes. 2. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  For you your selues know brethren our entrance vnto you,
that it was not in vaine, but ⸫ hauing suffered before and been
abused with contumuelies, (as you know) at Philippi we had
confidence in our God, to speak vnto you the Gospel of God
in much carefulnes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Anotable example for catholike preachers, and passing comfortable
when in the midst of persecutions, and reproches they preach sincerely to
please God and not men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your note is good. And God grant that you at length may cast
away your desire of contending, and man pleasing, and séeke the
truth in sinceritie, so should we cease from offending God, and
troubling the worlde, and our controuersies, and contentions
should quickly be at an end.
               
            
            
               
               1. Thes. 2. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  For what is our hope, or ioy, or crowne of glorie, ⸫ Are not
you before our Lord Iesus in his comming?
               
               
                  The note.
                  If the Apostle without iniurie to God, in right good sence called his
schoolers the Thessalonians, his hope, ioy, and glorie, why blaspheme the
protestants the catholike church and her children for terming our blessed
ladie and other saints, their hope for the speciall confidence they haue
in their praiers?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The prosperous successe, that God gaue to his Apostle Paule
amongst the Thessalonians, did much comfort, and encourage
the said Apostle in his hope, and expectation, not onlie of their
saluation, but also of the crowne of righteousnes laid vp for himselfe,
in which respect as he might well, bicause it was grounded
vpon the promises of God, he calleth the Thessalonians his hope.
How can this excuse you, when the ground of your dealing, is
voide of all warrant of the worde? For what warrant can you
shew for your confidence in the praiers of saints? But let vs go
a little farther with you, what haue you left to God & his Christ,
that you haue not giuen our ladie, and other saints (what said I
to saints) nay to knaues, and traitors? who taught men to séeke
to come to heauen by the blood of Thomas, you can tell well
enough. It is not the catholike church and her children, whom
we charge with this, it is the Romish Babylon, and her vpholders,
the sinke of sinne, and the mother of all abominations, that
séeketh to rob, and spoile God of his honor, and glory, and to giue
it to creatures. But our God is in heauen,Psal. 113. 3. Esaic. 42. 8. he doth whatsoeuer
pleaseth him: he will not giue his glorie to an other.
               
            
            
               1. Thes. 3. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  Night and day more abundantly praieng that we may ⸫ see
your face, and may accomplish those things which want of
your faith.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Though letters and epistles in absence giue great comfort and confirmation
in faith, yet it is preaching in presence by which the faith of
Christ, and true religion is alwaies both begun and accomplished.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Why did you then both take quite away from the people the
cōfort, which they might haue reaped by the Epistles of Paul being

absent, if you would haue suffered them in a toong which the
people vnderstoode; and also in the daies, wherein your heresie
raigned amongst vs, both slenderly and corruptly giue the other?
But thanks be to God, who hath remooued you, and giuen great
encrease to his truth, and religion, by the industrie and diligence
of true and sincere preachers, amongst his people of England.
               
            
            
               1. Thes. 4. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  As for the charitie of the ⸫ fraternitie, we haue no neede to
write to you, for your selues haue learned of God to loue one
another.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All catholike christians make one fraternitie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Howsoeuer they differ in time, or place, whether they be dead,
or aliue, and wheresoeuer they be scattered vpon the face of the
earth.
               
            
            
               1. Thes. 4. 11▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  But we desire you brethren that you ⸫ abound more, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christian men ought to proceed and profite continually in good works
and iustification.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you had said sanctitie, or sanctification, your note had béene
right, but you are so gréedie and egerly bent vpon your inherent
iustice, that you care not what you confound, for in the text there
is no word of iustification.
               
            
            
               1. Thes. 4. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  For this we saie to you in the word of our Lord, that ⸫ we
which liue, which are remaining in the aduent of our Lord shal
not preuent them that haue slept.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He speaketh in the person those, which shal be aliue when our Sauiour
returneth to iudgement.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is verie true, and the cause why he so speaketh, is to teach
all men so to liue, as if they were continually in present expectation,
of the comming of our Lord & Sauior Christ to iudgement.
               
            
            
               1. Thes. 5. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  But we that are of the day are sober, hauing on the breastplate
of faith and ⸫ charitie, & an helmet the hop of saluation.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A Christian mans whole armour is not faith onely, but all the three
vertues heere named.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  And who but papists teach otherwise? As for crosse,Lib. de 
                           •
                        id. c. 13 Hosias saith that we haue no other shield but the signe of the crosse. and holiwater
and such like, there is no mention of them, and yet these
be the chéefe armour and weapons which our papists teach.
               
            
            
               1. Thes. 5. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  
                     
                        •
                      Praie without intermission.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To desire eternall life of him that onlie can giue it, is to praie without
intermission: but bicause that desire is often by worldly cares cooled, certaine
houres and times of vocall praier were appointed, See S. August.
e p. 121. ad Probam.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You are not long in one minde. One time to praie continually,
is to praie certaine times euerie daie: an other time to pray continually
is to aske life euerlasting at his hand that can onlie giue
it. And so it is what please you to make of it, but this later enterpretation
(as I thinke) dropped out of your pen ere you were
aware. For if God onlie can giue eternall life, why do you request
it of others? As for appointed times to praie, being a good
meanes to stir vp our coldnes and negligence therein, we both
vse and like of.
               
            
         
         
            2. Thessalonians.
            
               2. Thes. 1. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  So that we our selues also glory in you in the churches of
God, for your patience, and faith in all your persecutions and
tribulations, which you sustaine, for an example of the iust
iudgement of God, that ⸫ you may be counted worthy of the
kingdome of God, for the which also you suffer.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Note that by constant and patient suffering of afflictions for Christ
men are worthy (so the Greeke signifieth) as the aduersaries them selues
translate verse 11. of the croune of the kingdome of heauen, and so doe
merite and deserue the same. See annot. Luke 20. 35. And the Apostle
heeresaieth that it is Gods iustice no lesse to repaie glory to the afflicted,
then to render punishment to them that afflict, bicause of their
contrarie desertes or merits.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If you did not racke making worthie in English beyond the
meaning of the spirit of God, then to be made worthie, & of God

to be counted worthie were all one: for they whom God accounteth
worthie, are worthie indéed. But yet it followeth not,
that they which are made worthie, do deserue or merit the kingdome
of God, and the crowne of glorie by their inherent righteousnes,
which is the thing which both you would & should prooue.
Your reason from the iustice of God followeth not: Gods iustice
indéede requireth that glorie be giuen, or as you say, repaied to
the afflicted for his sake, aswell as punishment to their afflicters,
not for the cause which you assigne, but chieflie for his word and
promise sake, hauing promised that they which suffer with
Christ, shall also reigne with him: and then also bicause it is iust,
that he put a difference betwéene the estates of those, whome hée
hath made so farre to differ: your annotation or rather marginal
note is answered before.
               
            
            
               2. Thess. 1. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  When he shall come to be ⸫ glorified in his saints, and to be
made maruellous in all them that haue beleeued, bicause our
testimonie concerning you was credited in that day.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ shall be glorified in his Saints, that is, by the great and vnspeakeable
honour and exaltation of them he shalbe honoured, as now he
is: the honour which the Church doeth to them, not diminishing Christs
glorie (as the aduersaries foolishlie pretend) but exceedinglie augmenting
the same.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bicause it is a glorie to Christ to aduance and exalt his saints
in glorie, doeth it follow therefore that it is lawfull for your
church to giue to saints that, which Christ giueth them not, or
that it is not sacriledge to rob Christ of al things due to him, and
to giue them to men, be they neuer so holie? We are not against
anie lawfull aduancement of saints, but against such as neither
they can haue, nor yet can stand with the glorie of our Christ.
               
            
            
               2. Thess. 2. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Let no man seduce you by anie meanes, for vnlesse there
come a reuolt first, and the man of sinne be reueiled, the sonne
of perdition, which is an aduersarie and is ⸫ extolled aboue all
that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he sitteth in
the temple of God, shewing him selfe as though he were God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  How then can the Pope by Antichrist, as the heretikes fondlie

blaspheme, who is farre from being exalted aboue God, that he praieth
most humblie not onelie to Christ, but also to his blessed mother and all
his saints.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The proud presumptuous prerogatiues giuen to the Pope,
and accepted of him, doeth verie well declare this exalting of him
selfe, which particularlie héere to recite were too long. Other
men, as the most Reuerend father in God Master Iuel Bishop
of Salisburie, and master Fore in our mother tongue, for the benefit
of the poore people of England, haue in this matter taken
great paines, to whom also I referre my reader. But if there
were no more but that which you note as an argument & proofe
of his humilitie, it is sufficient and inough to conuince him of
Antichristian pride: he that taketh vpon him to be wiser then
God, exalteth him selfe aboue God: he that will make his praiers
to anie other then God taketh vpon him to be wiser then
God, Ergo he that maketh his praiers to anie other but God, exalteth
him selfe aboue God. The maior as I take it is cleare and
manifest, and néede no proofe. The minor is prooued thus, the
wisedome of God hath taught vs to praie to our father in heauen,
and not to anie other, what is it then to teach men to praie to
others, but to controll that wisedome of God, that it hath not
taught the wisest way to pray, and thus in that wherein you
thought to shew his humilitie, you set foorth his intollerable
pride.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Thess. 2. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  Therefore ⸫ God will send them the operation of error, to
beleeue lieng, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Deus mittet, saith Saint Augustine libro 20. de Ciu. cap. 19. quia
Deus diabolum facere ista permittet. God will send bicause God will
permit the diuell to do these things, whereby we may take a general rule,
that Gods action or working in such things is his permission. See annot.
Rom. 1. 24.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Now Augustine must helpe you with a generall rule, & that
expresselie both against the whole course of scripture, and also against
his owne minde, if you meane by permission onlie permission,
for he saith, who doeth not tremble at these horrible iudgements
of God, by which he doth in the hearts of the wicked what
he will, rendring to euerie man according to his merits. And againe

he saith, it is out of doubt that God doeth worke in the
mindes of men to encline their willes, either to good according to
his mercie,De gratia & libero arbitrio cap. 21. or els to euill according to their deserts by his iudgement,
sometimes open and sometimes secret, but alwaies iust.
This I trowe is somewhat more then only permission, therefore
you must racke some other for that generall rule, for Augustine
will not yéeld it you: and it groweth out of a foolish nicenes, for
men to be afraid to speake as the holie Ghost hath spoken afore
them.
               
            
            
               2. Thess. 2. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  And our Lord Iesus Christ him selfe, and God our Father
which hath loued vs, and hath giuen eternall consolation, and
good hope in grace, ⸫ exhort your hearts, and confirme you in
euerie good worke and word.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This word of exhorting implieth in it comfort and consolation, 2. Corinthes,
1. verse 4. and 6.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Trueth doeth well, but neuer when it is intermedled with
vntruthes. If this note were not defiled with the former, & these
that follow, but had passed alone, then we would haue ioined
with you.
               
            
            
               2. Thess. 3. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And we denounce vnto you brethren, in the name of our
Lord Iesus Christ, that you withdraw your selues from euery
brother walking inordinately, and not according to the ⸫ tradition
which they haue receiued of vs.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Here also (as is noted before 1. Thessalonians 2. 15.) the aduersaries
in their translations auoid the word tradition being plaine in the
Greeke, least them selues might seeme to be noted as men walking inordinatelie,
and not according to Apostolicall tradition, as all Schismatikes,
heretikes, and rebels to Gods church do.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If corrupt vse had not in your times made tradition to bée
commonlie taken of the people for a doctrine deliuered by word
of mouth onlie, and neuer published in the holie Scriptures by
writing contrarie to the sense and meaning of the Apostle, then
had there not béene anie iust cause of auoiding the word. But you
can not iustlie blame vs, though we flie a word corrupted by you,
and therefore dangerous to deceiue withall, and set downe for it

some other worde, no lesse aptlie agréeing to the signification of
the Gréeke word, and better with more plainnesse expressing vnto
the vnlearned the minde and meaning of the Apostle in that
place. But bicause you charge other men with inordinate walking,
contrarie to the traditions Apostolicall, answer for your
selues,Libr. 2. cap. 2. and yeeld vs reason if you can, whie you breake those
which you call the Apostles constitutions?Libr. 1. cap. 6. why do you not commonlie
and ordinarilie choose married men to be Bishops? why
haue you kept the common people from reading the scriptures?Libr. 3. cap. 9.
why suffer you women to baptize?Lib. 7. cap. 24. why fast you not continuallie
on Wednesdaies?Libr. 8. cap. 2. whie doo ye exclude the people both from
election and approbation of Bishops and priests? If these bée
not the ordinances of the Apostles, why do ye abuse the world
with alledging the authoritie of that booke for you? if they bée,
with what face can you obiect to others, wherein you are most
manifestlie faultie your selues?
               
            
         
         
            1. TIMOTHIE.
            
               1. Tim. 1. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  But the end of the precept is charitie from a pure heart, &
⸫ a good conscience, a faith not fained.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine saith, he that list to haue the hope of heauen, let
him looke that he haue a good conscience, let him beleeue and worke
well. For that he beléeueth, he hath of faith: that he worketh, he hath
of charitie. praefat. in Psalm. 31.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  As you alledge Saint Augustine, so I would that you caried
his syncere mind and loue to the truth, so should we not onlie
agrée in this, but throwing away all minde and desire of contending,
enter into a most earnest search for truth with al humilitie.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 1. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  This precept I commend to thee (O Timothie) according
to the prophecies going before on thee, that thou warre in
them a good warfare, hauing faith and a good conscience,
⸫ which certaine repelling haue made shipwracke about the
faith.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Euill life and no good conscience is often the cause that men fall to
heresie, from the faith of the Catholike church. Againe, this plainlie reprooueth

the heretikes false doctrine, seeing that no man can fall from
the faith that he once trulie had.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  True and liuelie faith is one thing, and the outward profession
of faith is another. You loue to dallie with equiuocations,
knowing that that hindereth the consecution of an argument.
The outward profession and not true faith is meant héere. By
such arguments as you make, it is easie to prooue that the crowe
is white.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 2. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  I desire therefore first of all things, that obsecrations, praiers,
postulations, thankesgiuings be made for all men, ⸫ for
Kings, and al that are in praeeminence, that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all pietie and chastitie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Euen for heathen Kings and Emperors, by whom the church suffreth
persecution: much more for all faithfull princes, and powers, and people
both spirituall and temporall, for whom as members of Christes bodie,
and therefore ioining in praier and oblation with the ministers of the
Church and priests more properlie and particularlie offer the holie sacrifices.
See Saint August. de origine animae. lib. 1. cap. 9.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The spirit that guideth and directeth the bishops of Rome
now, is full contrarie to the spirit that guided and directed Paul,
and the whole primitiue church. For now such princes as punish
papists, or fauour not poperie, must be murdered, disinherited, excommunicated,
deposed, depriued, giuen to the diuell, and not
praied for. They may not looke for the dutie, which was giuen to
persecuting princes then. For our holie father of Rome will not
allow it. I see not for what purpose you alledge Augustine, and
therefore I passe him ouer with silence.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 3. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  Well ruling his owne house, ⸫ hauing his children subiect
with all chastitie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He saith hauing children, not getting children. Saint Ambrose Epist.
82.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I hope saint Ambrose doth not meane, that he should haue children
of other mens begetting, or that it should be lawfull for a

bishop to be a married man, and not lawfull for him to liue according
to the lawes of matrimonie, which God himselfe hath set
downe. But I sée you are glad to vse the fathers, where you find
them a little too much to fauor and fansie your single life.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 3. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  Not a ⸫ neophyte: least puffed vp into pride, he fall into
iudgement of the diuell.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Neophytus is he that was lately christened, or newly planted in the
mysticall bodie of Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héerein I confesse the church of England hath béene negligent
and faultie, for permitting some of your dissembling papists to exercise
the ministerie of the word, afore sufficient triall by length
of time was had of their vnfained repentance and conuersion.
               
            
            
               2. Tim 4. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ euery creature of God is good, and nothing to be reiected
that is receiued with thankesgiuing.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We see plainly by these words such abstinence onely to be disallowed,
as condemneth the creatures of God to be naught by nature & creation.
               
               
                  The note.
                  We sée a double estimation of meats héere, one taken from the
nature & creation of things, the other from the person of him
that vseth them: as appéereth plainly in these words, which God
created for the faithfull, and for them that haue knowen the
truth. Your church therefore is heere plainly noted: first, for that
it maketh it vnlawfull for some to féede of diuers and sundrie of
the creatures of God,As the charter house moonks. which God had appointed for the vse of all
the faithfull. Secondly, bicause it hath generally caused men to
make a superstitious difference betwixt fish, fruit, flesh, egs, and
whitemeat, being al alike by nature and creation. For that which
God hath made lawfull at all times, with you is somtimes vnlawfull,
holines and the seruice of God, or at least a parcell of it,
is planted in superstitious abstinence, and mens consciences tied
and intangled in the things, in which God hath left them frée. As
for your ouer turning this to be meant of other ancient heretiks,
can no more excuse you, than it did excuse the Manichées, that
this was meant of the Tatians, Cataphriges, Eucratites, and
such like, who were long afore them.
               
            
            
               
               1. Tim. 4. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ corporall exercise is profitable to little, but pietie is
profitable to all things, hauing promise of the life that now is,
and of that to come.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Some (saith S. Chysostom) expound this of fasting, but they are deceiued:
for fasting is a spirituall exercise. See a goodly commentarie of these
words in S. August. lib. de mor. Eccl. Cath. c. 33.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Corporall or bodily exercise are externall actions for religions
sake vsed and exercised, as watching, long abstinence from meate
and drinke, the daily reciting of a certaine number of praiers, lieng
and lodging on the bare ground, the wearing of haire cloth
next the skin, whippings, and whatsoeuer other bodily vexations
besides, wherein papists plant merit, and their heremites and
others their religious do without al measure or mean vse. These
and such like are the things, which saint Paul saith are profitable
to little, and yet a great péece of poperie consisteth in them.
The maners of the catholike church in saint Augustines time, to
which you refer vs, doth as much differ from the maners of the
church of Rome now, as chalke doth differ from chéese.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 5. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  But she that is a widow indeed and desolate, let hir hope in
God, and continue in obsecrations and ⸫ praiers night & day.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Bicause of this continuall praier, which standeth not with coniugall all
and carnall acts of matrimonie (as the Apostle signifieth, 1. Cor. 7. 5.)
therfore were these widowes to liue in the state of perpetual continencie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  All Christian men are commanded to continue in praiers,
and to pray without ceasing: Therfore by your reason it is lawfull
for no Christian to marry. You care not how vainly you conclude,
nor into what briers you bring poore men that haue tender
consciences, so you seeme to say somwhat for your single life.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 5. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  The priests that rule wellet them be esteemed ⸫ woorthy of
double honor: especially they that labour in the worde and
doctrine.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Double honor, and liuelihood due to good priests.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  But goodnes of priests consisteth not in saieng masse, and sacrificing
for the quicke and the dead, but in wel ruling their flock,
and in diligent and painefull instructing the people, which pertaine
to their charge in Christian religion.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 5. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Against a priest receiue not accusation, but vnder two or
three witnesses.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Here the Apostle will not haue euerie light fellow to be heard against
a priest. So Augustine for the like reuerence of priesthood admonisheth
Paucarius, that in no wise he admit any testimonies, or accusations of
heretikes against a catholike priest. ep. 212.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  No reason that against ministers of the worde, accusations
should lightly be admitted, and your dealing against vs, in continuall
lieng, and false accusations, doth verie well iustifie Augustines
counsell to Paucarius. For it is a verie dangerous thing,
to admit the accusations of popish heretikes against true Catholikes,
séeing they are commonly woont with their aduersaries to
kéepe neither faith, nor truth.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 5. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  Impose hands on no man ⸫ lightly, neither do thou communicate
with other mens sins.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Bishops must haue great care that they giue not order to anie, that
is not well tried for his faith, learning, and good behauiour.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Herein we fully agrée with you. But this rule hath béene as
well kept by you, as all good precepts haue besides. But it is no
matter: for the pope and his bishops, learned neither of Peter,
nor of Paul,1. King. 12. 31. but of Ieroboam to make priests for their own tooth.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 6. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  If any ⸫ teach otherwise, and consent not to the sound words
of our Lord Iesus Christ, and to that doctrine which is according
to pietie, he is proud, knowing nothing.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotation before, cap. 1. 34.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We agrée with you vpon this point, that all doctrine which is

odde, singuler, new, differing from that which was first planted
by the Apostles, and descended from them, to all nations, and ages
following, is assuredly erronius. Let vs therefore setting all
other things apart examine the doctrine of your church, and so
much as shall be found to descend from the apostles we wil with
all our harts embrace. But this triall you flie. And if anie time
you make a shew of comming to it, then by and by your church
must giue credite to your doctrine, your church cannot erre, your
pope cannot erre, we must beléeue your doctrine, not bicause you
can prooue it, to haue come from the Apostles, but bicause your
church, and pope haue giuen sentence for it, but if you durst abide
by your note, we would easily shew your doctrin to be erronious.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 6. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  For the roote of all euill is couetousnes: ⸫ which certaine
desiring haue erred from the faith, and haue intangled themselues
in manie sorrowes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  As in the first chapter the lacke of faith and good conscience, so here
couetousnes and the desire of these temporall things, and in the ende of
this chapter presumption and boasting of knowledge are causes of falling
from the faith: heresie often being the punishment of former sins.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is very true that God punisheth sin by sin, and that there be
many causes, for which wicked men are wont to forsake the faith
which they do, or did somtimes professe. The causes in your note
assigned, lacke of faith, and good conscience, couetousnes, presumption,
and boasting, if all the world be sought, from one end to the
other, there cannot any be founde, in whom these causes haue so
euidently concurred, and wrought as in your most holy fathers
of Rome, wherein I referre my selfe to the credite of your owne
stories.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 6. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  Command the rich of this world not to be high minded,
nor to trust in the vncertainty of riches but in the liuing God,
(who giueth al things aboundantly to enioy) to do wel to become
rich in good works, to giue easelie to communicate, to
heape vnto themselues a good ⸫ foundation for the time to
come, that they may apprehend the true life.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Almes deeds and good works laid for a foundation and ground to attaine
euerlasting life. So say the doctors vpon this place.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  If you had shewed vs what doctors had so spoken, we woulde
haue shewed you their meaning. But we know that neither
they nor the apostles ment by the word foundation, to put Christ
out of his office, or place: but onlie to oppose against the vncertaintie
of riches here, the certaintie of promised blessednes in the
time to come. According to the saieng of our Lord, and Sauiour
Christ, Blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercy.
               
            
         
         
            2. TIMOTHIE.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. 1. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  For the which cause I admonish thee, that thou resuscitate
the grace of God which is in thee by imposition of my hands.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere againe it is plaine that holy orders giue grace, and that euen
by, and in the externall ceremonie of imposing the bishops hands. And it
is a maner of speech specially vsed in this Apostle and S. Luke, that orders
giue grace to the ordered, and that to take orders or authoritie to
minister sacrament or preach, is to be giuen or deliuered to Gods grace.
Acts. 14. 25.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héere you say that that is plaine, which no wise man can sée:
namely, that holy orders giue grace, in, and by the externall ceremonie
of imposing of the bishops hands. For if that were so, what
néeded there be any choise of men furnished with gifts and graces
for that purpose, sith in the very ordering they should be sufficiently
indued with gifts and graces necessarie and néedfull? And
how fel it out that there were so great a number of popish priests
void and destitute of al gifts & graces after their ordering, when
the bishop had conferred and bestowed vpon them all that he
could? It is euident by the manifold commendations that the
Apostle giueth to Timothie,1. Tim. 4. 16. as well for his owne studie in the
scriptures,2. Tim. 3. 14. 15. as also for his bringing vp vnder his mother, and
grandmother, that he was a man furnished with gifts afore Paul
and the elders ordered him. But bicause the praiers of the church
in that his consecrating to the worke of God, were not in vaine,
that blessing and increase of aptnesse and fitnesse, which God at
their petitions gaue him at that time, is called the gift or grace
by imposition of hands. In the like order it is true, that all those
which be rightly ordered, are deliuered to the grace of God: bicause

the same God, who of his mercifull goodnes afore indued
them with gifts, made them fit and méete for the worke of his
ministerie, and mooued his church to call them thereunto, afterward
by and in the imploieng of their talents to his glorie, and
the benefit of his church and people, increaseth and augmenteth
their gifts.
               
            
            
               2. Tim. 1. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  Haue thou a forme of sound words, which thou hast heard
of me in faith and in ⸫ the loue in Christ Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Faith and loue coupled commonly togither in this Apostles writing.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Paul so speaketh of them, bicause faith and loue be companions
inseparable. But such mates as you are, bend themselues to
vncouple these, to the end they might haue some probable shew
of matter to prate withall, against iustification by onely faith.
               
            
            
               2. Tim. 1. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  Our Lord giue mercie to the house of Onesiphorus, bicause
he hath often refreshed me, and hath ⸫ not beene ashamed of
my chaine.
               
               
                  The note.
                  What an happie and meritorious thing it is to releeue the afflicted for
religion, and not to be ashamed of their disgrace, yrons or what miserie
so euer.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Put meritorious into your purse, and vnderstand true religion,
and then we agrée to your note.
               
            
            
               2. Tim. 2. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  Therefore ⸫ I sustaine all things for the elect, that they also
may obtaine the saluation, which is in Christ Iesus with heauenly
glorie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Marke heere that the elect (though sure of their saluation) yet are
saued by the means of their preachers and teachers, as also by their owne
endeuor.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Marke héere the force and might of truth, which hath héere
wrested this confession of truth from you, that the elect are sure
of their saluation, to which the whole course of your doctrine is
opposite. The ministerie of the word, and mens owne endeuors
to attaine the knowledge of the truth, we acknowledge to be
meanes appointed of God to saue those, which be his.
               
            
            
               
               1. Tim. 2. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  But profane and vaine speeches auoid.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See the annotation before. 1. Timoth. 6. verse 20.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We haue séene your note, and do sée that both your reasons
and authorities there stand very well against your selues. But I
refer the answer of it to the answer of all your annotations.
               
            
            
               1. Tim. 2. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  But the seruant of our Lord must not wrangle, but be mild
towards all men, apt to teach, patient, with modestie admonishing
them that resist the truth: least sometime ⸫ God giue
them repentance to know the truth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Conuersion from sinne and heresie is the gift of God, and of his speciall
grace, yet heere we see good exhortations and praier, and such other
helps of man be profitable thereunto: which could not be if we had not
freewill.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That conuersion from sin is the gift of God, and that all helps
by man, which God hath thereto appointed are néedfull and necessarie
it is manifest, but it is impossible, that the industrie of
man should do good,Rom. 8. 7. where God createth not a new hart, and reneweth
not a right will. For the will and wisedome of man is
enimitie to God. And so appéereth the vanitie of your conclusion
for frée will.
               
            
            
               2. Tim. 3. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  But as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moises, so these also resist
the truth, men corrupted in minde, reprobate concerning
the faith.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That those Magicians which resisted Moises were thus called, it is
not written in all the old Testament, therefore it came to the Apostles
knowledge by tradition, as the church now hath the names of the three
Kings, of the penitent theefe, of the souldier that pearced Christs side
on the crosse.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Howsoeuer Paul had the names of those magicians, to vs it
is not materiall. We are sure the spirit of God hath now to vs
made them knowen by him, and therefore it followeth not that
we must beléeue your fabulous narrations of the names, number,
dignitie and such like, of the wise men, wherein you make of
East, West, and of West, East, contrarie to the manifest truth,

so that the wiser sort of your selues do not beléeue those toies, but
your Romish church hath deliuered it to her children: let them
that will willinglie be deceiued, be deceiued by her.
               
            
            
               2 Tim. 3. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  But thou ⸫ continue in those things which thou hast learned,
and are committed to thee, knowing of whom thou hast
learned.
               
               
                  The note.
                  In all danger and diuersitie of false sectes, Saint Pauls admonition
is euer to abide in that was first taught and deliuered, neuer to giue
ouer our old faith for a new fansie. This is it which before he calleth depositum.
1. Timothie 6. and 2. Timothie 1.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And why did not Paul admonish men to hold fast that, which
the Pope and the church of Rome should prescribe, bicause that
should not, or could not erre, or stray from the first faith? Or why
do not you, setting all other things apart, enter into that triall
with vs, whether our doctrine or yours were the former? Your
whole doctrine swarueth farre from the first faith which the Apostles
planted, and the greatest part thereof is quite destitute of
all testimonie of antiquitie.
               
            
            
               2. Tim. 4. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  For I am euen now ⸫ to be sacrificed, and the time of my resolution
is at hand.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The martyrdome of Saints is so acceptable to God, that it is counted
as it were a sacrifice in his sight, and therefore hath manie effectes both
in the partie that suffereth it, and in others that are partakers of the
merit as of a sacrifice, which name it hath by a Metaphore.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The voluntarie suffrings of most bitter and cruel death for
Gods cause, of Gods saints are accepted of God as a most swéete
sacrifice. The effectes in the partie that suffereth, bicause you
haue not vttered what they be, I can not imagine your meaning,
& therefore know not what to say to it. The effects it hath
in others, if you had dealt plainlie, you should haue said to be the
confirmation and strengthening of other christians by their suffrings.
But you come couertlie in with the partaking or partnership
of their merits, to make a way for the maintenance of
your holie fathers gainfull marchandize, for he hath the bestowing
of all the merits of Peter and Paul and other saintes, and

they are admitted to be partakers of them, that will paie most for
them.
               
            
            
               2. Tim. 4. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  Eubulus, and pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the
brethren salute thee.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This Linus was coadiutor with and vnder Saint Peter, and so counted
second in the number of the popes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is strange to sée how boldly our papists can set downe that,
which by no meanes they can be sure of, first therefore good reader
thou art to vnderstand, that by the testimonie of all stories
Peter and Paul suffered death at Rome both in one day. If euer
Linus therefore were bishop of Rome by the Apostles life time,
he was at this present, when they were so néere their end, that
they dailie looked to be sacrificed. But it is not likelie that he was
as then aduaunced to that dignitie, when neither Paul mentioneth
him as bishop, or as his or Peters coadiutor or fellow labourer,
and also setteth diuers other Christians afore him in
his salutation, which had béene a verie vnmannerlie part, and a
great forgetfulnesse of dutie in the Apostles, if Linus had then
béene Bishop there, and so Christs vicar generall. But bicause
you terme him Saint Peters coadiutor there, I pray you tel me,
was Saint Peter there now or no, I will not vse the reason,
that Paul not onlie héere but alwaies forgetteth him amongst
those whom he nameth in his salutations, whereof groweth
great likelihood that he was neuer there whiles Paul wrote
thence. But if he were now and before there,verse. 15. Paul maketh a verie
great and pitifull complaint of him, that he amongst the rest
forsook him. But I had rather say he was not yet come to Rome,
and that Paul made Linus the first Bishop there, as your Clemens
also affirmeth, then to admit so great an absurditie against
Peter. The succession of the bishops of Rome which you so much
glory of, and vpon the authoritie whereof your church resteth, is
vncertaine, vaine, obscure, and such as your selues can make no
certaine report of.
               
            
         
         
            TITVS.
            
               Tit. 1. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  All things are ⸫ cleane to the cleane: but to the polluted,

and infidels nothing is cleane, but polluted are both their
minds and consciences.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He speaketh not of the church absteining from meats sometimes
which is not for anie vncleannes, in the creatures, but for chastening
their bodies: but he meaneth the Iewish superstition, who now being christians,
would not cease to put difference of cleane and vncleane according
to their old law. See Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 31. cap. 4.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I easily beléeue that he ment not of that which was not, for
your churches superstition in that matter was not yet growne.
But you haue brought about by your lawes of abstinencie, that
your simple followers, in the extremitie of sicknes when there
cannot be any pretence of chastening their bodies thereby, are so
snarled in conscience, that they dare not touch, or tast, that which
is necessary to preserue life, and to restore health withal. Besides
chastening of your bodies, in your ordinarie abstinence in poperie,
hath no probable shew. For your richer sort neuer fare more
delicately, nor fill their bellies more gluttonouslie, then when
they abstaine from ordinarie meats, and hunt after extraordinarie
delicates. So that no mans bodies are chastened by your fasting
daies, but their, whom néede, or nigerdlines doth continuallie
compell to borrow of their bellies.
               
            
            
               Tit. 2. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  These things speake, and exhort, and rebuke ⸫ with all authoritie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Bishops must be stout and commande in Gods cause, and the people
must in no wise disobey or contemne them.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  So must also euerie minister of the word, and their flockes do
owe vnto them honor, and obedience, and you must remember
that your popes cause, is not gods cause.
               
            
            
               Tit. 3. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  But when the benignitie and kindnes towarde man of our
sauiour God appeered, not by the works of iustice which we
did, but according to his mercy he hath saued vs ⸫ by the lauer
of regeneration and renouation of the holie ghost.
               
               
                  The note.
                  As before in the Sacrament of holie orders (1. Timoth. 4. and 2.

Timoth. 1.) so heere it is plaine that baptisme giueth grace, and that by
it as by an instrumentall cause we be saued.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Concerning your Sacraments of orders, of your own institution,
and grace by them giuen, you haue receiued answer
before. That baptisme is amongst the instrumentall causes of
our saluation no man denieth. And likewise we grant vnto you,
that by it grace is giuen to the woorthy receiuers, so that you vnderstand
by baptisme the whole sacrament, and not the outward
acte, and worke of the minister onely as you commonly do.
               
            
            
               Tit. 3. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  A man that is an heretike, after the first and second ⸫ admonition
auoide. Knowing that he that is such an on, is subuerted
and sinneth being condemned by his owne iudgement.
               
               
                  The note.
                  These admonitions and corruptions must be giuen to such as erre, by
our spirituall Gouernors, and pastors: to whom if they yeeld not, Christian
men must auoide them.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If we were agréed of the church, and gouernors thereof, then
we would not contende with you about your note. But nowe so
long as you wil not suffer the church to be discerned by the scriptures,
nor cleaue to that church which receiueth the doctrine in
them deliuered, the admonitions, and correptions of your gouernors,
are to be contemned, despised, and disobeied.
               
            
         
         
            PHILEMON.
            
               Phile. 1. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  I giue thanks to my God alwaies making a memory of thee
in my praiers. Hearing thy ⸫ charitie and faith which thou hast
in our Lord Iesus, and toward all the saints.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Faith and charitie commended alwaies togither, both necessarie to
make a compleate Christian man, and to iustification and saluation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Faith, and charitie alwaies togither, but not alwaies commended
togither, both necessarie to make a compleat Christian,
faith for iustification, and charitie for sanctification: But you the
better to blinde men, confounde that which you should distinguish.
               
            
            
               
               Phile. 1. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  For I haue had great ioy and consolation in thy charitie,
bicause the bowels of the saints ⸫ haue rested by thee brother.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The duties of charitie and mercie done to Christs prisoners are exceeding
acceptable to God, and all good men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is verie true, and yet you the popes prisoners, and not
Christs.
               
            
            
               Phile. 1. 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ do thou receiue him as mine owne bowels.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All spirituall men, ought to be exceeding propense and readie to procure
mens pardon and reconciliation to all penitent.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is to be maruelled at, that men shewing so little mercie as
you are woont, and so voide of all pitie, as your tragicall doings
haue shewed you to be, should now become teachers of mercie,
and pitie to other men.
               
            
            
               Phile. 1. 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  I Paule haue written with mine owne hand: I will repay it:
not to say to thee, ⸫ that thou owest me thine own selfe also.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The great det and dutie that we owe to such as be our spirituall parents
in Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  As to our parents we can make no sufficient recompense, so
much lesse are we able to requite those, which are Gods good instruments
of our regeneration.
               
            
         
         
            HEBREWES.
            
               Hebr. 1. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  Being made so much more excellent than Angels, as he
hath inherited a more excellent name aboue them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The excellencie of Christ aboue Angels.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And therefore consequently his excellencie aboue Moyses, the
prophets, and all creatures whatsoeuer.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 1. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  Are they not al ⸫ ministring spirits, sent to minister for them
which shall receiue the inheritance of saluation?
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  The holy angels (saith S. Augustine) to the societie of whom we aspire
in this our peregrination, as they haue eternitie to continue, so also facilitie
to know, and felicitie to rest. For they do helpe vs without all difficultie,
bicause with their spirituall motions, pure and free, they labor and
trauell not. De ciuitate lib. 11. cap. 31.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I would your doctrine of Angels were alwaies, as this which
here you learne of Augustine, then some of your vnprofitable
controuersies, which now trouble the world, would soone be cut
of, and throwen to the dunghill amongst other filth and mire of
poperie. But these, and such other good things, are defiled with
the rest that you couple them with. And more I haue not to say
to you for this note.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 1.
               
                  The text.
                  Therefore more abundantly ought we to obserue those
things which we haue heard: ⸫ least perhaps we run out.
               
               
                  The note.
                  As that which runneth out of a broken vessel, or that runneth by is lost.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  He is said to run out, which doth not hold and kéepe the word
which he heareth, of whom we say in English, In at the one eare
and out at the other.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 2. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  But him that was a little lessened vnder the Angels: we see
Iesus ⸫ bicause of the passion of death crowned with glory and
honor, that through the grace of God he might tast of death
for all
               
               
                  The note.
                  This prooueth against the Caluinists that Christ by his passion merited
his own glorification, which they would not for shame denie of Christ,
but that they are at a point to denie all meritorious works, yea euen
Christs also. And therefore they translate also this heretically, by transposing
the words. In the bible printed 1579.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The force of this proofe resteth vpon the signification of the
Gréeke preposition 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which héere, as often else where, doth signifie
the finall cause or end, and is to be referred to his lessening,
which goeth before, and not to his crowning which commeth after.
As if he should say, we sée him, that is Iesus, bicause of his suffering,
or that he might suffer, a little lessened vnder the Angels,

that is, made man. And thus your proofe faileth, and commeth to
naught. Otherwise for Christs merits we do more highly estéeme
of them than you. But the holie Ghost hath taught vs, that he
tooke our nature vpon him, not for himselfe but for our good,
so that whatsoeuer he did in our nature, was not to gaine to him
selfe, but to vs; not to his, but to our benefit: but preposterous desire
to stablish the merits of men carieth you, you wot not whither.
For it maketh you to suppose, that the maiestie of God
which is proper to himselfe (for that was the glorie wherewith
Christ is crowned) may be the deserued reward of mans works,
which is horrible once to thinke.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 2. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  For no where doth he take Angels: but ⸫ the seed of Abraham
he doth take.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The dignitie of man in that Christ tooke our nature vnto his person
in deitie, and not the nature of Angels.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Nay rather the great and maruellous goodnes of God, that
was better to men than to Angels, and that vouchsafed rather to
vnite our miserable vile nature to his Godhead, rather than the
eternall excelling nature of Angels.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 3. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  For this man is esteemed woorthie of more ample glorie
aboue Moises, by so much as more ample glory than the house
hath he that framed it.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The excellencie of Christ aboue Moises.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Christ far excelled Moises: but you make him far inferior.
For from Moises doctrine no man might swarue to the right
hand,Deut. 4. 2. or to the left, no man might ad or take away: but to Christs
doctrine,Deut. 28. 14. vnder the name of traditions, you may make as manie
additions as you list.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 3. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  For we be made partakers of Christ: yet so if we keepe the
⸫ beginning of his substance firme vnto the end.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Faith is the groundworke of our creation in Christ, which if we holde
not fast, all the building is lost.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Such a faith as a man in some measure is able to render a
reason of out of the word, and not a blinde perswasion to beléeue
as other men beléeue, neither knowing what we beléeue, and
whie, as the greatest number of your blinde followers do.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 4. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  For he said in a certaine place of the ⸫ seuenth day, thus, And
God rested the seuenth day from all his workes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If the Apostle had not euidentlie shewed that the Saboaths rest
was a figure of the eternall repose in heauen, who durst to haue applied
that Scripture of Gods rest the seuenth day to that purpose? Or how can
our aduersaries now reprehend the like application manifoldlie vsed in
all holie ancient writers to that end?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  What conscience is in you for applieng Scriptures without
example, warrant, or anie other necessarie collection I know not:
but this I know, that in your handling of the scriptures there
appeareth none. All things that happened to the fathers in the
old Testament, were figures (as the Apostle teacheth) of things
happening in the new testament to vs. As therfore the diligence
of the fathers was commendable in séeking and searching what
was prefigured in the old law; so the immoderate desire and delight
of some, to draw all things in both testaments into perpetuall
allegories, and to make figures where none are, & to wrest
their fansies out of what place they list, is iustlie by your aduersaries
found fault withall.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 4. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  For the ⸫ word of God is liuely and forcible, and more piersing
then anie two edged sword: and reaching vnto the diuision
of the soule and the spirit, of the ioints also and of the marowes,
and a discerner of the cogitations and intents of the
hart.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Whatsoeuer God threatneth by his word concerning the punishment
of sinne and incredulitie, shalbe executed, be the offence neuer so secret,
deepe, or hidden in our harts, bicause Gods speech passeth easilie, & searcheth
throughlie euerie part, power and facultie of mans soule.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note is true, though but in a litle part expressing the
meaning of the text, and verie hardlie agréeable with other parts

of your doctrine. For if secret and hidden sinnes, which by no
meanes breake foorth and discouer them selues, by acte can not
escape the threatned vengeance of God, then what sinnes can you
can veniall?
               
            
            
               Hebr. 6. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ we confidentlie trust of you, (my best beloued) better
things and neerer to saluation: although we speake thus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is euident by these words against the Nouatians and the Caluinists,
that Saint Paul meant not preciselie that they had done, or could
do anie such sinne, where they should be put out of all hope of saluation,
and be sure of damnation during their life.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is euident by your words, that you flatter your selues with
mercie more then there is cause whie, whiles you thinke that you
can not commit anie such sinne, as for which you should be sure
during your life to be damned. For herein you do not contend
with the Nouatians and Caluinists (as it pleaseth you to terme
them) onlie, but with Saint Iohn, and with our Lord and Sauior
Christ. For what will ye say of those sinners, which S. Iohn
forbiddeth vs to pray for: or of that sin, which our Sauior Christ
hath told vs shall neuer be forgiuen,1. Iohn 5. 16. neither in this world, nor in
the world to come?Matth. 12. 32. The same sinne, the Apostle in this Chapter
describeth, not bicause the Hebrewes, to whom he wrote, had
committed it, but because it was possible for some of them to fall
into it, therefore he forewarneth them of the great and wonderfull
danger of it.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 7. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  To whom also Abraham diuided tithes of all, first in deede
by interpretation ⸫ the king of iustice, and then also King of
Salem, which is to say, King of peace.
               
               
                  The note.
                  When the fathers and catholike expositers picke out allegories and
mysteries out of the names of men, the protestants not indued with the
Spirit whereby the Scriptures were giuen, deride their holie labours in
search of the same: but the Apostle findeth high mysteries in the names
of persons and places as you see.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That we deride the Fathers or anie other Catholike expositors,
is one of your woonted slanders: but we saie that measure in
all things is a merrie meane. For though in the names of such

speciall persons as were figures of Christ, and in the names of
other persons, places, and things as had their names giuen for
some speciall causes and considerations, the mysteries shadowed
in the signification of those names are wel, and profitably sought:
yet to do, or endeuour the like, in all names, or in many other
names is labor néedlesse, causelesse, and curious.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 7. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  And heere indeede ⸫ men that die receiue tithes: but there
he hath witnes that he liueth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The tithes giuen to Melchisedech, were not giuen as to a meere mortall
man, as all of the tribe of Leui and Aarons order were, but as to one
representing the sonne of God, who now liueth & reigneth, and holdeth
his priesthood, and the function thereof for euer.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your note is true, and bicause he holdeth his priesthood and the
functions thereof for euer, therefore you offer him great iniurie,
to appoint other priests to do his office, that is, to offer propitiatorie
sacrifice for vs.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 7. 
                     •
                  5.
               
                  The text.
                  Whereby he is able to saue vs for euer, going by himselfe to
God: ⸫ alwaies liuing to make intercession for vs.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ according to his humaine nature, praieth for vs, and continuallie
representeth his former passion, and merit to God the father.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You would make vs beléeue that Christ was our priest onlie
in respect of our nature, directly against the worde, and against
this present place. For the priests appointed by the lawe, were
men hauing infirmitie, but our priest is the sonne for euer perfect,
where perfection is opposed to infirmitie, and the sonne of
God is opposed to men: which sheweth the coupling of both natures,
aswell in exercising of his office as in his person. But you
of purpose in your translation haue omitted the worde men, to
obscure and darken the sense of the text.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 8. 
                     •
                  2.
               
                  The text.
                  We haue such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of
the seate of maiestie in the heauens, a ⸫ minister of the holies,
and of the true tabernacle which our Lord pight and not
man.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Christ liuing and reigning in heauen, continueth his priestly function
still, and is minister not of Moyses Sancta and tabernacle, but of his
owne bodie, and blood, which be the true holies and tabernacle not formed
by man, but by Gods owne hand.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Paule setteth Christ in heauen at the right hand of maiestie,
you set him in earth in the sacrament of the altar. Paule teacheth
that he continueth in his priestly function: you haue appointed
priests to offer propitiatorie sacrifice, as if his priesthood were
ceased. Paule saith that if Christ were vpon the earth againe, he
were no priest: you teach that he is againe vpon earth, therefore
your doctrine maketh him no priest.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 8. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ if that former had beene voide of fault, there should
not certes a place for a second been sought.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The promises and effects of the law were temporall, but the promises
and effects of Christs Sacraments in the church be eternall.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is plaine, and flat Manicheisme. If the high priest were
a figure of Christ, if Sancta sanctorum were a figure of heauen, if
the sacrifices of the old law were figures of Christs sacrifice, then
how can the promises, or effects perteining to them be temporal?
The differences that I haue learned betwéene the sacraments of
the law, and the Gospell do not consist in diuersitie of promises,
and effects, but in cléerenes, number, and time. Cléerenes bicause
that, which then was obscurely shadowed, is now cléerely reuealed:
number bicause they had a great multitude of sacramentall
figures, we as few in number, and as effectual in signification, as
possible may be, in time bicause theirs nursed in them the faith
of Christ to come, and ours confirmeth to vs the faith of Christ
which is alreadie come, and hath accomplished all things, which
are necessarie for our redemption.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 9. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  The holie Ghost signifieng this, that the way of the holies

                        •
                     as ⸫ not yet manifested, the former tabernacle yet standing.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The way to heauen was not open before Christs passion, and therfore

the Patriarks and good men of the old testament were in some other
place of rest vntill then.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You dreame of a drie sommer. Christ was alwaies the waie,
but Christ was not alwaies manifested, or made openly knowne
during the former tabernacle, as now he is. What maketh this
for your dream of shutting the fathors out of heauen, and causing
them to go séeke another place of rest? Was not Christ the lambe
slaine from the beginning of the world? And was not faith in his
blood as auailable to the fathers, as to vs?
               
            
            
               Hebr. 9. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  Which is a ⸫ parable of the time present.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All things done in the old testament and priesthood were figures of
Christs actions.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If all things done in the olde Testament, and priesthoode
haue relation to Christ and that which he perfourmed for vs,
then how are the promises temporall, as before you said? Liars
had néed of good memories, or els with one breath they denie and
ouerthrow that, which they affirme with another.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 9 19.
               
                  The text.
                  For all the commandement of the lawe being read of Moises
to all the people, he taking the blood of calues and goates
with ⸫ water and skarlet wooll, and ysope, sprinkled the verie
booke also it selfe, and all the people, saieng, This is the blood
of the Testament which God hath commanded you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere we may learne that the Scriptures conteine not all necessarie
rites or truthes, when neither the place to the which the Apostle alludeth,
nor anie other mentioneth halfe these ceremonies, but he had them
by tradition.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The Scriptures (you say) containe not all necessarie rites
and truthes, whie do you couple rites and truthes togither? You
know that we hold that rites and ceremonies may be variable
according to diuersitie of times, places, and maners of people: so
the generall rules of Scriptures giuen to frame them by be obserued.
But truth is alwaies one and the same, & not to be found
but in the word of truth, and therefore though you could haue
prooued that some of these rites were had by tradition, yet it
would not followe that anie necessarie truth were omitted in

scriptures. But let vs sée how doughtilie you prooue that, forsooth
halfe the ceremonies here spoken of, are not mentioned in the
place of Scripture, to the which the Apostle alludeth, nor in anie
other place, and therfore it can not be otherwise, but he had them
by tradition. As you are true in this, so I would you might finde
credit in all things els:Exod. 14. 8. first in the place by your selues quoted,
the reading of the Lawe, the sprinkling of the people and the
book, with the blood of the sacrifices, with the words here rehearsed
are mentioned. Then resteth water, skarlet wool and hissope,
to be shewed els where. In Leuiticus we finde that water was
mingled with the blood which was to be sprinckled,Leuit. 14. 4. and that the
sprinckle it selfe was made of cedar wood, of hissope, and of a skarlet
lace. Thus haue you one place for the sprinckling, and another
for the sprinkle, and nothing héere at all by tradition, which you
so contend for.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 9. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  And as it is appointed to men to die once, and after this the
iudgement: so also Christ was offered once, to ⸫ exhauste the
sinnes of manie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By this word which signifieth to emptie, or draw out euen to the bottome,
is declared the plentifull & perfect redemption of sinnes by Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  When the holie Ghost by such significant and forcible wordes
hath taught vs to ascribe our whole and full remission of sinnes
to Christ, what impudencie and shamelessenes is in you, to ioine
to Christ a number of trumperies of your own, and as it were in
this matter to part stakes with him by chalēging, if not one half,
yet a verie great part by your works satisfactorie & meritorious?
               
            
            
               Hebr. 10. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  Holocausts and for ⸫ sinne did not please thee.
               
               
                  The note.
                  For sinne is the proper name of a certaine sacrifice called in Hebrew

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      as holocaust is another kinde. See the annotations. 2. Corinths,
5. verse 21.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To trouble peoples heads with the diuersitie of the sacrifices
of the Iewes, and their diuers appellations, I iudge it not necessarie,
and therefore I leaue your note as I finde it.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 10. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And this is the testament which I will make to them after

those daies, saith our Lord, giuing my lawes ⸫ in their hartes,
and in their mindes will I superscribe them, and their sinnes
and iniquities I will remember no more.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This is partlie fulfilled by the grace of the new Testament, but it shal
be perfectlie accomplished in heauen.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note I will not impugne, but it commeth as a rose among
nettles, which a man can hardlie cul out, without stinging
of his handes.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 10. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  Hauing therefore brethren confidence in the entring of the
holies in the blood of Christ, which ⸫ he hath dedicated to vs
a new and liuing way by the vaile, that is, his flesh, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To dedicate, is to be the author and beginner of a thing. The protestants
translate, he hath prepared, for their heresie that Christ was not
the first man that entered into heauen.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Wée shunne not the word dedicate, which you your selues
haue borrowed of a protestant, for it is as good and fit as the other.
And you charge vs wrongfullie with that which we holde
not, for we all affirme that Christ was the first man that euer
caried the whole humane nature & substance of man, consisting
of an humane bodie, and of a reasonable soule into heauen.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 10. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  A man making the Lawe of Moises frustrate, without anie
mercie dieth vnder two or three witnesses: ⸫ how much more
thinke doth he deserue worse punishment, which hath troden
the sonne of God vnder foote, and esteemed the blood of the
Testament polluted, wherein he is sanctified, and done contumelie
to the spirit of grace?
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heresie and Apostasie from the Catholike faith punishable by
death.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This doth plainly and manifestly reprooue the ouermuch clemencie
vsed in this Realme and Church of England, towarde
froward and obstinate papists, who by your owne conclusion are
by Gods lawes punishable by death.
               
            
            
               
               Hebr. 10. 35.
               
                  The text.
                  Do not therfore loose your ⸫ confidence which hath a great
remuneration.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Good works make great confidence of saluation, and haue great rewarde.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Good works being testimonies of our election, fruits of our
faith, witnesses that we be led and guided by the spirit of God,
do nourish and increase our confidence in God, whom we knowe
to haue adopted vs in Christ, for his children. It is true also that
God doth most liberally reward all good things, which he worketh
in his children.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 11. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And faith is ⸫ the substance of things to be hoped for, the
argument of things not appearing.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By this word substance is ment that faith is the ground of our hope.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Or rather that faith is the very substance, and being of things
which yet appéere not, nor are not séene, and therefore are hoped
for.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 11. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  By faith ⸫ Henoch was translated, that he should not see
death, and he was not found, bicause God translated him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heere it appeereth that Henoch yet liueth and is not dead against
the Caluinists. See the Annot. chap. 11. Apoc.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Why do you not couple Saint Paule with the Caluinists,
doth not he saie,Rom. 5. 1
                           •
                        . that death reigned ouer all from Adam to Moyses?
Was not Henoch one of these all, or did he not liue within
the time there limited? yet it is true that Enoch and Elias did
not die after the common and ordinarie maner of other men, but
were translated, and haue in extraordinarie maner and sort deposed
the corruptible flesh, that with Christ they may enioy blessed
rest, and quietnes.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 11. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  But without faith it is impossible to please God, for he that
commeth to God, must beleeue that he is, and is a ⸫ rewarder
to them that seeke him.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  We must beleeue that God will reward all our good works, for he is a
rewarder of true iustice, not an accepter or imputer of that, that is not.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that God of his goodnes and bountie will rewarde
euery good worke, and it is true that God rewardeth true iustice,
that is the good, that they do that in sinceritie and truth séeke
him, though it deserue none. But that which you adde sheweth
that you care not how directly you oppose your selues to the truth
of Gods word, so that you may bleare the eies of the simple with
somewhat. Is not the iustice of Christ our iustice? is it in vs reallie,
or by imputation? Héeretofore you haue séemed to haue
bent your force to prooue some iustice, besides imputatiue iustice,
and now you would haue imputatiue iustice quite strooken out
of the booke, least God should be an imputer of that, which is not.
Our sinnes were not in Christ, and yet they were imputed to
Christ, and Christ was punished for them: why shall it not then
stand as well with Gods iustice, that though Christs iustice be
not actually, and really in vs, yet it be both imputed to vs, and we
crowned and rewarded for it?
               
            
            
               Hebr. 11. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  Wherevpon he receiued him also ⸫ for a parable.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is in figure and mysterie of Christ dead and aliue againe.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The truth of this note we acknowledge.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 11. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  By faith Ioseph dieng, made mention of the going foorth
of the children of Israell: and gaue commandement ⸫ concerning
his bones.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The translation of relikes, or saints bodies, and the due regard and honor,
we ought to haue to the same are prooued hereby.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Ioseph in this commandement touching his bones, shewed
his assured faith, and constant beléefe that God in his good time
would kéepe, and performe his promise, touching the inheritance
of the land of Canaan. The children of Israell in translating his
bones, shewed their care of truth, in kéeping the promise, which
they made vnto him. The honor, yea all the honor, they did to

him or his bones, when they came into the lande of promise,Iosua 24. 
                           ••
                        . and
were possessed of it, was to sée him, or them honestly laide in the
graue. What maketh all this for your superstitions? The saints
of God neither gaue you, nor your fathers charge to translate
their bones. The cause of your translating them was not any due
regard to them, but profit to your selues, by making marchandise
of their carkasses, and by abusing most shamefully the simplicitie
of the ignorant, to offer largely to you vnder colour of honoring
them. And therefore if you should not maintaine this note,
that butter would not cleaue to your bread.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 11. 26.
               
                  The text.
                  Esteeming the reproch of Christ greater riches then the
treasure of the Egyptians. For ⸫ he looked vnto the remuneration.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The protestants that denie, we may, or ought to do good in respect or
for reward in heauen are hereby confuted.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You haue confuted your own shadow, and not the protestants,
for it is your slander, and not our assertion that is hereby confuted.
For we confesse that in well doing men may respect, and
haue an eie to such rewardes as God hath promised. But this
we say withall, that it is not the reward onlie or chiefelie, that
the saints of God haue respect or regard to, for that were either
hipocriticall or seruile, but the reuerence, that sonnes owe vnto
their father, who the more assured they are of his fatherlie fauor,
the gladder they are to please him, and the loather to displease.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 12. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  Looking diligentlie least anie man ⸫ be wanting to the grace
of God: lest anie roore of bitternesse springing vp do hinder,
and by it manie be polluted.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That we be not good there is no lacke on Gods part, who offereth his
grace to vs, but the defect is in our selues, that are not answerable to
Gods calling of vs, and grace towards vs.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note is verie true, and therefore we ought carefullie to
call vpon God to reforme vs, and to renue vs, that we be not also
amongst them, that stubburnly refuse the grace of God calling
them.
               
            
            
               
               Hebr. 12. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  Least there be anie fornicator or prophane person as ⸫ Esau,
who for one dish of meat sold his first birth rightes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Such as forsake their saluation and religion to saue their lands and
goods are like Esau.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note must haue a fauorable interpretation, and some cautions
& exceptions, except you will leaue no place of repentance
to them that haue once preferred goods afore religion, but either
hipocriticall or too late as Esaus was.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 12. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ you are come to mount Sion, and the citie of the liuing
God heauenlie Ierusalem, and the assemblies of manie
thousands of Angels, and the Church of the first borne, which
are written in the heauens, and the iudge of all God, and the
spirits of the iust made perfect, and the mediatour of the newe
Testament, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The faithfull are made fellowes of Angels, and of all the perfect
soules departed since the beginning of the world, and of Christ him selfe.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bicause the church is the fellowship of all the saints which
haue béene, are or shall be, whereof Christ, and not the pope is
head and chiefe, and which with Christ make one bodie.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 13. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  With ⸫ various and strange doctrines be not led away.
               
               
                  The note.
                  New, diuers, changeable, and strange doctrines to be auoided, for
such be hereticall, against which the best remedie or preseruatiue, is
alwaies to looke backe to our first Apostles, and the holie fathers doctrine.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I would to God you would once kéepe promise, to looke backe
in truth to our first Apostles doctrine, so should our controuersies
be soone at an end: but you commonlie by your first apostle meane
your corrupt monke Augustine. And if by him you would examine
your doctrine, you must cast away a number of your chiefe
corruptions, which he neuer knew of.
               
            
            
               Hebr. 13. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  And the God of peace which brought out from the dead,
the great pastor of the sheepe in the blood of the eternall testament,

our Lord Iesus Christ ⸫ fit you in all goodnesse that
you may doe his will, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      that is, make you perfect and absolute in all goodnesse.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This you learned either of master Beza, or of Erasmus, or of
both, giue them thankes for it.
               
            
         
         
            IAMES.
            
               Iam. 1. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  For ⸫ euerie one is tempted of his owne concupiscence, abstracted
and allured.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The ground of temptation to sinne is our concupiscence, & not God.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Tentations are either outward or inward. Tentations outward
are afflictions, wherebie God is woont to trie and prooue
men, as gold and siluer is tried in the fire. Tentations inward
whereof Iames speaketh in this place, are inordinate desires
prouoking & soliciting vs to sinne, but bicause men who receiue
corruption from Adam, are prone and readie to do as Adam did,
that is, to lay their faults frō them selues to God, therfore Iames
earnestlie admonisheth them to looke into them selues, and there
to espie and sée the roote and matter of all corruption.
               
            
            
               Iam. 1. 25.
               
                  The text.
                  But he that hath looked into the law of perfect libertie, and
hath remained in it, not made a forgetfull hearer but a doer
of the worke, this man shalbe ⸫ blessed in his deede.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Beatitude or saluation consisteth in well working.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Weldoers or workers are blessed and saued, and yet notwithstanding
beatitude & saluation doth not consist in our weldoing,
but in the mercie & goodnes of God bestowed vpon vs in Christ.
Therefore it is to be obserued that in this place Iames maketh a
comparison betwéene hearers of the word, whereof one sort are
negligent & forgetfull, & therefore neuer the better for the things
they heare. The other sort are diligent, and commit to memorie,
and put in practise in life the thing they learned by hearing, these
latter so doing and not the former, shew them selues to be blessed
and saued. For Christ preached is their saluation, their workes

do testifie their faith, whereby they haue laied hold on Christ
their righteousnes, as fruits do witnes the goodnes of a trée.
               
            
            
               Iames. 
                     •
                  . 20.
               
                  The text.
                  But wilt thou know ⸫ ô vaine man that faith without works
is idle?
               
               
                  The note.
                  Ile speaketh to all heretikes that say, Faith onely without works doth
iustifie, calling them vaine men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You shew your delight, you séeke to deceiue your selues and others
by equiuocations. For you know well ynough, that faith is
not taken héere for a true and a liuely faith, which worketh by
loue, as Paul and we take it, when we speake of iustifieng by
faith. Secondly, you know also, that we make no account of anie
such faith as is idle, or separated from loue. Thirdly, you know
that saint Iames taketh not héere iustifieng, for being made iust,
but for being declared and shewed to be iust: as appéereth by the
example of Abraham which he bringeth. For God first made him
iust, and afterward he was declared and shewed so to be, by that
most excellent example of obedience, in offering his sonne Isaac.
There is therfore no contrarietie betwixt vs and Iames, though
you go about to prooue that by sound of words, which by sound or
iust meaning you cannot effect and bring to passe.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  But if you haue bitter zeale, and there be contentions in
your harts: glorie not, and be not liers against the truth: for
this is not ⸫ wisdome descending from aboue, but earthly, sensuall,
diuelish.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The difference betwixt the humane wisedome specially of heretikes,
and the wisedome of the catholike church and hir children.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If a man compare the fruits of heauenly wisedome, with the
fruits of the wisedome of your church, he shall find them as contrarie
as white is to blacke. All stories testifie, that your church
hath béene the author of most of the wars and contentions in
Christendome these thrée hundred yéeres, and vpwards. Your
bookes in praise of Sodomitri
                        •
                     , your curtesans maintained in the
eies and bosome of your most holy father, and the beastly life of
your priests, testifie the chastitie of your church. The mercie of
your church the massacres of France, and the Marian storme in
England not yet forgotten, do sufficiently shew. I might go thorough

the rest: but peace, chastitie, and mercie wanting amongst
you, doth sufficiently shew your wisedome to be earthly, sensuall,
and diuelish.
               
            
            
               Iames. 4. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ giueth greater grace: for the which cause it saith, God
resisteth the proud, and giueth grace to the humble.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The boldnes of heretikes adding heere the word scripture to the text
thus: And the scripture giueth greater grace.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The blindnes of you papists, which thinke it a boldnes to set
the nominatiue case before the verbe. I pray you tell vs what it
is that (as saint Iames héere saith) giueth greater grace, if it be
not the scripture? But the place is plain, the words afore, and the
words following do inforce, that the word scripture must be supplied:
but there is none other cause of your wrangling in this,
but that you would haue euery thing left as obscure and darke,
as might be possible, to fray poore men from studieng that which
they cannot vnderstand.
               
            
            
               Iames. 4. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Approch to God, and he will approch to you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Free will and mans owne endeuor necessarie in comming to God.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Why do you not plainly say, that we must preuent and go before
the grace of God by our will and our endeuor, bicause Iames
setteth our approching first? That we know to be your meaning,
for that your sophisters commonly contend for. But to answer
you shortly, we are commonly and vsually by the spirit of God
exhorted to that, which God must worke in vs, therefore frée will
is not prooued by those exhortations.
               
            
            
               Iames. 4. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Detract not one from another my brethren.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He forbiddeth detraction, euill speaking and slandering.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Uices, wherein you set a great péece of your delight, as in your
annotations most manifestly doth appéere.
               
            
            
               Iames. 4. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  For that you should say, ⸫ If our Lord will, and if we shal liue,
we will do this or that.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  All promises and purposes of our worldly affaires are to be made vnder
condition of Gods good liking and pleasure, and it becommeth a
Christian man to haue vsually this forme of speech in that case: If God
will: If God otherwise dispose not.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If this note had come from Rome, as it doth from Rhemes:
from Italie, as it doth from France, we should haue woondered
how they teach others that, which they haue not learned themselues.
It may be you know the common Italian prouerbe, In
despite of God. And this I know, that neither this good counsell
of Iames was vsed in time of poperie, and when in the time of
the Gospell men began to leaue former corruptions, and reformed
their spéeches according to this rule, the papists scorned at
it, and derided it, as too much holines.
               
            
            
               Iames. 5. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  Go to now ye rich men, weepe, ⸫ howling in your miseries
which shall come to you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A fearfull description of the miseries that shall befall in the next life
to the vnmercifull couetous men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But your religion giueth them hart of grace to contemne all
threats: for your father the pope will sell them heauen for mony.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  ames. 5. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  Behold the husbandman expecteth the pretious fruit of the
earth: patiently bearing till he receiue ⸫ the timely and the
lateward.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth either fruit or raine.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is an Hebraisme, and therefore better expounded of raine
than of fruit, bicause the phrase is vsuall in the Hebrew, and so vsually
signifieth.
               
            
            
               Iames. 5. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Confesse therefore your sinnes one to another: and pray
one for another that you may be saued.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The heretikes translate, Acknowledge your sinne, &c. So little they
can abide the very word of confession.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Héere is a knot sought in a rush. To acknowledge, and to confesse
in English eares is all one. That we cannot abide the word
of confession is one of your impudent and shamelesse slanders,
from the which the vsuall and common vsing of it in our translations
do sufficiently cléere vs.
               
            
            
               Iames. 
                     •
                  . 20.
               
                  The text.
                  My brethren, if any of you shall erre from the truth, and a
man conuert him, he must know that he that maketh a sinner
to be conuerted from the error of his way, shall saue his soule
from death, and ⸫ couereth a multitude of sinnes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He that hath the zeale of conuerting sinners, procureth heerby mercie
and remission to himselfe, which is a singular grace.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You dreame still of mans procuring mercie and remission to
himselfe by his owne works: but S. Iames hath no such thing,
but onely this, that the soule of the conuerted man is saued, and
his sinnes couered, that is to say, abolished.
               
            
         
         
            1. PETER.
            
               1. Peter. 1. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  For the which cause hauing the loines of your mind girded,
sober, trust perfectly in that grace which is offered you in the
reuelation of Iesus Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Chastitie not onely of bodie, but also of mind is required. S. Beda
vpon this place.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Then all chastitie doth not consist in single life: for in mind
none haue béene more impure than your single men.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 1. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  And if you inuocate the father, him which without acceptition
of persons iudgeth according to euerie ones worke, in
feare conuerseye the time of your peregrination.
               
               
                  The note.
                  God will iudge men according to euery ones works, and not by faith
onely.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Who euer denied that in the iudgement of God, that it may
appéere (as it is indéed) iust: the godly and vngodly shall be discerned

a sunder by their works, and yet you neuer the nigher to
your merits.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 1. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  Knowing this that not with corruptible things, gold and
siluer you are redeemed from your vaine conuersation of your
fathers ⸫ tradition: but with the pretious blood as it were of
an immaculate and vnspotted lambe Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth the erros of gentilitie, or if he wrote to the Iewes dispersed
he meaneth the yoke of the law, with the fond and heauie additions
of their late masters called Deuteroses. The heretikes to make it sound
to the simple against the traditions of the church, corrupt the text thus:
Which you haue receiued by tradition of the father.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Two things we sée in your note. First, an exposition what is
héere meant by traditions: secondly, a fond quarell to our translations.
First you affirme boldly without blushing, that héere by
tradition the errors of gentilitie are meant. But bicause that carieth
not so much as any probable shew, therefore presently you
flie from it, saieng, if he wrote to the Iewes, then he, &c. As if any
man could doubt to whom he wrote, when both he was the Apostle
of circumcision, and also he nameth them to whom he wrote,
strangers of the dispersion of Pontus,
                        Galat. 2. In the beginning of this chapter. Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
and Bithinia. It is manifest, that the Iewes at that time dwelt
in euery part of these countries, as strangers dispersed héere and
there: which cannot with any shew for proofe be imagined of any
nation besides. Your yoking of Gods law with those traditions,
or additions called Deuteroses, sheweth your vile and base
estimation of Gods word. But as whatsoeuer the Iewes had
frō their fathers added to Gods lawe, was cause of vaine conuersation,
so also your additions to the Gospell of Christ called traditions,
are causes of like vanitie, and vnprofitable trauell and labor
in them that vse them. Your quarrell to our translations is
but méere wrangling, sith your translation hath the same in effect:
for how could the fathers deliuer, except the sonnes receiued?
or how were they deliuered by Christ from their vaine cōuersation,
if they had not receiued it first? But wranglers will neuer
leaue cauilling.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 2. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  But you are an elect generatiō, a ⸫ kingly priesthood, an holie

nation, a people of purchase: that you may declare his vertues,
which from darknes hath called you into his maruelous light.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The protestants can no more gather of this, that all Christians be
priests, than that al be kings, as is most plaine, Apocalypse 1. 6. and 5. 10
Thou hast made vs a kingdome (or kings) and priests.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We gather both the one and the other, and we know of none
other sacrifices now to be offered to God, but those which euerie
Christian man and woman are bound to offer, and therefore we
néed not your sacrificing priests with their paltrie.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 2. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  Be subiect therefore to euerie ⸫ humane creature for God,
whether it be to the king as excelling, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So is the Greeke: but the protestants in fauor of temporal lawes made
against the catholike religion, translate it very falsely thus: To all maner
ordinance of man, themselues boldly reiecting ecclesiasticall decrees
as mens ordinances.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The Gréeke scholiast, whom I hope you will neither accuse of
corrupt meaning, nor denie that he vnderstood the Gréeke, interpreteth
it as we translate. By ordinances of man, we vnderstand
not (as you slander vs) lawes of men, but princes and magistrates
elected, appointed, and created by men. The decrées of
your church we reiect, as well bicause that they being but the ordinances
of men, are obtruded in the place and stead of Gods
law, as also bicause we acknowledge no dutie of subiection to the
makers and ordeiners of them, being to vs English men méere
stangers, to whom we owe no more dutie than to any other forrem
potentates.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 2. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Loue the fraternitie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  In this speech is often commended the vnitie of al Christians amongst
themselues.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Which vnitie you haue broken many waies. First, in cutting
your selues from the churches of the east parts of the world. Secondly,
in falling from the ancient faith, which the church of
Rome it selfe first of all in old time professed. Thirdly, in your obstinate

opposing your selues now to those that retaine, kéepe, and
hold fast the ancient holie catholike faith deliuered by Christ and
his Apostles to the church.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 3. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  In the like maner let the women be subiect to their husbands,
that if any beleeue not the word, by the conuersation of
the women, without the word they may be woon, considering
your chaste conuersation in feare.
               
               
                  The note.
                  How women should behaue themselues towards their husbands.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Which counsell and prescription all godly matrones imbrace.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 3. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Whose trimming, let it not be outwardly the plaiting of
haire, or laieng on of gold round about, or putting on vestures,
&c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Against the proud, curious, and costly attire of women, wherein this
ill time of ours exceedeth.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Iniquitie decreaseth not towards the latter end.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 3. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  Husbands likewise dwelling with them according to knowledge,
as vnto the weaker feminine vessell imparting honor, as
it were to the coheires also of grace of life: that your praiers
be not hindered.
               
               
                  The note.
                  How husbands should behaue themselues towards their wiues.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Which good lesson God grant all married men may kéepe and
obserue. In which lesson one thing is to be obserued, that married
men may so dwell with their wiues, that their praieng be not
thereby hindered, contrary to that which in your notes you haue
diuers times affirmed.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 4. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  For, for this cause also was ⸫ it euangelized to the dead, that
they may be iudged indeed according to men in the flesh: but
may liue according to God in the spirit.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It hath the same difficultie and sense, that the other word haue before,

1. Chap. 3. See the annotation there, v. 19. and S. August. epist. 69. and
Oecumenius vpon this place.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Time is the daughter of truth, and therefore things that somtimes
seemed obscure, are in time reuealed, made open and plain,
and so is this. The sense is plaine: The Gospell was preached in
former ages to them that are now dead. Christ by his spirit preached
to the rebellious and disobedient people, which liued in the
daies of Noe. Your annotation which you refer vs vnto, is friuolous,
grounded vpon a malicious slander, that we denie Christs
descending into hell, wheras we onely denie the popish sense and
interpretation of that article. And concerning Augustine, your
note booke once againe deceiued you. For in the place which you
quote, there is nothing touching this matter: but in his 99. epistle
he handleth this place, and especially the former in the thirde
chapter at large concerning Christs preaching to disobedient
persons in the daies of Noe. Where after that by many reasons
he had prooued that your opinion whereby you apply this place
to Christs descending into hell, can by no meanes stand: he enclineth
(though not fully and certainly) that it is not ment at all
of Christs descending into hell, and rather thinketh that Peter
meaneth that those times of Noe, were a figure of our times, and
the generall disobedience then, a figure of the small obedience
now, and the sauing of Noe, and his familie in the arke then, a
figure of sauing vs now by baptisme, and so consequently giueth
light to that true, and cléere interpretation, which we now follow,
and for which we are in part beholding to him, as Gods
good i
                        •
                     strument.
               
            
            
               1. Pet. 5. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  Feede the flocke of God which is amongst you, prouiding
not by constraint, but willingly according to God ⸫ neither
for filthy lucre sake but voluntarilie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Desire of lucre, or to exercise holie functions for gaine, is a filthie
fault in the cleargie, and therefore much to be auoided.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And what? is it not a filthy fault also in the pope? You know of
whom it was written,Pope Alexander. that he sold all holie things, altars, keyes,
and Christ himselfe. You know what outcry hath béene made against
the popes actions, both in this Realme, and in others, by

them, which you will not allow to be protestants. Besides your
whole religion is framed for gaine, and to make marchandize of
mens soules. So that from the highest to the lowest none of you
can excuse your selues to bée cléere from the desire of filthie
lucre.
               
            
         
         
            2. PETER.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 1. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  For not hauing followed vnlearned fables, haue we made
the power and presence of our Lord Iesus Christ knowne to
you, but ⸫ made beholders of his greatnes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By this it is plaine that either Iohn, Iames, or Peter must be the author
of the Epistle, for these three were onlie present at the transfiguration,
Matth. 17. 1.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We do not intend to striue with you for the author of the epistle:
but you might haue told vs that you borrowed this of master
Beza, and that Iames being killed by Herode, it must be either
Iohns, or Peters, and that the phrase being Peters peculiar
phrase, doth shew it to be Peters. But you can borrow of vs, and
not giue againe that, which is due to vs.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 1. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  And this voice we heard brought from heauen when we
were with him in the ⸫ holie mount.
               
               
                  The note.
                  You see that places are made holie by Christs presence, and that all
places be not alike holie. See annot. Acts. 7. 33.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That all places by nature, and creation are alike good, and of
like holines this place hindereth not, though by some special occasion,
or vse that a place for a time is put to, it may be more estéemed,
or regarded then an other.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 2. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  And many shal follow their riotousnes, by whom the way of
truth shall be blasphemed.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Heretikes (of whom he prophesieth here) do gaine scholers by preaching
libertie, and by their owne licentious life, which is specially ioined
to the heresie of these daies.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  The first, and most speciall note giuen to know those heretikes
by whom Saint Peter here speaketh of, is that they be lieng
masters. Which how it is, and alwaies hath béene annexed
to your religion, and the teachers thereof, may appéere to the indifferent
Reader, by the answers to these your notes, and by your
bookes of beastly fained myracles. Your other note of preaching
libertie, and licentious life, cannot in all the worlde be so fitly
sought, and so surely founde as amongst your selues. For by your
doctrine our ladie is so good a gentlewoman,Mille 
                           〈◊〉
                         la beat
                           •
                         Mars▪
                      that so men serue
her, be they whoores, be they théeues, be they what they will be, it
is no matter she will entreat and obtaine pardon for them. And
her seruice is neither painfull, nor costly, for it consisteth in sayeng
of a few Aue Maries, and now and then praieng to our ladie,
and somtimes offering of a taper. As for licentious life who haue
béene able to match your most holie fathers of Rome?
               
            
            
               2. Pet. 2. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  And in auarice shall they with ⸫ feigned words make marchandize
of you. Vnto whom the iudgement now long since
ceaseth not, and their perdition slumbereth not.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All the sweete words of heretikes, speaking much of the word of the
Lord, the Gospell, Iesus Christ, &c. are but tearms of art to buy and sell
poore mens soules.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This accusation of those, whom you are woont to call heretikes,
is one of your accustomed slanders. But your marchandise
is so manifest, that your own writers haue cried out of it. It was
an abbot that acknowledged the church of Rome for his mother,
that willed her to reioice,Abbas vrspergensis. bicause brookes and riuers of monie
flowed to her, in woonderful plentie, & no man came to her with
emptie hand. The old prouerbe, no penie, no Pater noster, did
witnes that the pretended good which you chalenged, and vaunted
that you could do to soules, would not come from you without
being déerely bought, and well paied for. As for your pretensed
accusation beareth no shew. For if we had sought our owne
profite, we would neuer haue sought the ouerthrow of your religion.
For if we had held that still, we had béene sure of the first
bequest in euerie mans will.
               
            
            
               2. Pet. 2. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  And especiallie them which walke after the flesh in concupiscence

of vncleannes, and contemne dominion, bold, selfe
pleasers, they feare not to bring in sectes, blaspheming.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The speciall properties of heretikes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Though your restraint of these properties to heretikes, be
neither in it selfe true, neither agréeable with the truth of the
text which speaketh more generallie, yet bicause it can not be but
that such teachers be heretikes, as be so grosselie wicked, we will
examine the case how you can cléere your most holie fathers, and
the pillars of your church from being heretikes: the properties
here mentioned be in nūber six. The first, walking after the flesh
in concupiscence of vncleannes: what the testimonies of al stories
are, concerning not the dregs but the highest and holiest amongst
you I néede not tell you. Pope Iohn the eight, otherwise called
pope Ioan, deliuered of a childe in solemne procession, whose picture
remaineth in Rome as a monument of the truth of her being
pope, bewraieth sufficientlie their vncleannes and filthines.Plat
                           •
                        na.
Pope Iohn the thirtéenth was slaine being taken in the age of
adulterie. It were too long to rip vp the licentious liues of other
popes, I know your selues are ashamed of them. The second, is
cōtempt of dominion: your popes haue not only vsurped the place
& seat of their soueraigne lords, but haue also troden vpon them,
deposed Emperors and kings from their roial estate, made them
his pages to lead his horse and hold his stirrop, and to thinke it a
great curtesie that they might be admitted to kisse his foot. If this
be not contempt of dominion, then what cal you it? For boldnes,
what dare not they do to mē, that dare cast their god into the fire?
that dare poison the holie host as they terme it. What selfe pleasers
they be in this it appeareth, that they both flatter them
selues,Pope Hildebrand called Gregorie the 9. Pope Victor the third was poisoned in the chalice. and go about to perswade others that they can not erre?The Emperor Henrie of Lucemburgh was po
                           •
                        soned in the consecrate bread.
How Christendome hath bene replenished by them with sectes,
he that vnderstandeth & knoweth the swarmes,Leo the tenth. the number, the
diuersitie of Monkes, Friers, Nunnes, Eremites, Iesuits, and
such like, can not doubt? And for blasheming which is the sixt, he
that hath read of the Popes spéech, that he called the Gospel the
fable or tale of Christ, can not doubt but that this note also is verified
of your holie father: now acquite your selues well, and
shewe vs some good defence of your popes against these properties.
               
            
            
               
               2. Pet. 2. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  But these men as vnreasonable beastes, naturallie tending
to the snare, and into destruction ⸫ in those things which they
know not blaspheming, shall perish in their corruption.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So heretikes blaspheme the highest misteries of our faith through
ignorance.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If a man should go about to recken vp the bold blasphemies of
your popish heretikes, against Christ him selfe and his holie
word,Master Cam
                           •
                        pion in the 3. dais conference in the Tower. the day would sooner faile him then matter. But no maruell,
when your great challenging champions can make them
selues good sport and pastime, of the greatest and most reuerend
mysteries of our religion.
               
            
            
               2. Pet. 2. 18.
               
                  The text.
                  For speaking the proud things of vanitie, they allure in the
desires of fleshlie riotousnesse, those that escape a little, which
conuerse in error ⸫ promising them libertie, whereas them
selues are the slaues of corruption.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Who euer promised more libertie to their followers then Luther and
Caluin, and the like, taking away penance, fasting, continen
                        •
                     ie, or chastitie,
keeping of vowes, necessitie of good workes, (because faith doeth all)
obedience to Ecclesiasticall pastors, and Councels, and such like?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You are nothing ashamed of lieng. These things which you
set downe of Caluine and Luther are starke lies, which you shall
neuer be able to iustifie. But you haue set open the flood gates to
sinne, by promising manie daies of pardon to the saieng of a set
number of praiers, and such like.
               
            
         
         
            1. IOHN.
            
               1. Iohn. 2. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  Because all that is in the world is the concupiscence of the
flesh, and the concupiscence of the eies, and the pride of life,
which is not of the Father, but is of the world.
               
               
                  The note.
                  How all sinne and temptation proceede of these three, see Saint Thomas
Summ. 1. 2. quaest. 77. arti. 5.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your labours (I perceiue) are bestowed vpon them that least

néede them, that is, vpon the learned, for I do not suppose you to
be such fooles, as to send the vnlearned multitude to search in the
doctors and schoolemen.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   2. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  They went out from vs, but ⸫ they were not of vs, for if they
had bene of vs, they would surelie haue remained with vs.
               
               
                  The note.
                  They were of vs for a time, that is, of, and in the church, otherwise
they could not haue gone out: but they were not of the constant sort, or
of the elect and predestinate, for then they had taried within, or returned
before their death.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You dare conclude contrarie to the Apostle, he saith they were
not of vs, you say they were of vs, otherwise they could not haue
gone out, and therefore I can not maruell that you are so bold
with vs. The societie and companie of men whom we call the
church, do nurse as it were in their bosome, manie hipocrites and
enemies to Christ, which in time shew them selues, who though
they go out from the church, yet in trueth were neuer of the
church, for if they had bene of the church truelie, then at the least
they shuld not haue seuered them selues from the church at their
end: for none are truelie of the Church, but those whom God
hath elected and chosen.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  . Iohn. 1. 24.
               
                  The text.
                  You, that which you haue ⸫ heard from the beginning let it
abide in you.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Keepe that firmly and constantly, which you heard euen from the beginning,
by the mouth of the Apostles: and not that which you haue receiued
by writing.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If the apostles taught one thing by mouth, and another thing
by writing then your note hath some reason in it. I would faine
see some papists collect this vnwritten doctrin, and then shew vs
how we may be assured that they had it from the apostles. For
the things that haue béene heretofore forged vnder the apostles
names, the papists themselues do not obserue the tenth part of
them. In the meane space they shall giue vs leaue to beléeue
that the apostles whole doctrine is conteined in the Canonicall
Scriptures.
               
            
            
               
               1. Iohn. 2. 29.
               
                  The text.
                  If you know that he is iust, know yee that euery one also
⸫ which doth iustice is borne of him.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Wee see that that it is an apostolical doctrine that men may do or work
iustice, and that so dooing they be iust by works, proceeding of Gods
grace, and not by faith or imputation onely.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We sée indéed, that it is an apostolical doctrin, that a man may
do, or worke iustice, and farther that that doing and working is
an assured testimonie, that we are regenerate and borne of God.
But that by so doing we are made iust, or iustified afore God:
that is your owne addition, without warrant of this text or anie
other. For though whomsoeuer God hath sanctified, him also he
hath iustified, yet regeneration and sanctification whereof the apostle
speaketh here, are things distinct from iustification wherof
he speaketh not here. And bicause iustice is a word of generall
signification, and somtimes spoken of iustification, that is, of that
righteousnes whereby we are made iust, and sometime (as here)
of sanctification, that is, of that righteousnes whereby we are declared
to be iust, this ambiguitie serueth your humor to dallie,
and deceiue withall.
               
            
            
               1. Iohn. 3. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  See what maner of charitie the father hath giuen vs, that we
should be named and be ⸫ the sonnes of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not by nature as Christ, but by grace and adoption.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And can we be both named and be the sonnes of God, and yet
doubt of our saluation? Were not that to doubt either of the power,
or goodnes of our father? Why are you then the doctors of
doubtfulnes?
               
            
            
               1. Iohn. 3. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  We know that when he shall appeere we shall be like to him,
bicause we shall ⸫ see him as he is.
               
               
                  The note.
                  How we shall see God and be like to him in the next life. See S. Aug.
ep. 111. 112. de Ciuitate dei. lib. 12. cap. 29.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is well that you affoord vs so good a schoolemaster, but how

shall they do, that either vnderstand not the latin toong, or are
not able to buy the fathers? It is manifest that your meaning is
not to helpe the poorer and more ignorant sort.
               
            
            
               1. Iohn. 3. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  And euery one that hath this hope in him ⸫ sanctifieth himselfe
as he also is holie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This teacheth vs that man sanctifieth himselfe, by his free wil working
togither with Gods grace. See Augustine vpon this place.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You know that your collection will not hold, and therfore you
turne Saint Augustine to vs. Wherein still is to be noted that
you of purpose flie from these works, which Augustine wrote against
Pelagius, wherein of purpose he handleth the matter of
fréewill, and scrape and scratch for it here and there, where he
speaketh little of it, and that but by the way. The spéech that Augustine
vseth in this place is this: that God sanctifieth, but hée
sanctifieth not them which are not willing to be sanctified. And
therfore bicause man adioineth his will to God, he is said to sanctifie
himselfe. This spéech of Augustine though it may be racked
against his minde, to serue your assertion of fréewill, yet being
interpreted according to his vndoubted meaning (as in manie
places he vttereth against Pelagius) of those onely whose wils
God altered, and to whom God also giueth power in some measure
to performe their good desires, is verie tollerable, and may
well stand.
               
            
            
               1. Iohn. 3. 17.
               
                  The text.
                  He that shall haue the substance of the world, and shall see
his brother haue need, and shal shut his bowels from him, how
doth the charitie of God abide in him?
               
               
                  The note.
                  Euerie man is bound to giue almes according to his abilitie when he
seeth his brother in great necessitie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And yet not to thinke his déede meritorious, but onely to declare,
and shew that the loue of God dwelleth in him.
               
            
            
               1. Iohn. 3. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And this is his commandement, that we beleeue in the name
of his sonne Iesus Christ: and ⸫ loue one another as he hath
giuen commandement to vs.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Least any man should thinke by the words next before onely faith in
Christ to be commanded, or to please God, he addeth to faith the commandement
of charitie or loue of our neighbor.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If there be any that thinke faith onely commanded, or do separate
loue from it, tell vs (I pray you) who they be, and where
they remaine, that we also may know them, hate, abhor, and detest
them.
               
            
            
               1. Ioh. 4. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  God ⸫ no man hath seene at any time.
               
               
                  The note.
                  No man in this life, nor with corporall eies can see the proper essence,
or substance of the deitie. See S. Augustine ad Paulin. de videndo Deo.
Epist. 112.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Still you send vs to those schoolmasters, to whom the simple
can haue no accesse, and therefore by whom they cannot be the
better.
               
            
            
               2. Ioh. v. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  Looke to your selues, that you lose not the things which
you haue wrought, but that you may receiue a full ⸫ reward.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Reward for keeping fast the catholike faith.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Which is full contrarie to the faith of the Romish church at
this day.
               
            
            
               2. Ioh. v. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  Euery one that ⸫ reuolteth, and persisteth not in the doctrine
of Christ: hath not God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To go backe or reuolt from the receiued truth and doctrine apostolicall,
is damnable.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But al papists are gone backe from the truth in the primitiue
church receiued, therfore except they repent, they are damned.
               
            
            
               3. Ioh. v. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  My deerest, thou doest faithfully, whatsoeuer thou workest
on the brethren, ⸫ and that vpon strangers.
               
               
                  The note.
                  A great grace to be beneficiall to strangers, specially to them that be
of our catholike faith, and suffer for the same.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Remember then your vngracious gouernment in the daies of
Quéene Mary, when al those strangers, which afore in the daies
of good king Edward were intertained and comforted in England,
bicause they had left their countries for the kéeping of a good
conscience, and for the testimonie of the true, ancient, most holie
catholike faith, were banished this land, and sent to séeke a resting
place, where they might find or get it.
               
            
            
               3. Ioh. v. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  I had written perhaps to the church, but he that loueth to
beare ⸫ primacie amōgst them, Diotrepes doth not receiue vs.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It seemeth (saith saint Bede) he was an archheretike or proud sectmaster.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Uery much resembling my Lord Bishop of Rome in loue of
primacie, though far comming behind him in height of pride, and
in all other wickednes and mischiefe.
               
            
            
               3. Ioh. v. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  For this cause if I come, I wil ⸫ aduertise his works which he
doth: with malicious words chatting against vs.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is, I wil rebuke them, and make them knowen to be wicked. Bede.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This exposition we receiue, and God hath verified it vpon
your owne heads. For your Diotrepes of Rome his casting out
all those that beare fauor to them that loue the truth, is now to al
the world made manifest to be wicked, and they are sufficiently
aduertised both of him and his works.
               
            
            
               I
                     •
                  de vers. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  For there are certaine men secretly entred in (which were
long ago prescribed vnto this iudgement) impious, transferring
the grace of our God ⸫ into riotousnes, and denieng the
onely dominator, and our Lord Iesus Christ.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Diuers heretikes abuse the libertie of Christs grace and Gospell, to
the fulfilling of their carnall lusts and concupiscences.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is very true, and yet none so much and so grossely as papists.
For if they would leaue their lies and forgerie, and sticke to such

testimonies as are without exception, they should easily sée it, and
be compelled to confesse it.
               
            
            
               Iude vers. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  But I will admonish you, that once know al things, that ⸫ Iesus
sauing the people out of the land of Egypt, secondly destroied
them which beleeued not.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This is our Sauiour, not Iosue as saint Hierom noteth. ep. 17. see Abac.
c. 3. verse 18.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That it could not be Iosua that is héere meant, both the truth
of the storie of the children of Israels deliuerie out of Egypt, and
of the punishment of the incredulous, and also the Gréeke text,
which hath not Iesus but the Lord, doth plainly and euidently
testifie.
               
            
            
               Iude vers. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  In like maner these also defile the flesh, and ⸫ despise dominion,
and blaspheme maiestie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Such be heretikes, that will not be subiect to anie superior, or that refuse
to obey the lawes, either of spirituall or temporall rulers: in which
kind (speciallie in blaspheming the supreme spirituall magistrate) the
Protestants do passe.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is somewhat, that you do not alwaies passe ouer those places
with silence, wherein you are so liuelie described: for of these
heretikes the pope is the head, and you his clawbackes are members.
For to what superior doeth the Pope acknowledge himselfe
subiect? and do not all ecclesiasticall persons of his church, challenge
exemption from the authoritie of temporall power? what
maiesty is there vpon the earth, which he blasphemeth not, when
he abaseth the highest earthlie maiestie so farre vnder him selfe,Innocentius de maioritate & obedientia cap. Solita.
as the moone is inferior to the sunne? Iudes description therefore
agréeth to none so well as to your selues.
               
            
         
         
            APOCALYPSE.
            
               Apocal. 1. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Blessed is he that readeth and heareth the words of this
prophecie, and ⸫ keepeth those things which be written in it,
for the time is nigh.
               
               
                  The note.
                  There be manie (speciallie now a daies) that be great readers, hearers,

& talkers of Scriptures: but that is not inough to make them good,
or blessed, except they keepe the things prescribed and taught therein:
according to our Sauiours saieng, (Luke 11.) Blessed are they that
heare the word of God and keepe it.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is verie true that except men kéepe the word, all their other
indeuors about the word are little worth: but men can not kéepe
that which they know not. Reading and hearing (as here appeareth)
is the ordinarie meanes that men should vse to come by
knowledge: but you, to the end you might maintaine blindnesse
and ignorance, haue kept the people from reading and hearing,
therfore you haue made 
                        •
                     ure worke, that they should not attaine
blessednes by kéeping.
               
            
            
               Apocal. 1. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  I Iohn your brother and partaker in tribulation, and the
kingdome and patience in Christ Iesus, was in ⸫ the Iland
which is called Patmos, for the word of God, and the testimonie
of Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Banished thither for religion by Nero, or rather by Domitian almost
60. yeeres after Christs ascension.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By whom he was banished it is not materiall, as long as wée
cōsent that these things were reuealed to him in his banishment.
               
            
            
               Apocal. 1. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  I was ⸫ in the spirit on the dominicall daie, and heard behind
me a great voice as it were of a trumpet, saieng, that
which thou seest write in a booke, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  I had a vision not with my corporall eies, but in spirit I beheld the similitude
of the things following.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  As Peter and Paul, so Iohn in spirit also had reuelations, and
yet neuer none of them saw or knew of saint Patriks purgatory.
               
            
            
               Apocal. 1. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ And I turned to see the voice that spake with me.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The first generall vision of the seuen according to Saint Ambrose.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You delight your selues with fathers, when and where you
néede them not. Your blind followers when and where they see

any father cited, suppose that it is for some matter of controuersie,
and thinke that all antiquitie make for you: but in truth where
you most néede them, there you haue none at all.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 1. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And being turned I sawe seuen candlestickes of gold, and
in the middest of the seuen candlesticks, one like to the Sonne
of man, vested in a priestlie garment to the foote, and girded
about neere to the pappes with a girdle of gold.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It seemeth not to be Christ him selfe, but an angell bearing Christes
person, and vsing diuers speeches proper to Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I sée no cause, why it should not be Christ him selfe.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 1. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ the seuen candlestickes are the seuen churches.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Irenaeus alluding to this saith, The church euery where preacheth
the truth, and this is the seuenfolde candlesticke bearing the light
of Christ. libro 5. aduersus haere.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We are to obserue héere first, that the signes here beare the
names of the things which they signifie: for the seuen starres are
the angels of the seuen churches, and the seuen candlestickes are
the seuen churches, euen none otherwise then bread is the bodie
of Christ. Secondlie, the cause whie the church is compared to
a candlesticke, is bicause it carieth that light whereof all godlie
men are partakers. And bicause in it as candles or shining lights,
the Apostles, Prophets, Euangelists, Pastors, and doctors do
shine by the most wholsome doctrine of Christ.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 2. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ to the Angell of the church of Ephesus write, thus
saith he, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That which before he willed him to write to the church, he now willeth
to be written to the Angels or bishops of the same onlie, where we
see that it is all one to the church, and the head or gouernour thereof.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is euident that Iohn was commanded afore to send that
which he wrote to the churches: and it is also plaine, that he is
commanded to write the same to the Angels, that is, to the pastors,

and gouernors of the church. But that which thence you
collect, that it is all one to sende to the church, and to the heads
and gouernors thereof, is true but sometimes, and not alwaies.
As when some faithfull are saluted by the apostle, and the church
that is in their house, it is manifest that by the church, gouernors
are not ment. And againe, bicause you set head and gouernor
in the singular number, wherein we suppose that you haue
a secret relation to the onely soueraigne of your church, therfore
we are to admonish the Reader, that when by the church the
gouernors thereof be vnderstood, there is neuer anie one gouernor
of the whole church ment.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 2. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  But I haue against thee a few things, bicause ⸫ thou hast left
thy first charitie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By this we see is plainly refuted that which some heretikes hold, that
a man once in grace or charitie can neuer fall from it.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  First we do not hold that a man cannot fal, but that he whom
God looueth cannot finally fall, the contrarie whereof doth not
héere appéere. Secondly, that by the angell of the church any one
particular man is ment, cannot be prooued, but rather a societie
or succession of men, whereof the later may be vnlike the former.
Whereof S. Paul speaketh to the ministers of the same church,
that of themselues shoulde arise gréeuous woolues: and whereof
we haue had great experience in the church of Rome, in the
later bishops, who are as vnlike the former, as lions are vnlike
to lambes, or drosse vnlike to golde. And therefore this cannot be
iustly applied to any mutation in one, and the same particular
man.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 2. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  I know thy tribulation, and thy ⸫ pouertie, but thou art rich,
and thou art blasphemed of them that saie themselues to be
Iewes and are not, but are the synagogue of sathan.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This church representeth the state of them, that are spoiled of their
goods, emprisoned, and manifoldly afflicted for the catholike faith.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And it is to be noted withall who afflicted them, spoiled them,
blasphemed them, that is, spake and did al maner of euil of them,

and to them. For the afflictors and persecutors here spoken of,
are such as saie themselues to be Iewes, and are not, that is, such
as take vpon them wrongfully the name, & title of Gods church,
and people, being in déed and truth the synagogue of sathan. How
néere this toucheth you, that violently vsurpe the name of catholikes,
consider with your selues well, for the afflictions you haue
brought vpon others, are manifest.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 2. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  Be thou faithfull vnto death, and I will giue thee ⸫ a crowne
of life.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The singular reward of martyrdome.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But that rewarde of martyrdome magnifieth mightilie the
marueilous munificence of our good, and gratious God, and not
the merit of the martyr.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 2. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  He that shall ouercome shall not be hurt of the ⸫ seconde
death.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The death of the body is the first death, the death of the soule the second.
Which martyrs are surest to escape of all men.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That true martyrs are sure to escape the second death is granted,
but not surer then other, that be the sonnes of the same God,
who are assured of his fatherly fauor, both by his promise, and by
the testimonie, and witnes of the spirit of adoption.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 2. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  And in those daies Antipas my faithfull witnes, who was
slaine amongst you ⸫ where sathan dwelleth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The speciall residence of sathan is where the faithfull are persecuted
for Christs truth, where not to denie the catholike faith for feare is
much here commended.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The speciall residence therefore of sathan, is wheresoeuer the
bishop of Rome beareth swaie, for in all those places, the blood of
infinite martyrs haue béene shed, to the great praise and commendation
of those that haue constantly suffered for the testimonie
of Gods truth.
               
            
            
               
               Apoc. 2. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  I know thy ⸫ works, thy faith, and thy charitie, and ministerie,
and thy patience, and thy last works mo then the former.
               
               
                  The note.
                  None of these are any thing woorth without the other.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  These things do so mutually follow one an other, that though
they may be distinguished, yet separated they cannot be. Your
spéech therefore is like this, the sunne is naught woorth without
light. The fire is naught woorth without heate. For loue doth
necessarily follow faith, and after faith and loue, our ministerie
and diligent seruice to God, in the vocation, wherin it hath pleased
him to plant vs, with patience and all plentie of good works
do necessarily follow, so that one of these cannot be alone as you
imagine.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 2. 23.
               
                  The text.
                  And all the churches shall know, that I am he that searcheth
the reines, and harts, and I will giue to euery one of you ⸫ according
to his works.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Who seeth not heere that good works deserue saluation, as ill works
deserue damnation, and that it is not faith alone, which God rewardeth,
but that faith which worketh by charitie?
               
               
                  The answer.
                  He had néede of a woonderfull sharpe sight, that should sée here
that, which is not here. You know well enough, for it hath béene
often told you, that it followeth not, that works deserue bicause
God rewardeth. But still bicause you are not able to make better
proofe, you make your selues sport with this. Likewise you
haue béene often told, that we set lesse store by that faith which
is alone, then you do. For if it be without charity, it is improperly
called faith, being common both to wicked men, and diuels.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 2. 28.
               
                  The text.
                  And he that shall ouercome, and keepe my works vnto the
end: I will giue him power ouer the nations, and he shall rule
them with a rod of iron, and as a vessel of a potter shall they be
broken, ⸫ as I also haue receiued of my father: and I will giue
him the morning star.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This great priuilege of saints riseth of the power and preheminence

of Christ, which his father gaue him according to his humanitie: and
therefore to denie it to saints, is to denie it to Christ himselfe.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You should haue told vs what this priuilege is, and to whom
it is giuen, dead, or liuing saints, so should you not colorably haue
nuzeled your blind and ignorant followers in the superstitions
that they haue learned of you. Therefore that which you subtilly
haue omitted, we will performe, to the end your craft may be of
all men espied. The rod of iron, or scepter of Christs kingdome is
his word, whereby he ruleth and gouerneth al that are his.2. Cor. 10. ve
                           •
                        . 4. 5. 6. This
word he hath committed into the hands of his ministers, to rule
and gouerne his church thereby: & also to destroy, breake downe,
and ouerthrow euery high thing that exalteth it selfe against it
to withstand it, which shall be by it broken and shiuered to péeces,
as a potters vessell is broken with a rod of iron. This is the power
that is giuen to them ouer nations: How then can you fetch
out of this, that which you couet, that is, defence for your robbing
of God and his Christ of his honor, and giuing it to dead saints?
               
            
            
               Apoc. 3. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  But thou hast a few names in Sardis, ⸫ which haue not defiled
their garments.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Such as haue not committed deadly sinne after baptisme.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  All sinne of it selfe, and according to the nature thereof, whether
it be originall or actuall, whether it séeme small or great is
deadly: for the reward and wages of it is death.Rom. 5. 23. And therefore
your distinction of deadly and veniall sinnes, in that sense that
you set it downe, is false, friuolous, and foolish.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 3. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And they shall walke with me in whites, bicause they ⸫ are
woorthie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Note that there is in man a woorthines of the ioies of heauen by holy
life: and this is a common speech in holy scripture, that man is woorthie
of God, of heauen, of saluation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Note that no where in scripture our meriting or deseruing the
ioies of heauen is found: and note also that woorthines by our
good and holie life, is a popish tradition, and one of their vnwritten

verities: for it is Christ in whom we are made woorthie. And
thirdly note, that therefore héere, as commonly else where, our
Rhemists play but the boyish sophisters, to abuse the poore ignorant
vnlearned people, which depend vpon them, with ambiguitie
of words.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 3. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  Behold, I stand at the doore and ⸫ knocke, if any man shall
heare my voice, and open the gate, I will enter in to him, and
will sup with him, and he with me.
               
               
                  The note.
                  God first calleth vpon man, and knocketh at the doore of his hart:
that is to say, offereth his grace. And it lieth in man to giue consent by
free will holpen also by his grace.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That God offereth his grace we consent, but that the reformation
of mans will is by you parted betwixt God and man, that
we cannot like of by any meanes. For that you cannot gather
neither of this place, or of any other. For where by nature our
will is altogither corrupt, God, yea euen God alone must haue
the whole glorie of the reformation thereof. And therefore Dauid
calleth that reformation,Psal. 51. 10. by the name of creation, as if it were by
God to be brought foorth againe anew of nothing.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 4. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  After these things I looked, and behold, a doore open in
heauen, and the first voice which I heard, was as it were of a
trumpet speaking, saieng, Come vp hither, and I will shew thee
things which must be done quickly after these
               
               
                  The note.
                  The second vision, in which is represented vnto vs the glorie and maiestie
of God in heauen, and the incessant honor and praises of all angels,
and saints assisting him: Which is resembled in the daily honor done to
him by all orders and sorts of holy men in the church militant also.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If all orders in heauen giue all honor, glorie, and power to
God alone and his Christ, how dare you then miserable caitifes
part the glorie of mans saluation betwéene God and your selues?
Is that thinke you a resemblance of the incessant honor and praises
of his angels and saints in heauen?
               
            
            
               Apoc. 4. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And in the sight of the seate, as it were a sea of glasse like to

Christall, and in the midst of the seat, & round about the seat
⸫ fower beasts full of eies before and behind.
               
               
                  The note.
                  These fower beasts and the like described in the first of Ezechiel, by
the iudgement of the holy doctors, signifie the fower Euangelists, and in
them all true preachers. The man Matthew, the lion Marke, the calfe
Luke, the eagle Iohn. See the causes heereof in the summe of the fower
Euangelists, pag. 1. S. Gregorie in Ezechiel.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The causes alledged, why by the fower beasts fower Euangelists
should be signified, are in my iudgement very slender and
friuolous. But whether they be signified, or els whether (as other
interpreters affirme) they do represent Gods wisedome, might,
diligence, spéedinesse, or facilitie in bringing all things to passe, I
will not contend neither with Gregorie nor you.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 5. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And I sawe in the right hand of him that sate vpon the
throne, ⸫ a booke written within and without, sealed with
seuen seales.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The third vision. Saint Gregorie taketh it to be the booke of holie
scriptures. libr. 4. dialog. 6. 42.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Saint Gregories interpretation doeth verie well please vs,
and I hope bicause you alledge it, it can not dislike you: we will
therefore adde some thing, which the text it selfe doth manifestly
offer vnto vs to be obserued. First, in that it is written within
and without, it manifestlie appéereth that there is no roome left
for your additions, called traditions. Secondlie, it is fast and safe
sealed, & that with seuen seales, by which so diligent and so close
sealing vp, it is manifest that it is vtterlie vnlawfull to adde, to
diminish, to alter anie thing, for that to do in a sealed euidence is
no better then méere forgerie.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 5. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  And no man was able neither in heauen nor in earth, nor
⸫ vnder the earth to open the booke, nor to looke on it.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He speaketh not of the damned in hell, of whom there could be no
question, but of the faithfull in Abrahams bosome, and in purgatorie.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Surelie you can spie daie at a very little hole, that can picke
purgatorie out of this place: he speaketh of men vnder the earth,
but he can not meane of hel, and therefore he must néedes meane
of purgatorie. First, graues are vnder the earth, and therefore it
may be he meaneth neither hell nor purgatorie. But I pray you
tell vs, how do you know he meaneth not hell, bicause it was out
of al doubt and past question, that among the damned there could
be none found worthie to open the booke. And doeth not the same
reason prooue, that he could meane purgatorie, or Limbus patrum?
or may it be like to finde some worthier there, then could
be found in earth or in heauen? You knowe well inough that
your fond followers will not séeke to examine the truth of anie
thing you set downe, and therefore you dare deale thus looselie,
that euerie bodie that will not wilfullie be blinde, may sée your
absurdities. But to leaue your follies, I sée that you are amongst
those, to whom this booke is yet shut and not opened, and therefore
no maruell though you want vnderstanding.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 5. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  And one of the seniors said to me, weepe not: behold, the
⸫ Lion of the tribe of Iudah, the roote of Dauid, hath wonne
to open the booke, and to loose the seuen seales thereof.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So did Iacob (Genesis 49.) call Christ, for his kinglie fortitude in
subduing the world vnto him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That Christ is called héere the Lion of the tribe of Iudah, it
is apparant, but whether by allusion to that place of Genesis,
which you cite, may be doubted: but thereof I will not mooue
anie contention.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 5. 6.
               
                  The text.
                  And I sawe, and behold in the middest of the throne, and
of the foure beastes, and in the middest of the seniors, ⸫ a
lambe standing as it were slaine, hauing seuen hornes, and seuen
eies, which are the seuen spirits of God, sent into all the
earth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  So Christ is called, for that he is the immaculate host, or sacrifice
for our sinnes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  By allusion vnto Moises law, bicause the lambe appointed for

sacrifice must haue neither maime nor spot.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 5. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  Thou art worthie, ô Lord, to take the booke, and to open
the seales thereof, ⸫ bicause thou wast slaine, and hast redeemed
vs to God in thy blood, out of euery tribe, and tongue,
and people, and nation, and hast made vs to our God a kingdome,
and priestes, and we shall reigne vpon the earth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This maketh against the Caluinistes, who are not content to say that
we merite not, but that Christ merited not for him selfe. Caluin. philip.
2. verse 9.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Let vs then sée how this prooueth that Christ merited for him
selfe. Thou art worthie, O Lord, &c. bicause thou wast slaine. Ergo
his death and passion was the cause of his worthinesse, and
made him worthie. I pray you, you (I say) that thinke this so
inuincible a proofe and so necessarie a consequence, tell me whether
Christ being the eternall sonne of the Father, were vnworthie
this honor afore his incarnation, and consequentlie afore his
death and passion? I suppose you dare not say that he was vnworthie
before,Iohn 17. 5. especiallie, séeing he durst not aske of his Father
greater glory then he was afore possessed of with the father. If he
were worthie before and so continued, then could not his merits
which came after, be the cause of his worthinesse, and so consequentlie,
he him selfe in our nature did not merit for him selfe
this worthinesse which he had before. But his honor and glorie,
to the which he hath aduanced our nature, was a consequent of
his abasing, and the coniunctions in those places note rather an
order and consequence, then a cause.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 5. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  And euerie creature that is in heauen, and vpon the earth,
and vnder the earth, and that are in the sea, and that are therein:
all did I heare saieng, To him that sitteth in the throne,
⸫ and to the lambe, benediction, and honor, glorie, and power
for euer and euer.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All the said creatures are bound to giue honor not onely to God, but
also to Christ, as man and our redeemer, and so they here do.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That the same honor, glory and praise, which is giuen to him

that sitteth in the throne, is also giuen to the lambe, and that of
all creatures both here and in other places, manifestly prooueth
that Christ as he was our priest and redéemer, was both God
and man. For otherwise it had not béene lawfull to giue him the
same honor and glorie which we giue to God.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 6. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And white stooles were giuen to euerie one of them ⸫ one:
and it was said to them, that they should rest yet a little time,
til their fellow seruants be compleate, and their brethren that
are to be slaine euen as they.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This one stoole signifieth the glorie, and blisse of the soules onely, but
at the day of iudgement they shall haue it doubled by adding the glorie
of their bodie also.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We allow of this note, as of our owne. But is there nothing
to be noted in the opening of the former fower seales, and the
horses, and that this vision of the soules of the martyrs was deferred
to the opening of the fift seale? Is it not a declaration that
persecution for religion, & for the testimonie of the truth should
then haue his full force and swaie when the fourth monarchie
grew to, or toward an ende. But if you would open your eies to
espie this, you woulde not so please your selues, and delight in
your persecuting church here shadowed or prophesied of.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  The text.
                  And I saw when he had opened the sixt seale, and ⸫ behold
there was made a great earthquake, and the sunne became
blacke as it were sackecloth of haire, and the whole moone
became as blood.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The tribulation that shall fall in the time of antichrist.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  As there be that enterpret this, of the tribulation that hath or
shall fall vpon the earth, for the contempt of the word, so comprehending
the calamities that haue befalne since antichrist inuaded
the papal seate: so there be also that enterpret this of the end
of the world, and Christs comming to iudgement. To whom I
assent rather, for these two causes. One, for that the signes here,
are the same which the Euangelists set downe to be signes of the
end of the world. The other bicause nothing but the sight of so

great and excellent maiestie as our Lord and Sauior shall come
withall to iudgement, can daunt, and in such order terrifie the
great potentates, and princes of the earth, that they know not
whether to turne them, how to escape, or where to hide themselues.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 7. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  Hurt not the earth, and the sea, nor the trees ⸫ till we signe
the seruants of our God in their foreheads.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It is an allusion to the signe of the crosse, which the faithfull beare in
their foreheads, to shew they be not ashamed of Christ. Saint August▪
tract. 43. in Io.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Christians in the primitiue church, when the confession of
Christ was ioined with worldly ignominie, did to shew how little
they were ashamed of Christ crucified, signe themselues with
the signe of the crosse. But since▪ you papists haue brought in so
many foule abuses about the crosse, that where papists are, it is
very dangerous to haue any vse of it. Howbeit in this place what
is meant by the signe or seale of God, I thinke it safest to learne
of Saint Paule, who telleth vs,2. Tim 2. 19. that the foundation of God remaineth
sure, and hath this seale, that the Lord knoweth who
are his. Which knowledge of God causeth his to be safe, at the
last day, when he executeth vengeance vpon the whole worlde
besides.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 7. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And I heard the number of them which were signed, an
hundred fortie foure thousand were signed ⸫ of euerie tribe of
the children of Israel.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Of all the tribes put togither so many 144000.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  To this I can say nothing, but this your note is true, your text
is vntrue.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 7. 5.
               
                  The text.
                  Of the tribe of Iuda twelue thousand signed, &c. vnto the
ninth verse.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He signifieth by these thousands, and the multitude following all the
elect of the Iewes to be in certaine number, the elect of the Gentiles to
be innumerable.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Your collection for the number of the elect shall stand for me.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 7. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And after this, I sawe ⸫ a great multitude, which no man
could number of all nations and tribes, and people & toongs.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The elect of the Gentiles.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This note might haue béene syared, for they are starke blinde
that cannot sée it without your direction.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 7. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  Standing befor the throne, and in the sight of the lambe,
clothed in white robes, and ⸫ palmes in their hands.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Boughes of the palme tree be tokens of triumph and victorie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  These notes may be put amongst your works of supererogation.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 7. 14.
               
                  The text.
                  These are they which are come out of great tribulation, and
haue washed their robes, and made them white in the blood
of the lambe, &c. to the end of the chapter.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The glory of martyrs.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Which is more and greater than is possible for man to merit.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 8. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  And another Angell came and stood ⸫ before the altar.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The priest standing at the altar, praieng and offering for the people
in the time of the high mysteries. Christ himselfe also being present vpon
the altar, is a figure of this thing, and thereunto he alludeth.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Now the masse is a figure of this vision, the priest is a figure
of the Angell, and we must imagine Christ either hanging ouer
the altar, or lieng vpon the altar, and to this saint Iohn alludeth
héere. And all this must néedes be true, our Rhemists who cannot
forge, faine, lie, nor erre, haue set it downe, and we must receiue
it on their credit. And so their masse came from heauen, as
sure as they are honest men, or as sure as if it were sealed with
butter.
               
            
            
               
               Apoc. 8. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And the smoke of the incenses ⸫ of the praiers of the saints
ascended from the hand of the Angell before God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  If this be saint Michaell, or any Angell, and not Christ himselfe, as
some take it, Angels offer vp the praiers of the faithfull, as the 24. elders
did. chap. 5. For this word Saints is taken heere for holy persons on
earth, as often in the scriptures. Though it be not against the scriptures,
that the inferior saint or Angell in heauen should offer their praiers to
God by their superiors there: but heerby we conclude against the protestants,
that it derogateth not from Christ, that Angels or saints offer vp
our praiers to God. As also it is plaine of Raphael, Tab. 12. 12.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Such premisses, such conclusion. You must haue that, which
you dare not certainly set downe, granted you, or else your conclusion
carieth not so much as anie shew, or likelihood of following.
That diuers take this Angell to be Christ, you your selues
confesse, and that Christ is many times in scriptures called an
Angell, I am sure you will not denie. That one Angell offereth,
and not many, what can it signifie, but that we haue one mediator
not many: and if we haue but one, then why may not Christ
be he? That of the 24. elders in the fift chapter, is a vision of the
saints vpon the earth, offering their owne praiers. For Iohn in
that chapter doth not describe the state of the church as it shall be
in heauen, but as it is héere vpon the earth: and therefore setteth
it downe magnifieng and praising the lambe, by whom the booke
was opened, that is, Gods will in his word reuealed and made
knowen. But you did well to tell vs that saints héere are taken
for holy persons vpon earth: for your blind schollers do not imagine
that there be any saints, but those which are dead and gone,
and which the pope hath canonized, and are to be found in his calendar.
If the superior saints offer the praiers of the inferior,
then we néed to learne the orders of saints and Angels in heauen,
that we go not to them, that themselues néed the helpe and intercession
of others. But who can so tell vs, that we may beléeue
him? You say it is not against the scriptures. If it be scripture
that telleth vs, that we haue an aduocate with the father Iesus
Christ, who is the propitiation for our sinnes, and that we haue
one mediator, then multitude of mediators and aduocates is against
scripture. We dare not beléeue your dreames, which are

no where warranted in the word. And we maruell not, that you
thinke it no derogation to Christ, to take away his mediatorship
of intercession, when you make him but halfe a redéemer, and
halfe a sauiour. As for that of Raphaell it may serue to deceiue
your simple followers withall, but not to confirme any matter of
controuersie against your learned aduersaries, who know it not
to be canonicall scriptures.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 9
                     •
                   1.
               
                  The text.
                  And the fift Angell sounded with the trumpet, and I saw ⸫ a
star to haue fallen from heauen vpon the earth, and there was
giuen to him the key of the pit of bottomlesse depth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Most vnderstand all this of heretikes. The fall of an archheretike,
as Arius, Luther, and Caluin out of the Church of God: which haue the
key of hell to open and bring foorth all the old condemned heresies buried
before in the depth.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And we also vnderstand this of archheretikes. But as you erre
in your iudgement of heresie, so you set them downe for archheretikes
who were not, but principall and woorthie ministers of
God in his church. Your odious coupling of Luther and Caluin
with Arius, is ridiculous, when neither they had nor held any of
Arius heresies. It is true, and signified by the star, that heretikes
rise of those that haue béen of great account amongst Christians,
and therfore haue the more opportunitie to deceiue with, and become
sectmasters, as the bishops of Rome, who were sometimes
most highly and woorthily estéemed, and now are become apostataes.
These, as they rightfully challenge to themselues the keies
of hell, so haue they let abroad in a maner al condemned heresies.
Ebions heresie in denieng that faith alone sufficeth for iustification.
Montanus heresie in making lawes for fasting daies. The
Manichées heresie in forbidding priests to marrie,
                        
                           〈…〉
                         lib. 3. cap. 27. Idem lib. 5. cap. 18. and so consequently
of most heresies one péece or other.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 9. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  And from the smoke of the pit there issued foorth ⸫ locusts
into the earth: and power was giuen to them, as the scorpions
of the earth haue power. And it was commanded them
that they should not hurt the grasse of the earth, nor any green
thing, nor any tree, but onely men which haue not the signe
of God in their foreheads.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  Innumerable petie heretikes following their maisters, after the opening
and smoke of the bottomlesse pit.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The innumerable locusts that deuour the wealth of the earth,
and with their vaine speculatious sting, and poison those which
loue not the truth, are by the pope let out of hell, and haue sparsed
ouer the christian world in infinite multitudes, as both his
schoolemen, and the sundry and diuers orders of his religious do
testifie. For what estimate may be made of the whole number,Sab
                           •
                        lic
                           ••
                        .
when only one order, namely, the Franciscane friers were able
to spare to the pope thirtie thousand able men to beare armour
at one time.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 9. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And they had ouer them a king, the angell of the bottomlesse
depth, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The cheefe master of heretikes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You say that in English his name is destroyer. We sée then
the diuell who was an homicide, and a destroier from the beginning
is this king, and captaine ouer the archheretike, and his
locustes, and that they vnder him worke the great, and mightie
destruction of men which here is prophesied. And this agréeth
with the prediction of the apostle Paule,2. Thes. 2. 9. That antichrist should
come by the working of sathan, with all power and signes, and
lieng woonders. The pope therefore and his cleargie haue both a
mightie and a cunning king, and captaine to conduct them to destroy,
and to be destroied.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 9. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ And the rest of men, which were not slaine with these
plagues, neither ⸫ haue done penance from the works of their
hands, not to adore deuils and idols of gold, siuer, and brasse,
and stone, and wood, which neither can see nor heare, nor
walke, and haue not done penance from their murders, nor
from their sorceries, nor from their fornication, nor from
their thefts.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Pagans, infidels, and sinfull impenitent catholikes must be condemned
also.
                  This phrase being the like both in Greeke and Latin, signifieth such

sorrowfull, and penall repentance, as causeth a man to forsake his former
sinnes and to depart from them. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . See the same
phrase cap. 2. 21. 22. & Acts. 8. 22.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your two notes being both out of one sentence, which could
not well be deuided, I haue coupled togither. And bicause I am
sure that by catholikes you meane none other but papists, therefore
you do well to couple them with pagans, & infidels. For touching
saluation and damnation they stand all in one state & case,
that is, in the state of damnation, except they repent. As for your
phrase which you make so much a doo about, it hath alreadie béen
diuers tunes examined & prooued, that your imagined satisfactorie
penance can not be gathered out of it. Otherwise we do think
that repentance to be but counterfet, which wanteth the testimonies
of true repentance, & doth not cause men to forsake their former
sins, and to depart from them. But I pray you tell me, your
images of gold, siluer, brasse, stone, and wood, can they see, heare,
or walke? haue you done penance from the works of your hands,
or will you wilfully go to the diuell?
               
            
            
               Apoc. 10. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And I saw an other angell, strong, descending from heauen,
clothed with a cloud, and a rainbowe on his head, and his face
was as the sunne, and his feet as a pillar of fier.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ the valiant angell is heere described.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I maruell that you followed not your Liranus to expounde
this of the bishop of Rome: but that flatterie you are ashamed of,
though in other things you excéede him. But the circumstances
make it plaine, his dignitie, power, strength, his decking from
top to toe, the greatnes of his voice, the brightnes of his countenance,
his vnused steps comprehending lande and sea togither,
can not well agrée to any other.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 10. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And when the seauen thunders had spoken their voices, I
was about to write: And I heard a voice from heauen saieng
vnto me: Signe the things which the seauen thunders haue
spoken: and ⸫ write them not.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Manie great mysteries and truths are to be preserued in the church,

which for causes knowen to Gods prouidence, are not to be written in the
booke of holie Scripture.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Farre fetched, and déere bought is good for ladies, Iohn was
forbidden to write, Ergo they are kept in the church. When you
can prooue that your church knoweth those things, which Saint
Iohn was forbidden to write, and those things which Saint
Paule heard, and sawe in heauen, and might not vtter, then
will I beléeue all your vnwritten verities.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 10. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And the angell which I saw standing vpon the sea, and
vpon the land ⸫ lifted vp his hand to heauen, and he sware by
him that liueth for euer and euer, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This was the maner of taking an othe by the true God. as Deut. 32.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  There were diuers and sundrie maners of taking othes by
the true God, which I do not thinke so necessarie here to be noted,
as that you haue taught men to forsake God, and to sweare
by those which are not Gods,Ierem. 5. 
                           •
                        . and as the thing which is héere
sworne, that is, that time shalbe no more, which is most necessarie
for men to consider, that they flatter not them selues with the
eternall continuance of the world.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 10. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And he said to me, Take the booke and ⸫ deuoure it.
               
               
                  The note.
                  By earnest studie and meditation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You say well, adde this (I pray you) that it is not onlie to be
read, studied, and thought vpon, but also in as large measure as
we are able to attaine to, vnderstood, and laied vp in our harts.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 10. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  And it shall make thy bellie to be bitter, but in thy mouth
it shalbe ⸫ sweete as it were honie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Sweete in the reading, but in the fulfilling somewhat bitter, bicause it
commandeth works of penance, and suffring of tribulations.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The promises of the most gratious fauour of God, and good
life to beleeuers are swéete and delectable, but that we must passe

through manie and bitter tribulations to come to life, to flesh
and blood can not be but bitter. As for your satisfactorie workes
of penance, which your mind runneth on, are not to be found any
where in this booke: but your hart is alwaies on your half penie.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 11. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  But the court which is without the temple, cast foorth and
measure not that: bicause it is giuen to the Gentiles, and they
shall tread vnder foot the holie citie ⸫ two & fourtie moneths.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Three yeeres and an halfe which is the time of Antichrists raigne
and persecution.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  But that these moneths are to be measured here by our ordinarie
moneths, that resteth to be prooued. The onlie thing that
we can learne by this is, that Antichrists raigne shall not endure
alwaies, but in comparison of Christes raigne which shalbe eternall,
if shalbe verie short. But how long or how short so euer the
time is, this is certaine and plaine against the papists, that during
Antichrists raigne, the holie citie, that is, the church shall be
troden vnder foote.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 11. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  And when they shall haue finished their testimonie, the
⸫ beast which ascended from the depth, shall make warre against
them, and shall ouercome them, and kill them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The great Antichrist.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The bishop of Rome, who though in the eies of the world
séeme to preuaile, and to kill the witnesses of Gods truth, yet he
can not do it till they haue finished their testimonie, that is, the
time that God hath appointed them for the execution of their
office.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 11. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  And their bodies shall lie in the streets of the ⸫ great citie,
which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where the Lorde
also was crucified.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He meaneth Hierusalem, named Sodome and Egypt for imitation of
them in wickednes: so that we see his chiefe raigne shalbe there, though
his tirannie may extend to all places of the world.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  How faine you would turne mens eies from Rome, to looke
for the great Antichrist els where. Séeing the names and other
attributes are spirituall descriptions of this citie, and that Rome
resembleth Hierusalem in killing Christ in his members, is like
Sodom in beastlie filthinesse, and like Egypt both in ambition
and superstition, and in indeuor to hold the people of God in seruitude
and thraldom, I sée not why we should still thinke that to
be the great citie here spoken of.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 11. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  And the inhabitants of the earth ⸫ shall be glad vpon them,
and make merrie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The wicked reioice when holie men are executed by the tirants of
the world, bicause their life and doctrine are burdenous vnto them.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is verie true, and taught by dailie experience vnder the
Pope, and such tirannous princes as bend their might, force, and
authoritie to aduance his dignitie.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 11. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  And the seuenth Angel sounded with a trumpet, and there
were made loud voices in heauen, saieng, ⸫ The kingdome of
this world is made our Lordes and his Christes, and he shall
raigne for euer and euer, Amen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The kingdome of this world vsurped before by Satan and Antichrist,
shall afterward be Christs for euer.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This last trumpet summoneth all the dead to rise againe, and
so to come to iudgement, at which time all enemies shalbe destroied,
and God sole seazed in quiet possession for euer and euer
of the whole world.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 11. 18▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  And the Gentiles were angrie, and thy wrath is come, and
the time of the dead to be iudged, and ⸫ to render reward to
thy seruants the prophets and saints, and to them that feare
thy name, little and great, &c.
               
               
                  The note.
                  To repaie the hire or wages (for so both the Greeke word and the Latin
signifie) due to holie men▪ proueth against the protestants, that they
did trulie merite the same in this life.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Whatsoeuer it pleaseth you to conceiue in your imagination,
that is by and by sufficientlie prooued. The signification of

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , hath beene often examined, and yet it could neuer be shewed
that it alwaies signifieth hire or wages due, and that for
worke: for that must be prooued afore merit can follow. For that
which is not otherwise due but by promise, may prooue the liberalitie
of the giuer, but not the merit of the receiuer. And thus
your proofes prooue nothing, but that brag is a good dog, and doth
diligently serue your turne.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 12. 
                     •
                  
               
               
                  The text.
                  And a great signe appeered in heauen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The dragons incredulous persecuting multitude, and Antichrist the
chiefe head thereof.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You haue deliuered a briefe summe of this chapter in my
iudgement, both bréefly and truly.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 12. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ A woman clothed with the sunne, and the moone vnder
hir feet, and on hir head a crowne of twelue stars.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This is properly and principally spoken of the church, and by allusion of
our blessed Ladie also.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  There be some of your side, which least they should be driuen
to admit Ecclesiam latentem,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         de 
                           〈◊〉
                         ecclesia. cap. 2. an hidden church, wrangle
hard for the contrarie, and so your doctors are not agréed on the
case.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 12. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  And there was seene another signe in heauen, and behold
⸫ a great red dragon hauing seuen heads and ten horns, & on
his head seuen diademes.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The great diuell Lucifer.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Bicause my purpose is but to answer you where cause is, and
not to write commentaries, therefore I will not meddle with
that which might be noted vpon the description of the diuell vnder
the forme of a dragon.
               
            
            
               
               Apoc. 12. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And his taile drew the third part of the stars of heauen, and
cast them to the earth.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The spirits that fall from their first state, into apostasie with him and
by his meanes.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The taile of the dragon be hypocriticall false prophets. As dragons
and serpents carie their venim, that they sting and poison
withall in their tailes: so the diuell seduceth and beguileth by
his false lieng prophets. The stars of heauen cast downe to the
earth, are the most noble and notable men that séeme far to excell
all others, brought to be altogither earthly minded, and to refuse
celestiall things.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 12. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And the dragon stood before the woman, which was readie
to be deliuered: that when she should be deliuered, he might
⸫ deuour hir sonne.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The diuels endeuor against the churches children, and specially our
blessed Ladies onely sonne the head of the rest.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that the diuell that is so great an enimie to the children
of the church, beareth also a speciall malice to Christ the
head of the church, and would haue deuoured him, but could not.
And bicause he knoweth that he cannot otherwise hurt nor harm
Christ, therefore he séeketh to swallow and deuour vs Christs
brethren, by the séed of the word, and mightie working of Gods
spirit begotten and borne of the church to God.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 12. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ they ouercame him by the blood of the lambe, and
by the word of their testimonie, and they loued not their liues
euen vnto death.
               
               
                  The note.
                  When the Angels or we haue the victorie, we must know that it is by
the blood of Christ, and so all is referred alwaies to him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You should haue said, if you would haue spoken truly, and so
as much as please vs, is referred to him. For, for to haue all referred
to him, is al that we contend and striue for: Faith in his blood

is the victorie whereby we ouercome the world, and all our enimies.
The strength of nature, the abilitie of frée will, merits of
our works, crossing, holie water, indulgences, pardons, masses,
and whatsoeuer trumperie you striue for beside, do nothing auaile
to this.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 12
                     •
                   14.
               
                  The text.
                  And there were giuen to the woman two wings of a great
eagle, that she might flie into the desert, vnto hir place, where
she is nourished ⸫ for a time, and times, and halfe a time from
the face of the serpent.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This often insinuation that Antichrists reigne shall be but three
yeeres and an halfe, Dan. 7. 25. Apocalipse 11. 2. 3. and in this chapter
v. 6. c. 13. 5. prooueth that the heretikes be exceedingly blinded with
malice, that hold the pope to be Antichrist, who hath ruled so many ages.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Master Saunders in his demonstrations hath as doughtily
done for you, as so darke proofes out of such doubtful places could
suffer, and hath already receiued answer sufficient at the hands
of that learned and reuerend man Master Whitakers. You
know how doubtfully all expositors expound these descriptions
of the time, and must we néedes credit you, that it must be taken
according to our vsuall supputation? As for the ages, which you
suppose your pope hath ruled, you may cut off the one halfe of
them, which I am sure you imagine.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 13. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  And all the earth was ⸫ in admiration after the beast.
               
               
                  The note.
                  They that now follow the simplest and grossest heretikes that euer
were, without seeing miracles, would then much more follow this great
seducer, working miracles.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  They which learne of them that preach the word truly and
sincerely, cannot be seduced by miracles. Bicause they know and
haue learned, that whatsoeuer miracles serue not to the confirmation
of that doctrine which is taught vs in the word, they are
but illusions of the diuell, and lieng signes of Antichrist, which
God doth send, permit and suffer, to shew who they be which constantly
cleaue to him and his truth. But on the contrarie part, it
is no maruell though your followers be easily seduced and beguiled.

First, bicause they be ignorant, and know nothing: secondly,
bicause they depend vpon men (who as they say cannot
erre) and not vpon the word of truth, and therefore beléeue many
things, wherof they haue no ground, but either lies or illusions.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 13. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And he opened his mouth vnto blasphemies toward God,
⸫ to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and those that
dwell in heauen.
               
               
                  The note.
                  No heretikes euer liker Antichrist than these in our daies, specially
in blasphemies against Gods church, sacraments, saints, ministers, and all
sacred things.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Lay away lieng, and speake the woorst you can truly of those
whom you call the heretikes of these daies, and I am sure you
cannot prooue your slanderous spéeches by them. But in truth
none be so like Antichrist as the pope, and you his friends. Wherin
we will report nothing maliciously by any of contrary religion
vnto you deuised, but truly testified, reported, and witnessed
by friends and fautors of the Romish power in their stories and
writings. One poisoned his God: another cast his God into the
fire:The consessor to Henrie the sixt Emperor. Hildebrand. Leo the tenth. another would eate his peacocke in despite of God: another
counted the religion of Christ a fable or a tale. It were infinite to
set downe all their blasphemies. But if these blasphemed not,
then tell me what you call blasphemie?
               
            
            
               Apoc. 13. 11▪
               
               
                  The text.
                  And I saw ⸫ another beast comming vp from the earth, and
he had two hornes like to a lambe, and he spake as a dragon.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Another false prophet inferior to Antichrist shall worke woonders
also, but all referred to the honor of his master Antichrist. So doth Caluin
& other archheretikes peruert the world to the honor of Antichrist,
and so do their schollers also for the honor of them.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  How faine you would turne all things from your selues to others.
The former beast comming out of the sea betokeneth all
those kingdoms and potentates that haue opposed themselues to
Christ, and with force and violence sought to suppresse the kingdome
of Christ. The second beast like a lambe betokeneth all orders
of the papisticall cleargie, who vnder the name of Christ

and his church, oppugne Christ and his church, and reteine some
similitudes of the old church to deceiue withall, and are maruellous
cunning artificers to coine, forge, feigne, and counterfet miracles.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 14. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And I looked and behold ⸫ a lambe stood vpon mount Sion,
and with him an hundred fortie and fower thousand hauing
his name, and the name of his father written in their
foreheads.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ and the same number of the elect which were signed. c. 7.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is set downe for our comfort, that we should neither be
caried away by the vniuersality of them that are seduced, neither
terrified with the greatnes of the troubles and miseries, wherewith
the children of God are afflicted. For howsoeuer in the eies
of the world, the pope and his séeme to preuaile for a time, yet
Christ and his elect stand vpon mount Sion, which is a figure of
his true church triumphing.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 14. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  These are they which were not defiled with women: for they
are ⸫ virgins. These follow the lambe whither soeuer he shal go.
               
               
                  The note.
                  One state of life more excellent than another, and virgins for their
puritie passing the rest, and alwaies accompanieng Christ according to
the churches himne out of this place: Quocunque pergis virgines sequuntur,
&c.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You are the most grosse, and the most carelesse heretikes that
euer set pen to paper. Were all the elect votaries, and professed
single life? who can beléeue you? Especially séeing the Israelites
(to whom this number here spoken of, was in the seuenth chapter
properly applied) did desire earnestly, and thought it a great
blessing of God to haue fruit of their bodies. It cannot therefore
be otherwise, but that virgins be héere called those, which are not
defiled with spirituall fornication: in which sense Paule prepared
the Corinthians to present them a pure virgin vnto Christ.
                        
                           •
                        . Cor. 11. 2.
                  
               
            
            
               Apoc. 14. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  These were bought from among men, the first fruits to God
and the lambe.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  This the church applieth to the holy innocents that died first for
Christ.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your church hath verie obedient children of you: for if she say
the crow is white, you will beléeue hir. For otherwise if you had
eies in your head, you might sée that she applieth this scripture at
randon, as she doth in a maner all that she dealeth withall. For
the circumstances of this place maketh it very plaine, that the
whole number afore spoken of, are the first fruits to God and the
lambe.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 14. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And an other angell followed, saieng, fallen, fallen is that
great ⸫ Babylon, which of the wine of the wrath of her fornication
made all nations to drinke.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The citie of the diuell, which is the vniuersall societie of wicked misbeleeuers,
and ill liuers in the world.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If euill liuers be a parcel of this society, your church of Rome
must néeds haue her part in it. I maruel what Saint Augustine
meant in his daies to make Rome the vniuersall head of this societie,De ciuitate dei lib. 15. ca. 5
and that Enochia which Cain built was a figure of Rome,
that being the first citie in time, and Rome the first in dignitie,
the foundations of both being laide in blood, the founders of both
being murderers, murderers I saie of their owne naturall brethren.
And that Babylon must néedes be here taken for Rome,
this maketh it manifest, that you your selues cannot assigne any
other citie, that hath made all nations to drinke of the wine of
her fornications spirituall.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 14. 10.
               
                  The text.
                  If any man adore the beast, and his image, and receiue the
character in his forehead or in his hand, ⸫ he also shall drinke
of the wine of the wrath of God, which is mingled with
pure wine in the cup of his wrath, and shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone in the sight of the holie angels and the
sight of the Lambe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The great damnation, that shall follow them that forsake Christ and
the church, and worship antichrist or his image.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  Into which stubborne and obstinate papists do headlong run,
and will not be reclaimed by any meanes.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 14. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  Here is the patience of saints, which ⸫ keepe the commandements
of God, and the faith of Iesus.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Faith is not enough to saluation, without keeping the commandements.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This cauill hath béene often enough answered. Obedience alwaies
followeth a true liuely iustifieng faith, and yet it is not our
obedience, that iustifieth and saueth vs.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 15. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And I sawe an other signe in heauen great and maruellous,
seauen angels hauing the seauen last plagues. Bicause in them
the wrath of God is consummate.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The tribulations about the daie of iudgement.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The tribulations that God hath afflicted the world withall
since the first spreading of the Gospell, and shall afflict it with at
any time, betwixt this, and the daie of iudgement.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 15. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  And I sawe as it ⸫ were a sea of glasse mingled with fire, and
them that ouercame the beast, and his image, and the number
of his name, standing vpon the sea of glasse hauing the
harpes of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Baptisme.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Least the greatnes and the multitude of the gréeuous plagues
should ouermuch dismay the godlie, the holy Ghost afore hande
setteth downe their happy and blessed estate, wherein they shall
eternally ioie, and reioice with God, and his Christ, that haue
their eies fixed vpon that, to the end they may the easilier deuour
and swallow vp the great troubles, and miseries of this life.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 15. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  And singing the ⸫ song of Moyses the seruant of God, and
the song of the lambe, saieng, Great and maruellous are thy

works Lord God omnipotent: iust and true are thy waies
king of the worlds.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The song of Moyses and Christ is the new Testament and the old.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This song is the ioifull thankesgiuing that the saints of God
vse, for his benefits. It is called the song of Moyses, and Christ,
bicause the benefits of all times of the lawe, and of the Gospell
are therein considered, the deliuerie of the children of Israel, and
the redemption of all nations vnder heauen. It consisteth of thrée
parts: namely in considering the woonderfulnes, and gloriousnes
of Gods works: the iustice and truth of God in his waies:
and the terriblenes and fearefulnes of his iudgements.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 1
                     •
                  . 6.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Bicause they haue shed the blood of the saints and prophets,
and thou hast giuen them blood to drinke, for they are
woorthie.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The great reuenge that God will do at the later daie vpon the persecutors
of his saints.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The great reuenge that God hath done, and shewed vpon all
the persecuting tyrants of the primitiue church. And this withal
is to be diligently remembred, that Gods arme is not shortened,
and his hand is stretched out still. And therefore still blood must
be the drinke of them that delight in blood, and they that loue
darknes, shall haue their rewarde in the kingdome of darknes,
and they that loue not the truth, must be giuen ouer to beléeue
lies.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 16. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  And men boiled with great heate, and ⸫ blasphemed the
name of God hauing power ouer these plagues.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The desperate and damned persons shall blaspheme God perpetuallie,
which shall be such onely as do not repent in this life.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If I did not perceiue that these plagues are referred to former
times, I would referre this to you whome I sée blinded with hipocrisie,
and drunken with the confidence of your owne merits,
so that when you intend and purpose to serue God, you commit

idolatrie, and bicause you sée not your sinnes, you can not abide
anie admonition or reproouing, and when God striketh and punisheth
you, bicause you vnderstand not the cause, you are neuer
the better, but grudge and blaspheme, and runne headlong to the
diuell without repentance. But when I looke vnto those former
times, which are here spoken of, I finde the same rootes of euill in
them which are in you, although not so déepe rooted in them as
in you, that is, the philosophicall doctrine of frée will and confidence
in them selues and their workes, which made them suppose
that they pleased God, when they killed his saints enemies
to those opinions: and bicause they did not imagine that they did
amisse, therefore no maruell though they repented not, but grudged
and blasphemed at the plagues which God powred vpon
them. For the same causes must néedes in euerie one haue like
effectes.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 16. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And they blasphemed the God of heauen, bicause of their
paines and woundes, and ⸫ did not penance from their works.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See chapter 9. verse 2. in the margent.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The foole will not giue his bable for the tower of London, for
then he should misse a great deale of good sport. Your marginall
annotation hath bene viewed and answered, the substance wherof
being friuolous and foolish, you haue repeated I knowe not
howe oft in these annotations.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 16. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  And I sawe from the mouth ⸫ of the dragon, and from the
mouth of the beast, and from the mouth of the false prophet,
three vncleane spirits in maner of frogges.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The dragon is the diuell, the beast Antichrist or the societie whereof
he is the head, the false prophet either Antichrist him selfe, or the
companie of heretikes and seducers that follow him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That by the dragon the diuell is signified, and by the beast the
Pope or the societie whereof he is the head, we easilie consent
with you, but the false prophet here we suppose to be Mahomet,
that hath seduced the whole empires of the Turkes and Persians.
And al these by euill, wicked, and seducing spirits bend them

selues, and all their force against the Church and kingdome of
Christ.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 16. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And he shall gather them into a place, which in Hebrewe is
called Arina-gedon.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The hill of theeues by Saint Hieroms interpretation.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The coniectures of interpreters is very diuers vpon this word,
but this is plaine, that being in the time of the sixt Angels powring
foorth his viall, it is a matter to be accomplished néere about
our times, and it is therefore the diligentlier to be considered and
weighed of vs with the issue of it. The summe of it is, that the
diuell and Antichrist shall by their false prophets, perswade the
Kings of the earth to bend all their whole force against the
church and against the Gospel of God, to extinguish and destroy
it. By all likelihoode the time of accomplishing this is nowe at
hand, for I suppose there was neuer afore anie such conspiracie
of princes for that purpose.Iudges 4. the whole chap. and 5. ver. 19. But God who drewe Iabin and Sisera
to Magiddo, which bicause it was placed by a mountaine, is
called héere Arma-gedon, to giue them and all their great armie
into the hand of a woman to destruction, hath promised to doe
the like héere, to the great comfort and consolation of his church
and people, especiallie of those which are now gouerned by Deborah.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 16. 19.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ the great citie was made into three parts: and the
cities of the Gentiles fell.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The citie or common welth of the wicked diuided into three partes,
into infidels, heretikes, and euill Catholikes. The citie is here called Babylon,
whereof see the next chapter verse 5.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The citie still I take for Rome, called héere Babilon. The diuision
of it I take to be into Epicurean Atheists, close hipocrites,
and cruell superstitious, and yet openlie wicked ignorant people.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 17. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And there came to me one of the seuen Angels, which had
the seuen vials, and spake with me, saieng: Come, I will shewe
thee the damnation of the great harlot.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  The small damnation of the whole companie of the reprobate, called
heere the great whore.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The finall damnation of the popes of Rome, and their church
there so euidentlie described by their maners, nature, properties,
conuersation of life, apparell, power ouer the kings of the earth,
that neither man, nor place vpon the earth can be found, to which
euerie part of this description can so aptlie agrée to as to these.
Open therefore your eies, and espie her whom the holie Ghost
laieth out so openlie before you, and flie from her betimes, least
you be partaker of her plagues and damnation.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 17. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  Which sitteth vpon ⸫ many waters.
               
               
                  The note.
                  These many waters are many peoples, verse 15.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Héere you haue found scripture for your vniuersalitie. The
whoore hath a large dominion, and many people vnder hir: euen
as many, as without all iudgement receiue whatsoeuer it pleaseth
the bishops of Rome to obtrude to them.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 17. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  The beast which thou sawest ⸫ was and is not, and shal come
vp out of the bottomlesse depth, and go into destruction.
               
               
                  The note.
                  It signifieth the short raigne of Antichrist, who is the chiefe horne or
head of the beast.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  I would it had pleased God to make it so short as you imagin
it, it had saued the blood of a great number of saints, and bred
quietnes in our daies: but sith it hath pleased God otherwise, God
open our eies, that we may sée, know, and take héed in time.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 17. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  And the ten horns which thou sawest, are ⸫ ten kings which
haue not yet receiued kingdome, but shall receiue power as
kings one hower after the beast.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Some expound it of ten small kingdoms into which the Roman empire
shall be diuided, which all shall serue Antichrist both in his life and a little
after.
               
               
                  
                  The answer.
                  I consent to them that interpret this of our kingdoms in Europe,
England, France, Spaine, Scotland, Nauar, Denmarke,
Sweueland, Beame, Poland, Hungarie, which all haue serued
Rome. But the continuance of their seruice the beasts whole life
and a little after, is one of your dreames.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 17. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And the ten hornes which thou sawest in the beast these shal
hate the harlot, and shal make hir desolate and naked, and shal
eate hir flesh, and hir they shal burne with fire. For ⸫ God hath
giuen into their harts to doo that which pleaseth him: that
they giue their kingdom to the beast till the words of God be
consummate.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Not forcing or moouing any to follow Antichrist, but by his iust iudgement,
and for punishment of their sinne permitting them to beleeue and
consent to him.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Of Gods working in the minds of men, and of your foolish friuolous
flieng to permission, we haue spoken diuers times afore.
I cannot learne of you, to speake otherwise than the holy Ghost
hath taught me. but héere it is manifest that those kings shall
not serue the whoore so long as you dreamed of, but that though
by the iust iudgement of God, they for a time gaue their crowns
and dignities vnto Antichrist, yet God hath alreadie altered the
minds and wils of some of these, and will when his good pleasure
is, alter the rest, that they shall hate the harlot, and make hir desolate
and naked, according to the words of this prophesie.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 18. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  As much as she hath glorified hir selfe, and hath been in delicacies,
⸫ so much giue hir torment and moorning: bicause
she saith in hir hart: I sit a Queene, and widow I am not, and
moorning I shall not see.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The measure of paines and damnation according to the wicked pleasures
and vnlawfull delights of this life, which is a sore sentence for such
people as turne their whole life to lust and riot.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Though this be properly spoken and meant of the paines and
damnation of the whoore of Babylon, yet it may be well extended

to all those, that after hir example excell in pride and ambition,
and other impieties. For as they haue folowed hir in sinning,
so no doubt they shall follow hir in the punishment of sinne.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 18. 9.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ the kings of the earth that haue fornicated with hir,
and haue liued in delicacies, shall weepe and bewaile themselues
vpon hir, when they shall see the smoke of hir burning.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Kings and marchants are most encumbred, endangered, and drowned
in the pleasures of this world, whose whole life and traffike is (if they be
not exceeding vertuous) to find varietie of earthly pleasures. Who seeing
once the extreme end of their ioies, and of all that made their heauen
heere, to be turned into paines and damnation eternall, then shall
howle and weepe too late.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Kings and marchants, and all other that haue had hir in reuerence,
shal be astonied at the iudgements of God vpon hir, and
shall moorne, especially all maner of shauen marchants, bicause
by hir decay they lose their corporall commodities. For thereby
their Romish marchandise, wherein consisted their whole traffike,
becommeth dead ware, and hangeth on their hands. For
that they haue no vent for it.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 18. 20.
               
                  The text.
                  ⸫ Reioice ouer her heauen, and ye holie Apostles, and prophets,
bicause God hath iudged your iudgement of her.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The angels and all saints shall reioice and laude God to see the wicked
confounded, and Gods iustice executed vpon their oppressors, and persecutors:
and this is that which the martyrs praied for, chapter 6.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  All celesticall creatures, togither with the saints of God are
called to celebrate, and shew foorth their spirituall ioie, and gladnes,
for the destruction of the enimies of Gods church, and for the
notable reuenge that God hath made for the blood of his saints,
that hath béene spilled.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 18. 21.
               
                  The text.
                  And one strong angell tooke vp as it were a great milstone,
and threw it into the sea, saieng: with this violence shall ⸫ Babylon
that great citie be throwen, and shall now be founde no
more.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  By this it seemeth cleere, that the apostle meaneth not any one citie,
but the vniuersal companie of the reprobate, which shal perish in the day
of iudgement, the old prophets also naming the whole number of Gods
enimies mistically Babylon, as Ierem. cap. 52.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  How cléere can any thing here make it, that by Babylon one
citie is not ment? The whole number of the reprobate shall perish
at the day of iudgement. What then? Doth that hinder that
the head, and principall citie of the diuels kingdome, is not ment
here, by Babylon? Babylon is taken in the scriptures mystically
for the whole number of Gods enimies, Ieremie. 52. Babylon
in that chapter is not named, and though it be by circumstance
desciphered, I sée nothing why there also, it should not be
taken for the citie it selfe. But howsoeuer it be taken there, it is
most manifest, that here it must be taken for Rome. For what
other citie is situate on seauen hils? what other citie hath had
kingdome ouer the kings of the earth? what other city hath made
the nations to erre in her inchauntments? and in what citie else
may a man finde the blood of the prophets, and saints that haue
béene slaine vpon the earth? So that the reasons that lead vs to
vnderstand it of Rome are so many, and so plaine, that except a
man would shut his eies against the light, he cannot choose but
sée it. Yet this is farther to be gathered, that the head and principall
citie of the diuels kingdome can not fall without the ruine
and fall of the whole kingdome.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 19. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And againe they said Allelu-ia.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This often repeating of Allelu-ia in times of reioising, the church
doth follow in her seruice.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And where all things in the church ought to be done to edifieng,
the people who vnderstand neuer a word, are neuer the
better, neither for your Latine, Gréeke, nor Hebrew. And yet
you thinke it sufficient to tell vs that such a thing, or such a thing
in the scriptures, is also in your church seruice. It were too great
a disgrace for you, to say or sing in plaine English, praise yée the
Lord.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 19. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  Let vs be glad, and reioice, and giue glorie to him: bicause

⸫ the marriage of the Lambe is come, and his wife hath prepared
hir selfe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  At this day shall the whole church of the elect be finally and perfectly
ioined vnto Christ in marriage inseparable.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In the meane space we had néed to take great héed of being seduced
by your perswasions, and so of forsaking Christ, and coupling
our selues to another man, that is, to the pope: which is both
the popes, and yours whole endeuors.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 19 9.
               
                  The text.
                  And he said to me write, Blessed be they that are called to
the ⸫ supper of the marriage of the Lambe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  That is the feast of eternall life, prepared for his spouse the church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  And not for you which imbrace another head and spouse in his
stéede, to whom you haue giuen greater preheminence, then to
Christ himselfe.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 19. 13.
               
                  The text.
                  And he was clothed with a garment sprinckled with blood:
and his name is called the word of God.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The second person in Trinitie, the Sonne or the word of God, which
was made flesh. Io. 1.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Who shall confound antichrist, and all the power of the earth
which taketh his part, euen with the sword, that procéedeth out
of his mouth.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 19. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And he hath in his garment, and in his thigh written, king
of kings, and lord of lords.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Euen according to his humanitie also.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Our Lord and Sauior Christ, God and man, after his resurrection
is aduanced aboue all principalities and powers, and euery
name that is named in heauen and in earth.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 20. 1.
               
                  The text.
                  And I sawe an angell descending from heauen, hauing the
key of the bottomlesse depth, and a great chaine in his hand.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  See in S. Augustine (lib. 20. de ciuit. ca. 7. 8. & seq.) the exposition
of this chapter.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your referring men to the doctors sheweth that your care is
not for ignorant men to profite them, for they are not the better
for this reference, and the learned néedeth it not.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 20. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  And I sawe seates, and they sate vpon them, and iudgement
was giuen them, and the soules of the beheaded for the
testimonie of Iesus, and for the word of God, and that adored
not the beast, nor his image, nor receiued his character in their
foreheads, or in their hands, and haue liued and reigned with
Christ a thousand yeeres.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Quid in millenario numero nisi ad proferendam nouam sobolem perfecta
vniuersitas praestitae generationis exprimitur, hinc per Iohannem
dicitur. Et regnabunt cum illo mille annis, quia regnum sanctae ecclesiae
vniuersitatis perfectione solidatur. D. Gregorius. libro 9. moral. cap. 1.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your poore countrimen are greatlie beholding to you, they are
much the better for your note, they vnderstand it as well, and are
edified as much by it as by your church seruice. And for my part
bicause you haue not vouchsafed to turne it into English your
selues, and bicause it toucheth no matter of controuersie betwixt
vs, I will also take mine ease and leaue it as I finde it.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 20. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  And when the thousand yeeres shall be consummate, Satan
shalbe loosed out of his prison, and shall go foorth and seduce
⸫ the nations that are vpon the foure corners of the earth,
Gog and Magog, and shall gather them into battell, the number
of whom is as the sand of the sea.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Saint Augustine thinketh that these do not signifie anie certaine nations,
but all that shall then be ioyned with the diuell and Antichrist
against the church. lib. 20. de ciuitate cap. 11. See Saint Hierome in
Ezechielem lib. 11.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  We agrée with Augustine that all enemies of the church are
signified, open, as Turkes and such like, priuie, as the Pope, papists

and such like, who vnder the name and title of Christ persecute
the members of Christ, which the text it selfe doeth plainlie
insinuate, which saith that they are the nations, which are vpon
the foure corners of the earth.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 20. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And I sawe a great white throne, and one sitting vpon it,
from whose sight ⸫ earth and heauen fled, and there was no
place found for them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  They shall then be new, not the substance, but the shape changed. 2.
Peter. 3. See Saint Augustine lib. 20. de ciuit. cap. 14.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That this is to be expounded of the innouation of heauen and
earth, we consent, but I muse for whome you gathered your
notes. The learned without you know whither to repaire for resolution
in their doubts. The vnlearned can not consult with Augustine
though they would. These references to sée the iudgement
of Doctors haue no profit, but to make a shew of your reading.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 20. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  And I sawe the dead, great and little standing in the sight of
the throne, and ⸫ bookes were opened, and another booke
was opened, which is of life, & the dead were iudged of those
things which were written in the bookes, according to their
works.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The bookes of mens consciences, where it shalbe plainlie read, what
euerie mans life hath bene.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Our owne consciences and thoughts at that day shall either
accuse or excuse vs. Looke therefore well into your consciences,
and take héede that you trust not too much, and to farre to your
Pope of Rome, for it is well knowen that he is but a mortall
man, and not God.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 20. 15.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ he that was not found written in the booke of life,
was cast into the poole of fire.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Such as do no good workes, if they haue age and time to do them, are
not found in the booke of life.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Your note is neither gathered out of this place, neither warranted

by anie other. He that liueth to mans state hath age, and
he that liueth long hath time to do good workes, but suppose they
haue done none, shal we cut frō them hope of mercie afore the last
gaspe, & may not the like grace be shewed them, that was graunted
to the penitent theefe? The time therefore of working must
begin at their conuersion and true turning to God, whether it be
earlie or late, otherwise this place sheweth nothing, but that onlie
the elect shalbe saued. Others, though in shew they haue led a
painfull religious life,Mat. 7. 22. 23. though they shalbe able to say, Lord, haue
not we done thus and thus in thy name? yet shall haue answere,
depart from me ye workers of iniquitie, I neuer knew you.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 21. 2.
               
                  The text.
                  And I Iohn sawe ⸫ the holie citie Hierusalem new, descending
from heauen, prepared of God as a bride adorned for hir
husband.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The Church triumphant.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The ioy and comfort of all the saints of God to thinke of. Now
euerie gift which we receiue in this life, is a pledge and token of
that loue, wherewith Christ hath imbraced his church as his
spouse: but then she shall be perfectlie adorned and beautified, and
put into actuall possession of al the good things, which are Christs
her husbands.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 21. 3.
               
                  The text.
                  And I heard a loud voice from the throne, saieng, behold
⸫ the tabernacle of God with men, and he wil dwel with them.
               
               
                  The note.
                  This Tabernacle is Christ according to his humanitie.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Though it be true, that by the incarnation of our Lord and sauiour
Christ, and his taking vpon him our nature, God dwelleth
with vs, yet héere it is spoken of Gods receiuing vs into the participation
of the glorie of his Christ. For then when we shall be
receiued into eternall and euerlasting felicitie, this societie, coniunction,
and dwelling of God and man togither, shall most cléerly
and perfectly appéere.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 21. 4.
               
                  The text.
                  And God shall wipe away all teares from their eies: and
death shall be no more, nor moorning, nor crieng, neither shall
there be sorrow any more, which ⸫ first things are gone.
               
               
                  
                  The note.
                  This happie day shal make an end of all the miseries of this mortality.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  God is likened to a mother, which wipeth away the teares
from the infants eies and chéekes, whereby is signified, that not
onely there shall be an end of the miseries of this mortalitie, but
also that there shall remaine no token, step, nor print of our former
calamities.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 21. 7.
               
                  The text.
                  He that shall ouercome, ⸫ shall possesse these things, and I
will be his God and he shall be my sonne.
               
               
                  The note.
                  He that hath the victorie in the church militant, shall haue his reward
in the triumphant.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If hope of praie, and spoile, and liberall intertainment make
men to aduenture them selues, and their liues for victorie, howe
much more we, whose liues are a continuall warfare, who are
most certaine and assured of victorie, should manfullie and valiantlie
fight against all spirituall enemies, sith the liberalitie of
God is so great to victors and conquerors.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 21. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  But ⸫ to the fearfull and incredulous, and execrable, and
murderers, and fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and
all liers, their part shalbe in the poole burning with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All that commit mortall sinnes, and repent not, shall be damned.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The wages of euerie sinne is death.Rom. 6. 23. All impenitent sinners
therefore how smal soeuer their sinne séeme to be, shalbe damned,
which is also plainly here insinuated, in that not onelie vnbeléeuers,
& other grosse and foule sinners in the common iudgement
of men, are reckoned, but also and that first of all, those which are
fearfull and cowards in Gods cause are set, which is a fault that
most men little regard, and make a small account of, and therefore
all sins without repentance draw men to damnation.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And he tooke me vp in spirit into a mountaine great and high,
and he shewed me the holie citie Hierusalem, descending

out of heauen from God ⸫ hauing the glorie of God. And the
light thereof like to a pretious stone, as it were to the Iasper
stone euen as Christall.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The glorie of the triumphant church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  Which though it be héere excellently, swéetly, and delectably
shadowed, yet it doth excéed far the capacitie and reach of our dull
braines and weake vnderstanding in this vale of miserie. Howbeit
the holy Ghost doth thus describe it, to the end that we considering
the excellencie of this description, and waieng that that
the holy Ghost hath but shadowed these things by the most excellent
earthly things that are, we should be wholy rapt and inflamed
with the loue of these things, and haue our eies continually
vpon them, and long and earnestly desire to haue the actuall fruition
of them.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 21. 12.
               
                  The text.
                  And it had a wall great and high, hauing twelue gates, and
in the gates twelue Angels, and names written thereon, which
are ⸫ the names of the twelue tribes of the children of Israel.
               
               
                  The note.
                  The names of the patriarks and apostles honorable and glorious in
the triumphant church.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  In respect of the promises made to the fathers, and in respect of
the doctrine of truth, and sauing health deliuered to the whole
church by the holy apostles, and in whatsoeuer respect beside that
you can reckon, neither derogating from the glorie of God, nor
dissonant from the truth of his word.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 21. 16.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ the citie is situated quadrangle wise, and the length
thereof is as great as also the bredth, and he measured the citie
with the reed, for twelue thousand furlongs, & the length
and height, and bredth thereof be equall.
               
               
                  The note.
                  See S. Hierom ep. 17. touching this description of the heauenly Hierusalem,
which is the church triumphant, teaching that thes
                        •
                      things
must be taken spiritually, not carnally.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This admonition is very necessarie for your poore blind followers,
who know nothing, and are vtterly destitute of all vnderstanding.

But alack how is it possible for them to take these
things spiritually, who are altogither carnall, led by masters and
teachers, which are themselues void of the spirit of God? But out
of poperie in this light of the Gospell, it is hard to find any so ignorant,
that thinketh not that these things ought to be spiritually
vnderstood.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 21. 22.
               
                  The text.
                  And ⸫ temple I saw not therein. For our Lord God omnipotent
is the temple thereof and the lambe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  All externall sacrifices, which now is the necessarie duetie of the
faithfull shall then cease, and therefore shall neede no materiall temple.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  The sacrifice which your minde runneth of, is now no dutie of
a christian. And though we haue now places to méete in, to heare
and learne the word, to praie and to praise God in, to celebrate
the misteries which he hath left to his church, and to vse all spirituall
exercises: yet temples we haue none, for God him selfe is
our temple,1. Cor. 6. 19. for we dwell in him, and we are his temple, for his
spirit dwelleth in vs. As for your propitiatorie sacrifices, you
may take paines to returne them to Rome, from whence they
came.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 21. 27.
               
                  The text.
                  There shall ⸫ not enter into it anie polluted thing, nor that
doeth abomination, and maketh lie, but they are written in
the booke of life of the lambe.
               
               
                  The note.
                  None not perfectlie clensed of their sinnes, can enter into this heauenlie
Hierusalem.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  You know that in this life we know but in part, we loue but
in part,1. Cor. 13. 9. and therefore no worke perfectlie good can procéede from
vs. Those therefore that put confidence in the meritoriousnesse of
mens workes, can not enter into this Ierusalem. And I muse
that you tremble not, and quake not, when you sée that he that
maketh a lie can not enter, considering it appéereth in all your
workes, and especiallie in these notes, that you thinke it not dishonestie
or shame commonlie to lie. And another thing I would
haue you to consider of, why this celestiall citie is called rather
by the name of Ierusalem, then of Rome, séeing that (if your doctrine
be true) Rome hath greater priuiledges vpon earth, then
euer had Hierusalem, and therefore were méeter to shadow that
celestiall citie.
               
            
            
               
               Apoc. 22. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  The text.
                  In the middest of the streete thereof, and on both sides of
the riuer ⸫ the tree of life yeelding twelue fruits, rendring his
fruit euerie moneth, and the leaues of the tree for the curing
of the Gentiles.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Christ is our tree of life, in the Church by the blessed Sacrament, and
in heauen by his visible presence, and influence of life euerlasting, both
to our bodies and soules, of whom Salomon saith, The tree of life to all
that apprehend him. Prouerb. 3.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  It is true that Christ is this trée of life, and that he worketh
life and health by the ministerie of his worde and sacraments to
beléeuers. And that the knowledge of the benefits which we haue
by Christ, is the leaues wherebie the Gentiles receiue health,
and are cured: and that Christes bodilie presence not in the Sacrament
but in heauen, preserueth eternallie the bodies & soules
of them that shalbe saued.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 22. 8.
               
                  The text.
                  And I Iohn which haue heard and seene these things, and
after I had heard and seene, I fell downe ⸫ to adore before the
feete of the angell which shewed me these things, and he said
to me: Stand vp, for I am thy fellow seruant.
               
               
                  The note.
                  You see it is all one to adore before the feete of the Angell, and to
adore the Angell, though to adore him be not expressed, as in the 19.
chapter. See the annotation there, verse 10.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  If your note be true, then how can you adore before images,
and not adore images? For if to adore before an Angel, & to adore
an angell be all one, then how is it not also al one to adore before
an image, and to adore an image? Your annotation shall receiue
answer amongst the rest.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 22. 11.
               
                  The text.
                  And he that is iust ⸫ let him be iustified yet, and let the holie
be sanctified yet.
               
               
                  The note.
                  Man by Gods grace, and doing goodworkes doth increase his iustice.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  This is according to your accustomed maner, dallieng, and
deluding with words ambiguous. It is manifest that the Apostle

reiterating one and the same thing in diuerse wordes, doeth by
the latter expresse the meaning of the former. Our iustice therefore,
but not our iustification before God, may be increased by
the meanes you speake of, for it is properlie Gods iustice, and not
ours whereby we are iustified before him. Gods iustice I call the
obedience of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, which God
imputeth to those whose sinnes he pardoneth, and which can onlie
abide the rigour of Gods examination, according to his perfect
rule of iustice, that is, the lawe. Mans iustice I call the fruits
and effects of the spirit of regeneration, which do more and more
dailie abound and increase in the godlie, as knowledge and faith
doeth more and more encrease.
               
               
                  The text.
                  Behold I come quickelie, and my reward is with me to render
to euerie man ⸫ according to his workes.
               
            
            
               Apoc. 22. 12.
               
                  The note.
                  Heauen is the reward, hire, and repaiment for goodworkes in all the
Scriptures, and yet the aduersaries will not see it.
               
               
                  The answer.
                  That our good workes deserue or merite heauen, is the thing
which we can not sée, nor you shew through all the Scriptures.
And yet you cease not to make lame and halting arguments that
followe not: for if alwaies vpon reward, deseruing necessarilie
followeth, then it must follow that your fellowes, which haue
bene rewarded with the gallowes, haue also deserued the gallowes,
which if you graunt, then you ouerthrowe the concertation
of your Catholike church, the chéefe purpose whereof was to
iustifie traitors.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   