
      
         
            
            
            EPITHALAMIA: OR NVPTIALL POEMS VPON THE MOST BLESSED AND HAPPIE MARIAGE BETWEENE the High and Mightie Prince FREDERICK the fifth, Count Palatine of the Rhein, Duke of Bauier, &c.
            AND THE MOST VERTVOVS, GRACIOVS AND THRICE EXCELLENT PRINCESSE, ELIZABETH, SOLE Daughter to our dread Soueraigne, IAMES by the grace of God King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, &c.
            
            CELEBRATED AT WHITE-HALL the fourteenth of Februarie, 1612.
            Written by GEORGE WITHER.
            
            
               AT LONDON, Imprinted for Edward Marchant, and are to be sold at his shop ouer against the Crosse in Pauls Churchyeard. 1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE ALL-VER TVOVS AND THRICE EXCELLENT PRINCESSE, ELIZABETH, SOLE DAVGHTER TO OVR DREAD SOVERAIGNE, IAMES BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING OF GREAT BRITANE, FRANCE AND IRELAND, &c.
            AND WIFE TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCE, FREDERICK THE FIFTH, COVNT PALATINE OF THE RHEIN, DVKE OF BAVIER, &c. ELECTOR AND ARCH-SEWER TO THE SACRED ROMAN EMPIRE, DVRING THE VACANCIE VICAR OF THE SAME, AND KNIGHT OF THE MOST HONORABLE ORDER OF THE GARTER:
            GEORGE WITHER WISHETH ALL THE HEALTH, IOYES, HONOVRS AND FELICITIES OF THIS WORLD IN THIS LIFE, AND THE PERFECTIONS OF ETERNITIE IN THE WORLD TO COME.
         
         
            
            
            To the Christian Readers.
            
               REaders; for that in my booke of Satyricall Essayes, I haue been deemed ouer Cynicall; to shew, that I am not wholy inclined to that Vaine: But indeed especially, out of the loue which in duty I owe to those incomparable Princes, I haue in honor of their Royall Solemnities, Published these short Epithalamiaes. By which you may perceaue, (how euer the world thinke of me) I am not of such a Churlish Constitution, but I can afford Vertue her deserued honor; and haue as well an affable looke to encourage Honestie; as a sterne frowne to cast on Villanie; If the times would suffer me, I could be as pleasing as others; and perhaps ere long I will make you amends for my former rigor; Meane while I commit this vnto your censures; and bid you farewell.
            
               G. W.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            EPITHALAMION.
            
               
                  BRight Northerne Star, and great Mineruaes peere,
               Sweet Lady of this Day: Great Britans deere.
               Loe thy poore Vassall, that was erst so rude,
               With his most Rustick Satyrs to intrude,
               Once more like a poore Siluan now drawes neare;
               And in thy sacred Presence dares appeare.
               Oh let not that sweete Bowe thy Browe be bent,
               To scarre him with a Shaft of discontent.
               One looke with Anger, nay thy gentlest Frowne,
               
               Is twice enough to cast a Greater downe.
               My Will is euer, neuer to offend,
               These that are good; and what I here entend,
               Your▪ 
                  Worth compels me to; For lately greeu'd,
               More then can be exprest, or well beleeu'd:
               Minding for euer to abandon sport,
               And liue exilde from places of resort;
               Careles of all, I yeelding to security,
               Thought to shut vp my Muse in darke obscuritie.
               And in content, the better to repose,
               A lonely Groue vpon a Mountaine chose.
               East from Caer Winn, midway twixt Arle and Dis,
               
               True Springs, where Britans true Arcadia is.
               But ere I entred my entended course,
               
                  Great Aeolus began to offer force.
               
                  * The boysterous King was growne so mad with rage;He here remembers, and describes the 
                        〈…〉
                     te Winter which was so exceeding tempestuous and windy.
               
               That all the Earth, was but his furies stage.
               
                  Fyre, Ayre, Earth, Sea, were intermixt in one:
               Yet Fyre, through Water, Earth, and Ayre shone.
               The Sea, as if she ment to whelme them vnder,
               Beat on the Cliffs, and rag'd more loud then thunder:
               And whilst the Vales she withsalt waues did fill,
               The Ayre show'rd Flouds, that drencht our highest hill,
               And the proud trees, that would no duty know;
               Lay ouerturned, twenties in a Rowe.
               Yea euery Man for feare, fell to Deuotion;
               
               Least the whole Ile should haue been drencht in th'Oceā.
               Which I peceiuing coniur'd vp my Muse,
               
               The Spirit whose good helpe I sometime vse;
               And though I ment to breake her rest no more,
               I was then faine her ayd for to implore.
               And by her helpe indeed, I came to know,
               Why, both the Ayre, and Seas, were troubled so.
               For hauing vrg'd her, that she would vnfold
               What cause she knewe: Thus much at last she told.
               
                  Of late (quoth she) there is by powers Diuine;
               
               
                  A match concluded, twixt Great Thame and Rhine.
               
                  Two famous Riuers, equall both to Nile▪
               
               
                  The one, the pride of Europes greatest Ile.
               
               
                  Th'other disdaining to be closely pent,
               
               
                  Washes a great part, of the Continent.
               
                  Yet with abundance▪ doth the Wants supplie,
               
               
                  Of the still-thirsting Sea, that's neuer drie.
               
               
                  And now, these, being not alone endear'd,
               
               
                  To mightie Neptune, and his watrie Heard:
               
                  But also to the great, and dreadfull Ioue
               
                  With all his sacred Companies aboue,
               
               
                  
                  Both haue assented by their Loues inuiting:
               
               
                  To grace (with their owne presence) this Vniting.
               Ioue cal'd a Summons to the Worlds great wonder;
               
               
                  T'was that we heard of late, which we thought thunder.
                  The reason of the tempestuous Winter.
               
               
                  A thousand Legions he intends to send them:
               
               
                  Of Cherubins and Angells, to attend them:
               
               
                  And those strong Winds, that did such blustring keepe,
               
               
                  Were but the Tritons, sounding in the Deepe;
               
                  To warne each Riuer, pettie Streame and Spring,
               
                  Their aide vnto their Soueraigne to bring.
               
               
                  The Floods and Shewers that came so plenteous downe,
               
               
                  And lay entrencht in euery Field and Towne:
               
                  Were but retainers to the Nobler sort,
               
               
                  That owe their Homage at the Watrie Court.
               
                  Or else the Streames not pleas'd with their owne store,
               
               
                  To grace the Thames, their Mistris borrowed more.
               
               
                  Exacting for their neighboring Dales and Hills,
               
                  But by consent all, naught against their wills.
               
               
                  Yet now since in this stir, are brought to ground
               
               
                  Many faire buildings, many hundreds drown'd,
               
               
                  And dailie found, of broken Ships great store,
               
               
                  That lie dismembred vpon euery shore:
               
               
                  With diuers other mischeefes knowne to all
               
               
                  This is the cause, that those great harmes befall.
               
               
                  Whilst others things, in redines did make,
               
               Hells hatefull Haggs, from out their prisons brake.
                  The cause of all such dangers, as fell out during the distemperature of the ayre.
               
               
                  And spighting at this hopefull match, began
               
               
                  To wreak their wrath, on Ayre, Earth, Sea and Man▪
               
               
                  Some hauing shapes of Romish shavelings got
               
               
                  Spewd out their venome: and began to plot:
               
               
                  Which way to thwart it: others made their way
               
               
                  With much distraction thorough land and Sea
               
                  
                  Extreamely raging. But Almighty Ioue
               
                  Perceaues their Hate, and Enuy from aboue:
               
               
                  He'le checke their fury, and in yrons chain'd,
               
               
                  Their libertie abus'd, shall be restraind;
               
               
                  Hee'le shut them vp, from comming to molest,
               
               
                  The Meriments of Hymens holy feast.
               
               
                  Where shall be knit that sacred Gordian knot,
               
               
                  Which in no age to come, shall be forgot.
               
               
                  Which Policie nor Force shall nere vnty,
               
               
                  But must continue to eternitie.
               
               
                  Which for the whole Worlds good was fore-decreed,
               
               
                  With Hope expected long; now come indeed.
               
               
                  And of whose future glory, worth, and merit
               
                  Much I could speak, with a prophetick spirit.
               Thus by my Muses deare assistance, finding
               The cause of this disturbance, with more minding
               My Countries welfare, then my owne content:
               And longing for to see this Tales euent.
               My lonely life I suddainly forsooke,He noteth the most admirable alteration of the weather a while before these Nuptials.
               
               And to the Court againe, my Iorney tooke.
               Meane while I sawe the furious Winds were laid;
               The risings of the swelling Waters staid.
               The Winter, gan to change in euery thing;
               And seem'd to borrow mildnes of the Spring.
               
               The Violet and Primerose fresh did growe;
               And as in Aprill, trimd both Cops and rowe.
               
               The Citie, that I left in mourning clad,
               Drouping; as if it would haue still bin sad:
               I found deckt vp; in robes so neat, and trimme,
               Faire Iris, would haue lookt but stale and dimme.
               In her best cullors; had she there appeard.
               The Sorrowes of the Court I found well cleerd,
               
                  Their wofull habits quite cast off, and tyr'd
               In such a glorious fashion; I admir'd.The glorious preperation for this solemnity, the state whereof, is here allegorically described.
               
               All her cheefe Peeres and choisest beauties too
               In greater pompe, then Mortalls vse to doe;
               Wait as attendants; Iuno's come to see;
               Because shee heares that this solemnitie
               Exceeds faire Hippodamia's, (where the strife
               Twixt her, Minerua, and lame Vulcans wife
               Did first arise) and with her, leads along;
               A noble, stately, and a mighty throng.
               
                  Venus, (attended with her rarest features,
               Sweet louely-smiling, and hart-mouing creatures,
               The very fairest Iewells of her treasure,
               Able to moue the senseles stones to pleasure▪)
               Of all her sweetest Saints, hath robd their shrines;
               And brings them for the Courtiers Valentines.
               
               Nor doth Dame Pallas, from these tryumphs lurke:
               Her Noblest wits, shee freely sets on worke.
               Of late, shee summond them vnto this place,
               To do your masks and Reuells, better grace.
               Here Meaning the Sea fight, and the taking of the Castle on the water which was most arteficially performed. 
                  Mars himselfe to, Clad in Armor bright,
               Hath showne his fury, in a bloudles fight;
               And both on land, and water, sternely drest,
               Acted his bloudy Stratagems, in Iest.
               Which to the people, frighted by their error;
               With seeming wounds and death did ad more terror.
               Besides; to giue, the greater cause of wonder;
               
                  Ioue did vouchsafe, a ratling peale of thunder,The fire works he alleadgeth to those exhalations.
               
               
                  Cometts and Meteors by the starrs exhald,
               Were from the Midle-region lately cald:
               And to a place appointed, made repaire,
               To show their firie friscolls in the ayre.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               People innumerable do resort;
               As if all Europe here would keepe one Court.
               Yea Hymen in his safferon-coloured weed;
               To celebrate his rites is full agreed.
               All this I see; which seeing, makes me borrow,
               Some of their mirth a while, and lay downe sorrow.
               And yet not this: but rather the delight,
               My hart doth take in the much hoped sight,
               Of these thy glories, long already due:
               And this sweet comfort, that my eyes do viewe.
               Thy happy Bridegrome; Pr: Co: Palatine,
               
               Now thy best friend and truest Valentine.
               
               Vpon whose brow, my mind doth read the story,
               Of mightie fame; and a true future glorie.
               Me thinks I doe foresee already, how
               
                  Princes, and Monarchs, at his stirrop bow.
               I see him shine in steele. The bloudy feilds
               Already wonne; and how his proud foe yeelds.
               God, hath ordaind him happines great store:
               And yet in nothing, is he happy more
               Then in thy loue, (faire Princesse) For vnles
               
                  Heauen, like to Man, be prone to ficklenes:
               Thy Fortunes, must be greater in effect,
               Then time, makes show of, or men can expect.
               Yet, notwithstanding all those goods of fate;
               
               Thy Mind, shall euer be aboue thy state.
               
               For ouer, and beside thy proper merit,
               Our last Eliza, grants her Noble spirit.
               To be redoubled on thee; and your names
               
               Being both one, shall giue you both one fames▪
               
               Oh blessed thou! and they to whom thou gui'st,
               The leaue for to attend thee where thou liu'st.
               
                  And haples we, that must of force let goe,
               The matchles treasure, we esteeme of so.
               But yet, we trust tis for our good, and thine:
               Or els thou shouldst not, chang thy Thame for Rhyne.
               
               We hope, that this will the vniting proue,
               Of Countries, and of nations by your loue.
               
               And that from out your blessed loynes, shall come;
               Another terror, to the Whore of Rome:
               
               And such a stout Achilles as shall make,
               Her tottering Walls, and weake foundation shake.
               For Thetis-like, thy fortunes do require:
               Thy Issue should be greater, then his sire.
               
               But (gratious Princesse) now since thus it fares:
               And God so well for you, and vs, prepares.
               Since he hath daign'd such honors, for to do you
               And showne himselfe, so fauorable to you.
               Since he hath changd your sorrowes, and your sadnes
               Into such great, and vnexpected gladnes.
               Oh now remember, for to be at leasure
               Sometime to think on him, amidst your pleasure!
               Let not these glories of the world deceaue you
               Nor her vaine fauors of your selfe bereaue you.
               Consider yet, for all this Iollitie,
               Y'are mortall, and must feele mortalitie.
               And that God can in midst of all your Ioyes▪
               
               Quite dash this pompe, and fill you with annoyes,
               
                  Triumphes are fit for Princes; yet we find,
               They ought not wholy to take vp the mind.
               Nor yet to be let past, as things in vaine,
               For out of all things, wit will knowledge gaine.
               
                  Musique may teach, of difference in degree,
               The best tun'd Common-Weales will framed be.
               
                  And that he moues, and liues, with greatest grace;
               That vnto Time, and Measure, tyes his pace.
               Then let these things be He declares what vse is to be made of these showes & triumphes, and what meditations the mind may be occupied about when we behold them. 
                  Emblems, to present.
               Your Mind, with a more lasting true content.
               When you behold the infinite resort,
               The glory and the splendor, of the Court:
               What wondrous fauors, God doth here bequeath you,
               How many hundred thousands, are beneath you:
               And view with admiration your great blisse,
               Then with your selfe you may imagine this.
               
                  T'is but a blast, or transitorie shade;
               
               
                  Which in the turning of a hand, may fade.
               
               
                  Honors, which you your selfe did neuer winne.
               
               
                  And might, (had God bin pleas'd) anothers bin.
               
               
                  And think, if shaddowes haue such maiestie;
               
               
                  What are the glories of eternitie?
               
               Then by this image of a fight on sea,
               
               Wherein you heard the thundring canons plea;
               And saw flames, breaking from their Murthering throts;
               Which in true skirmish, fling resistles shots.
               Your wisdome may (and will no doubt) begin;
               To cast what perill a poore Souldier's in.
               You will conceaue his miseries and cares,
               How many dangers, deaths and wounds he shares.
               Then though the most pass't ouer, and neglect them
               That Rethorick, will moue you to respect them.
               And if hereafter, you should hap to see
               Such Mimick Apes; (that courts disgraces be)
               I meane such Chamber-combatants; who neuer
               Weare other helmet, then a hat of Beuer.
               
               Or nere board Pinnace but in silken saile,
               And in the steed of boysterous shirts of maile,
               
                  Goe arm'd in Cambrick? if that such a Kite,
               
               (I say) should scorne an Egle in your sight:
               Your wisdome iudge (by this experience) can:
               Which hath most worth, Hermaphrodite, or Man.
                  * Fire works.
               
               The nights strange * prospects, made to feede the eyes;
               With Artfull fyres, mounted in the skies:
               Graced with horred claps of sulphury thunders;
               May make you mind, Iehouahs greater wonders.
               Nor is there any thing, but you may thence
               Reape inward gaine; aswell as please the Sense.
               
               But pardon me (oh fayrest) that am bold,
               My heart thus freely, plainely, to vnfold.
               What though I knowe, you knew all this before:
               My loue this showes, and that is something more.
               Do not, my honest seruice here disdaine,
               I am a faithfull, though an humble Swaine.
               I'me none of those, that haue the meanes or place;
               With showes of cost to do your Nuptialls grace:
               But only master, of my owne desire,
               Am hither come, with others to admire.
               I am not of these Heliconian wits;
               Whose pleasing straines the Courts know humor fits.
               But a poore rurall Sheapheard, that for need:
               Can make sheepe Musique, on an Oaten reed.
               Yet for my loue (Ile this be bold to boast)
               It is as much to you, as his that's most:
               Which; since I no way els, can now explaine,
               If you'l in midst of all these glories, daigne
               To lend your eares vnto my Muse so long:
               She shall declare it, in a wedding song.
               
            
         
         
            
            EPITHALAMION.
            
               
                  VALENTINE, good morrow to thee,The Mariage being on Saint Valentines day the author showes it by beginning with the salutation of a supposed Valentine.
                  
               
               Good I wish, though none I doe thee:
               I would waite vpon thy pleasure,
               But I cannot be at leasure.
               For I owe this day, as debter,
               To (a thousand times) thy better,
            
            
               
                  Hymen now will haue effected
               What hath been so long expected:
               
                  Thame thy Mistris, now vnwedded;
               Soone must with a Prince be bedded.
               If thou'lt see her Virgin euer,
               Come, and do it now, or neuer.
            
            
               Where art thou, oh faire Aurora?
               
               Call in Uer and Lady Flora.
               
               And you daughters of the Morning,
               
               In your neat'st, and feat'st, adorning:
               Cleare your fore-heads, and be sprightfull;
               That this day may seeme delightfull.
            
            
               
               All you Nimphs, that vse the Mountaines,
               Or delight in groues, and fountaines;
               
                  Shepheardesses, you that dally,
               Either vpon Hill or vally;
               And you daughters of the Bower,
               
               That acknowledge Vestaes power.
            
            
               Oh you sleep too long; awake yee,
               See how Time doth ouertake yee:
               Hark, the Lark is vp and singeth,
               And the house, with ecchoes ringeth.
               Pretious howers, why neglect yee,
               Whil'st affaires, thus expect yee?
            
            
               Come away, vpon my blessing,
               The bride-chamber, lies to dressing:
               Strow the waies, with leaues of Roses,
               
               Some make garlands, some make poses,
               
               T'is a fauor and't may ioy you▪
               
               That your Mistris will employ you.
            
            
               Where's Scuerne. 
                  Sabrina, with her daughters;
               That do sport about her waters;
               Those that with their locks of Amber,
                  * Wales.
               
               Haunt the fruitfull hills of Camber;
               We must haue to fill the number;
               All the Nimphs of Trent and Humber.
               
            
            
               
               Fie; your hast, is scarce sufficing,
               For the Bride's awake and rising.
               Enter beauties, and attend her:
               All your helps▪ and seruice lend her.
               With your quaint'st, and new'st deuises:
               Trim your Lady, faire Thamisis.
               
            
            
               See shee's ready: with Ioyes greet her,
               Lads, go bid the Brid-groome meet her.
               But from rash approach aduise him,
               Least a too much Ioy surprize him.
               None I ere knew yet, that dared:
               View an Angell, vnprepared.
            
            
               Now vnto the Church she hies her,
               
                  Enuy bursts, if shee espies her.
               In her gestures, as she paces,
               Are vnited all the Graces:
               
               Which who sees and hath his senses,
               Loues, inspight of all defences.
            
            
               Oh most true maiestick creature.
               
                  Nobles did you note her feature
               Felt you not an inward motion,
               Tempting Loue to yeeld deuotion▪
               
               And as you were eu'n desiring.
               Something check you, for aspiring▪
               
            
            
               
               That's hir Ueriue which still tameth
               Loose desires: and bad thoughts blameth.
               For whilst others were vnruly,
               She obseru'd Diana truly:
               And hath by that meanes, obteyned,
               Guifts of her that none haue gained.
            
            
               Yon's the Bridgrome d'yee not spy him?
               See how all the Ladies eye him.
               
                  Venus his perfection findeth,
               And no more Adonis mindeth:
               Much of him my Hart deuineth:
               On whose brow all Vertue shineth.
            
            
               Two such Creatures Nature would not,
               Let one place long keep: she should not:
               One shee'le haue, (she cares not whether)
               But our Loues can spare her neither.
               
                  Therefore ere we'le so be spighted;
               They in one shall be vnited.
            
            
               
                  Natures selfe, is well contented,
               By that meanes, to be preuented.
               And behold, they are retired,
               So conioyn'd, as we desired:
               Hand in hand, not only fixed,
               But their harts, are intermixed.
            
            
               
               Happy they, and we that see it,
               For the good of Europe be it.
               And heare Heauen my deuotion,
               Make this Rhyne and Thame an Ocean:
                  
                     Tyber is the Riuer which runneth by Rome.
               
               That it may with might and wonder,
               Whelme the pride of * Tyber vnder.
            
            
               Now yon * Hall their persons shroudeth,Whithall.
               
               Whither all this people crowdeth.
               There they feasted are with plentie,
               Sweet Ambrosia is no deinty.
               Groomes quaff Nectar: for theres meeter,
               Yea more costly wines, and sweeter.
            
            
               
                  Young men all, for ioy go ring yee,
               And your merriest Carolls sing yee.
               Here's of Dam'zells many choices,
               Let them tune their sweetest voices.
               Fet the Muses too, to cheare them:
               They can rauish, all that heare them.
            
            
               
                  Ladyes, t'is their Highnesse pleasures,
               For to see you, foot the Measures:
               
               Louely gestures addeth graces,
               To your bright, and Angell faces.
               Giue your actiue minds the bridle:
               Nothing worse, then to be
                     •
                  dle.
            
            
               
               
                  UUorthies, your affaires forbeare yee,
               For the State a while may spare yee:
               
                  Time was; that you loued sporting,
               Haue you quite forgot your Courting?
               
                  Ioy the hart of Cares be guileth:
               
                  Once a yeare Apollo smileth.
                  Simel. in anno ridet Appol.
               
            
            
               
                  Fellow shepheards, how I pray you,
               Can your flocks at this time stay you?
               Let vs, also hie vs thither,
               Lets lay all our witts together.
               And some Pastorall inuent them,
               For to show the loue we ment them.
            
            
               
                  I my selfe though meanest stated,
               (And in Court now almost hated)
               Will knit vp my Abuses strip and whipt. 
                  Scourge, and venter
               In the midst of them to enter:
               For I know, ther's no disdaining,
               Where I looke for entertaining.
            
            
               See, me thinks the very season,
                  He noteth the mildnesse of the winter which excepting that the beginning was very windy, was as temperate as the spring.
               
               As if capable of Reason;
               Hath laine by her natiue rigor,
               The faire Sunbeames haue more vigor.
               They are Aeols most endeared:
               For the Ayre's stilld, and cleared.
            
            
               
               
                  Fawnes, and lambs, and kidds do play,
               In the honor of this day.
               
               The shrill Blacke-bird, and the Thrushe
               
               Hops about in euery bush:
               And among the tender twiggs,
               Chaunt their sweet harmonious ijgs.
            
            
               Yea, and mou'd by this example,Most men are of opinion that this day euery byrd doth chuse her mate for that yeare.
               
               They doe make each Groue a temple:
               
               Where their time the best way vsing,
               They their Summer loues are chusing.
               And vnles some Churle do wrong them.
               There's not an od bird, among them.
            
            
               Yet I heard as I was walking,
               Groues and hills by Ecchoes talking.
               Reeds, vnto the small brooks whistling;
               Whilst they danc't, with pretty rushling.
               Then for vs, to sleep twere pitty:
               Since dumb creatures are so witty.
            
            
               But oh Titan, thou dost dally,
               Hie thee to thy Uesterne vally.
               
               Let this night one hower borrow;
               Shee shall pay't againe, to morrow.
               And if thou'lt that fauor do them,
               Send thy sister Phaebe to them.
            
            
               
               But shee's come, her selfe vnasked:By these he meanes the 2. Masques, one of them being presented by the Lords, the other by the Gentry.
               
               And brings * Gods and Heroes masked.
               None yet saw, or heard in story,
               Such immortall, mortall glorie.
               View not, without preparation:
               
               Least you faint, in admiration.
               
            
            
               Say my Lords, and speak truth barely,
               Mou'd they not exceeding rarely?
               Did they not such praises merit,
               As if flesh had all bin spirit?
               
               True indeed, yet I must tell them,
               There was One did far excell them.
            
            
               But (alas) this is ill dealing,
               
                  Night vnwares away is stealing.
               Their delay, the poore bed wrongeth,
               That for Bride, with Bride groome longeth:
               And aboue all other places,
               Must be blest, with their embraces.
            
            
               
                  Reuellers, then now forbeare yee,
               And vnto your rests prepare yee▪
               
               Let's a while your absence borrow,
               
                  Sleep to night, and dance to morrow.
               We could well allow your Courting,
               But twill hinder, better sporting.
            
            
               
               They are gone; and Night all lonely,
               Leaues the Bride with Bridegroome only.
               
                  Muse now tell; (for thou hast power
               For to fly thorough wall or tower.)
               
                  VVhat contentments their harts cheareth;
               
               
                  And how louely shee appeareth.
               
            
            
               And yet do not; tell it no man.
               
                  Rare conceits may so grow common;
               Do not to the Vulgar show them,
               (T'is enough that thou dost know them.)
               Their ill harts, are but the Center,
               
               Where all misconceauings enter.
            
            
               But thou Luna that dost lightly,
               Haunt our downes and forrests nightly.
               Thou that fauor'st generation,
               And art help, to procreation:
               See their yssue thou so cherish,
               I may liue, to see it flourish.
            
            
               And you Planets in whose power,
               Doth consist, these liues of our;
               You that teach vs Diuinations,
               
               Help with all your Constellations:
               
               For to frame in Her a creature,
               Blest in Fortune, witt, and Feature.
               
            
            
               
               Lastly; oh you Angells ward them,
               Set your sacred Spels to gard them:
               Chase away such feares, or terrors,
               As not being; seeme through errors.
               Yea let not a dreames molesting,
               Make them start, when they are resting.
            
            
               But THOV chiefly; most adored;
               That shouldst only, be implored.
               
                  Thou to whom my meaning tendeth,
               Whether er'e in show, it bendeth:
               
                  Let them rest to night from sorrow
               
               
                  And awake with ioy to morrow.
               
            
            
               Oh, to my request be heedfull,
               Grant them that, and al things needful.
               Let not these, my straines of Folly,
               
               Make true prayer be vnholy,
               But, if I haue here offended:
               Help, forgiue, and see it mended.
            
            
               Daigne me this. And if my Muses
               
               Hastie issue, shee peruses;
               Make it vnto her seeme gratefull,
               Though to all the VVorld els, hateful.
               But how er'e, yet Soule perseuer,
               Thus to wish her good, for euer.
            
            
            
               THus ends the Day, together with my Song;
               Oh; may the Ioyes thereof continue long.
               Let Heauens iust, all-seeing, sacred power;
               Fauor this happie Iubile, of your:
               And blesse you, in your chast embraces so,
               We Britans, may behold before you goe.
               The hopefull Issue, we shall count so deare
               And whom, (vnborne) his foes already feare.
               Yea I desire, that all your sorrowes may;
               Neuer be more, then they haue been to day,
               Which hoping; For acceptance now I sue,
               And humbly, bid your Grace, and Court adue.
               I saw the sight, I came for; which I know,
               Was more then all, then world beside could show.
               But if amongst Apolloes Layes you can,
               Be pleasd, to lend a gentle eare to Pan:
               
               Or thinke your Country Shepheard, loues as deare,
               As if he were a Courtier, or a Peere:
               
               Then I, that els must to my Cell of paine,
               Will ioyfull, tnrne vnto my flocke againe.
               And there, vnto my fellow sheapheards tell,
               Why you are lou'd; wherein you doe excell:
               And when we driue our flocks a field to graze them,
               So chaunt your praises, that it shall amaze them:
               And thinke that Fate, hath now recald from death,
               Their still-lamented, sweet Elizabeth.
               
               For though they see the Court, but now and then
               They know desert as well as Greater men:
               And honord Fame, in them doth liue or die;
               As well, as in the mouth of Maiesty.
               
               But taking granted, what I here intreat:
               At heauen for you, my deuotions beat,
               
                  And though I feare, fate will not suffer me,
               To do you seruice, where your Fortunes be:
               How ere my skill, hath yet despised seem'd,
               (And my vnripened wit, been misesteem'd.)
               When all this costly Showe, away shall flit,
               And not one liue, that doth remember it:
               If Enuies trouble, let not to perseuer;
               Ile find a meanes, to make it knowne for euer.
            
         
         
            
            CERTAINE EPIGRAMMES CONCERNING MARIAGE.
            
               Epigram 1.
               
                  TIs said; in Marriage aboue all the rest
               The children of a King find comforts least,
               Because without respect of Loue, or Hate
               They must, and oft be, ruled by the State:
               But if contented Loue; Religions care;
               
               
                  Equalitie in State, and yeares declare
               A happie Match (as I suppose no lesse)
               Then rare, and great's Elizaes Happinesse.
            
            
               Epigram 2.
               GOd was the first that Marriage did ordaine,
               By making One, two; and two, One againe.
            
            
               
               Epigram 3.
               
                  SOuldier; of thee I aske, for thou canst best,
               
               
                  Hauing knowne sorrow, iudge of Ioy and Rest.
               
               What greater blisse, then after all thy harmes,
               To haue a wife that's faire, and lawfull thine:
               And lying prison'd twix't her luory armes;
               There tell, what thou hast scapt by powers diuine?
               How many, round thee, thou hast murthered seene;
               How oft thy soule hath been neere hand expiring,
               How many times thy flesh hath wounded beene:
               Whilst she thy fortune, and thy worth admiring,
               With ioy of health; and pitie of thy paine;
               Doth weepe, and kisse, and kisse, and weepe againe.
            
            
               Epigram 4.
               FAire Helen hauing stain'd her husbands bed,
               And mortall hatred twix't two Kingdomes bred,
               Had still remaining in her; so much good
               That Heroes, for her, lost their dearest blood:
               Then; if with all that ill, such worth may last,
               Oh what is she worth, that's as faire and chast!
            
            
               Epigram 5.
               OLd Orpheus, knew a good wiues worth so well,
               That when his di'd, he followed her to hell:
               And for her losse, at the Elizean Groue,
               He did not onely Ghosts, to pitie moue:
               But the sad Poet breath'd his sighes so deepe;
               T'is said the Diuels could not chuse but weepe.
            
            
               
               Epigram 6.
               LOng did I wonder, and I wondred much,
               Romes Church should from her Clergie take that due,
               Thought I why should she that contentment grutch?
               What, doth shee all with continence indue?
               Noe; but why then are they debar'd that state?
               Is shee become a foe vnto her owne?
               Doth shee the membèrs of her bodie hate?
               Or is it for some other cause vnshowne?
               Oh yes; they find a womans lips so daintie;
               
               
                  They tie themselues from one; cause theile haue twenty.
               
            
            
               Epigram 7.
               WOmen, as some men say, vnconstant be,
               Perhaps a few; and so no doubt are men:
               Nay if their scapes, we could so plainely see,
               I feare, that soarce there will be one, for ten.
               Men, haue but their owne lusts that tempt to ill;
               Women haue lusts, and mens allurements to:
               Alas, if their strengths cannot curbe their will;
               What should poore women, that are weaker do?
               Oh they had need, be chast, and looke about them,
               That striue 'gainst lust within, and knaues without them.
            
            
         
      
   