
      
         
            
            
            The particular grieuances of thoſe his Maieſties ſubiects throughout England and Wales, which lye vnder the oppreſſion of George Woods Patent for the ſole printing vpon Linnen cloth.
            
            FIrſt, in that the ſame was obtained vpon a falſe pretence, that he the ſaid Wood or one Ienkinſon (whoſe inuendon he ſaith, he hath bought) was the firſt inuenter of this Art; Wood is by trade a Printer of bookes.whereas in truth the ſaid Wood is but newly attained to any knowledge therein; and for Ienkinſon, if he had any maner of inuention therein at all
                  •
               , it was ſome very ſmall thing about thirtie yeares ago, now out of vſe, which inuention he hath alſo ſold to a great number of perſons, for 2 s. 3 s. 5 s. 
                  〈◊〉
                s. 20 s. 40 s. or any mony that he could get, and they ſold it to others. And he hauing made 
                  •
               is benefit thereof ſo many yeares, and in ſuch kind, it cannot now be taken for a new inuention, ſeeing not onely the Art it ſelfe, but alſo the apprentices and people that haue bene trained vp therein▪ are exceedingly increaſed, ſo that a great multitude of families both in this Cit ie and throughout the kingdome, would be impoueriſhed by the continuance of this Patent, if it ſhould hold.
            2. For the validitie of the Patent, it was in way of triall by ſuite of ſome Freemen, in the Exchequer; but vpon a Reference obtained from his Maieſtie to the Lord Chancellor and now Lord Treaſurer, vpon the falſe pretence aforeſaid, they were ſtopped, and not ſuffered to proceed to triall.
            3. The Patent is ſo generall, that it extends in preiudice to all his Maieſties ſubiects: for the goods therein prohibited, though they be bought and ſold, paid for, and paſſed from hand to hand, yet they are forfeited in whoſe hands ſoeuer.
            4. The Patentee may enter into the houſes of the Kings ſubiects, and ſeize and cary away and diſpoſe of the goods prohibited. And did execute this his power vpon ſome before this Parliament.
            5. He hath impriſoned otherſome by colour of the ſaid Patent, ſince the Parliament began.
            6. He pretended to the Drawers of the Citie, for his more eaſie obtaining of the Patent, and to gaine their aſſiſtance therein, great and good benefit vnto them, which Patent doth now vtterly begger them: for hee giues but a matter of 7 s. 4 d. for that worke which hee himſelfe takes 24 s.
            7. Hee hath by colour of this Patent, entred into ſome houſes, and taken away goods not contained in the Patent.
            8. He hath raiſed the prices of workes from 16 s. to 24 s. and by colour of the Patent may ſtill raiſe at his pleaſure.
            9. He hath giuen out ſpeeches, that he muſt raiſe the priſes of worke: for that hee doth not onely pay 10. lib. a yeare to the King, reſerued vpon the Patent, but alſo 200. lib. a yeare to ſome other or others that procured the Patent.
            10. The Patentee makes himſelfe hereupon ſo ſtrong, that he hath affirmed hee will not giue three pence to haue the Parliament maintaine his Patent.
            11. He had formerly a Patent, vpon pretence the inuention was his owne, whereupon was reſerued 40 lib. per annum to his Maieſtie: and by that Patent none were prohibited to vſe the Art. Which Patent not ſeruing to his purpoſe, he then found out this new pretence (though falſe) and obtained this Patent, which is in benefit to him if it ſhould hold, aboue a hund
                  ••
               d for one beyond the other: and yet there is no more reſerued vpon this vnto his 
                  •
               a
                  •
               eſt▪ then was vpon the other.
         
      
   