
      
         
            
            THE SONGS OF The OLD Teſtament, Tranſlated into Engliſh Meaſures, preſeruing the Naturall Phraſe and genuine Senſe of the holy Text: and with as little circumlocution as in moſt proſe TRANSLATIONS.
            To euery Song is added a new and eaſie TVNE, and a ſhort Prologue alſo, deliuering the effect and Vſe thereof, for the profit of vnlearned READERS.
            By GEORGE WITHER.
            Cum priuilegio & permiſſu Superiorum.
            LONDON, Printed by T. S. 1621.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST Reuerend Father in God, GEORGE, by the Diuine Prouidence, Lord Arch biſhop of Canterbury, Primate, &c. and to the reſt of the moſt Reuerend Archbiſhops.
            To the Reuerend Fathers alſo, the L. Biſhops, and to all other the deuout Paſtors and Superintendents, of the Churches of Great Britaine, and Ireland.
            
            GEORGE WITHER, their humble Seruant, wiſheth all encreaſe of Spirituall graces: and to their Chriſtian diſpoſure, ſubmits Himſelfe and this Endeauour.
            
               Moſt Reuerend Fathers, &c.
            
            
               THe many pious Inſtructions, and Chriſtian Pledges, which I haue at your hands, and by your meanes receiued of our holy Mother the Church, haue ſo oft informed me, in that Wherewithall a yong man ought to cleanſe his way; and ſo much confirmed me in the comfortable ſtudy thereof: 
That (howſoeuer the vaine inclinations of youth tempted the contrary) I was euer conſcionably fearefull of trifling away all my firſt age, in the pleaſures of Senſualitie. Yea, ſo often haue you rung in my eares that gratious and moſt ſerious Memorandum of the holy Ghoſt; Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, &c. That (more often then I ſhould haue beene) I was thereby put in minde, both to contemplate the works and mercies of the Almighty: and to endeauour alſo (as the ſlenderneſſe of my vnderſtanding, and the frailties of my yeeres would giue leaue) ſo to imploy my ſelfe, that the little time I purpoſed to ſpend well, might (if it were poſſible) produce ſomething, which (being as well profitable to others as to my ſelfe) would make a little recompence for thoſe many dayes, my youth and the temptations of the world, would force me idlely to conſume.
            And I thanke God; ſomewhat hath beene already effected, which (notwithſtanding my owne perſonall vnworthineſſe) the Church hath vouchſafed with a motherly approbation, both to receiue at my hand, and by her reuerend Authority to deliuer ouer alſo vnto others: Whereby I haue beene encouraged, to proceed according to thoſe beginnings, and (as a teſtimony as w
                  •
               ll of gratitude, as of obedience) now to conſecrate vnto the vſe, of good men, and in the name of your RRces this; the little gaine of my one Talent. Being a Metricall Tranſlation of thoſe ſacred Canonicall Songs diſperſed in the Old Teſtament, and anciently vſed to be ſung by the Primitiue Churches: My Thankefulneſſe it witneſſeh in this; that I offer vp the beſt fruit of my labours vnto thoſe, by whom I was firſt taught how to be ſo imployed: and my obedience is alſo teſtified, both in thus ſubmitting it vnto your graue Cenſures, and in 
hauing thus, according to your deſires, imployed my poore faculty in the ſeruice of the Church. For neither by any vaine-glorious humour of my owne, nor by the motion of any giddy Seperatiſts, but by ſome of you, was I firſt called and encouraged to this worke. In the performance whereof, I haue been euer mindfull of that Religious reuerence, which was fit to be obſerued in ſo weighty an vndertaking. And I hope, I haue ſo effected the ſame; as Gods Maieſtie may be praiſed in it, your RRces, pleaſed with it, good Chriſtians benefitted by it, and my owne ſoule receiue comfort therein.
            The liberty I haue taken, and the manner of my proceeding in this Tranſlation hath been little diff
                  •
               rent from that, which (in my Preparation to the Pſalter) I profeſſed to vſe in the Tranſlation of the Pſalmes; and I doubt not, but the greateſt fault which ſhall be diſcouered therein, vpon notice giuen, may be aſoone (almoſt) amended as found out.
            That to the glory of God they may be ſung either in publike, or in priuate, as your RRces ſhall ſee cauſe; I haue endeauoured to procure from ſome of our b
                  •
               ſt M
                     •
                  ſitians, ſuch Notes as (being eaſie, and proper to the matter) might the more accommodate them, for the praiſe of God, according to the laudable cuſtome of ſinging now in vſe. Moreouer; that ſuch as are delighted with thoſe Exerciſes, may not make meere ſenſual Muſicke, but expreſſe melody both 
                  •
               cceptable to God and profitable to themſelues, by knowing the Vſe, and meaning of what they ſing. I haue (according to the Truth, and agreeable to the doctrine of the Ancient Fathers) prefixed a briefe Prologue before euery Song. Wherein I firſt ſhew the generall meaning and ſcope of it, according to the litterall Senſe: then, how in the ſpirituall and moſt principal Senſe, it hath reſpect to the Miſteries 
               
of our Chriſtian Religion; and that each Song doth appertaine vnto vs, vpon ſome occaſions, in this age of the Church, as properly as it did to them, for whom they were firſt compoſed. Which in the Arguments themſelues, is ſo euidently and particularly declared, as I hope it will be well perceiued, it was not my owne idle fantaſie which directed me.
            This your RRces doe well know, and how the vſe of theſe Hymnes hath been continued in the Primitiue Churches; yea, and retained euen to this day in many Congregations, as not impertinent to vs of the laſt Ages. And to me it ſeemeth they neuer were (all at once) ſo much vſe-full, as now in theſe times, if the neceſſities of this Age be w
                  •
               ll conſidered. For which Cauſe; being thus to your hands preſented, ready fitted for vſe, according to the kinde of Muſicke now beſt approued of for ſubiects of this nature; And ſeeing alſo, they are both deſired, and may without any knowne inconuenience be generally admitted of: I doubt not but you will be pleaſed to recommend the practiſe of them to all thoſe who are willingly diſpoſed for ſuch Exerciſes. For, though ſome ſcoffing Iſmaelites may deride this addition of Songs, to that ouer-many which (as they thinke) the Church already hath. Neuertheleſſe; You, who by your experiences finde, that the humane nature in all things requires variety, to keepe it from loathing; and by your ſpirituall knowledges are aſſured, that God prouides for his Church, neither more nor leſſe of any thing then ſhall be requiſite. Euen you alſo know; that theſe are not to be accou
                  •
               ted a vaine, or burthenſome addition to our Pſalmes: eſpecially when the Apocriphall Inuentions of m
                  •
               n may there haue place.
            And when theſe ſhall be compared with thoſe Meaſur
                  •
               s we haue hitherto made vſe of in our deuotions, I 
doubt not (ſeeing the matter is of the ſame Authority) but the manner of expreſſing it ſhall make this no leſſe worthy of entertainment then that; (and though I ſhould ſay more worthy, I thinke it were no arrogance.) For (if I miſtake not) as naturally haue I expreſt the ſenſe of theſe Songs, and as plainely as moſt proſe Tranſlations haue yet done. And, if any indifferent man, who knowes the Poeſie and power of the Engliſh tongue may be my Iudge; I aſſure my ſelfe, hee will cenſure the expreſſion to be ſuch, as that it ſhall neither be obſcure to the meaneſt capacities, nor contemptible to the beſt Iudgments: but becomming the purpoſe it was intended for. I haue not lept on a ſudden into this employment; but in ſtudies of this nature haue now conſumed almoſt the yeeres of an Apprentiſhip. And if it be well weighed: Firſt, how full of ſhort ſentences and ſuddain breakings off, ſuch like ſcriptures are: Secondly, how frequently theſe particles For, But, and ſuch like, which are gracefull in the Originall, will ſeeme to obſcure the dependancy of ſenſe in the Engliſh phraſe, if they be not carefully needed: Thirdly, how harſh the Muſicke will be, if the Pauſes be not vſually reduced vnto the ſame place, which they haue in the firſt Stanza of each Song: Fourthly, how many other differences there muſt be betweene this kinde of Lyricall verſe and what is ſmoothed onely for the reading: Fiftly, how the Tranſlator is tyed to make choiſe, not of what is eaſieſt, but of that kind of verſe which may become beſt the nature of euery Song: Sixtly, how he is bound not onely to the Senſe, but to the very words (or words of the ſame power) which another hath vſed: Laſtly, how beſide all this ſtrictneſſe, he is euen in conſcience alſo conſtrained, ſo to expreſſe things by circumlocution (when he ſhall be forced to it) as that, although his phraſe be of the ſame 
power, it will not be warrantable vnleſſe it be ſo alſo done, that the manner of ſpeaking, peculiar to theſe writings, may be all the way perceiued by thoſe vnderſtanding Readers who are acquainted therewith. I ſay, If all theſe circumſtances be well conſidered (and how difficult they make it, to cloſe vp euery Stanza with a Period, or ſome ſuch point as the voyce may a while decently pauſe there) I am both perſwaded a worke of of this nature, would neither be haſtily aduentured vpon againe by any other; nor my labour herein be altogether diſeſteemed: who haue bin mindful of all thoſe, & many other particulars, conſiderable in ſuch a buſines.
            And now; that it may be finiſhed with more exactnes, then my owne induſtry is able to adde vnto it.
            (If in any part of theſe Songs the genuine Senſe be not yet well expreſſed,) vpon reaſon giuen, and the l
                  •
               ſt notiſe vouchſafed from any of your RRces, after the view of this; I ſhall be ready to amend it, according to your directions. Or if the Tunes haue not w
                  •
               ll ſuted the nature of them; Thoſe who haue formerly beſtowed their paines (and many other alſo) will be liberall of their beſt Art, more to apt them for the glory of God. For, although this Booke hath already the allowance appointed by Authority, and ſo much the approbation of many other good men, as that they deſire it generally publiſhed (at leaſt) for their priuate deuotions: Yet, knowing theſe vndertakings can neuer be too perfect, I haue purpoſed this Impreſſion for no other end, but to be diſtributed among your RRces, and my other ſpeciall friends. That if there be any ouerſight committed, or ought neceſſary omitted in them; it might be reformed and ſupplied in the next Edition, by warning and inſtruction from ſome of You.
            But, I hope it ſhall not be found very defectiue; And 
in my Epiſtle to make anſwere vnto thoſe many obiections, which vulgar vnderſtandings will be apt to frame againſt this vndertaking; I thinke it alſo needleſſe. Becauſe you, to whom (onely) I at this time preferre it, are all ſufficient enough without information from me, to perceaue how friuolous thoſe doubts and cauils be, which the weakeneſſe of ſuch are apt to inuent.
            And if your RRces be herewith ſatisfied, I value not how the wits of our age ſhall cenſure the Stile I haue vſed; for though many of them are well acquainted with the raptures in Hero and Leander, the expreſſions in Venus and Adonis, and with the elegancies becomming a wanton Sonnet; yet in theſe Lyricks, in the naturall ſtraine of theſe Poems, in the power of theſe voyces, and in the proprieties befitting theſe ſpirituall things, their ſenſuall capacities, are as ignorant as meere Ideots: and had it the Poeticall phraſes they fancy, I ſhould hate it; or were it ſuch as they might praiſe, I would burne it.
            That which I feare will be the greateſt blemiſh to this labour; is, my owne indignity. For I muſt confeſſe, I am the more vnworthy to be imployed in theſe holy things: Seeing I am none of thoſe, who are allowed to intermeddle with the Myſteries of our Chriſtian Sanctuary. Neuertheleſſe, if what I haue performed be allowable in it ſelfe, and by your approbations once conſecrated to a holy Vſe, doubtleſſe (if no mans Will ſtand for a Reaſon) it ſhal be no leſſe auaileable, then if ſome eminent Father of the Church had laboured therein. And whenſoeuer it ſhall be againe vndertaken, this I am certaine of; No man will go about it with a heart more deſirous to be rectified, or more fearefull to offend againſt the M•tie of theſe Scriptures.
            
               And I truſt no man will enuy me the honour of this employment: For, though it be no meane contentment to a Chriſtian (whoſe ſoule is touched with the vnderſtanding of theſe things) to be any way an inſtrument of Gods glory, yet (if we tru
                  •
               ly conſider it) that which I haue aſpired vnto therby, makes me in regard of You, or in reſpect but of the meaneſt of thoſe who are admitted to adminiſter the bleſſed Sacraments, no more then a hewer of wood, or a drawer of water, for the old Sacrifices, was in compariſon of the Leuite, who offered on the golden Alter.
            God knowes with what minde I haue proceeded in this endeuour; and therefore Reward and Acceptation from aboue the Sunne I am certaine of. But the courſe of things below the Sunne, I haue ſo well conſidered, that ſhould I reach the perfection of what I went about, yet all my labour might be no to purpoſe. For as the Preacher ſaith, Eccl. 9.11. I haue ſeene vnder the Sunne, that the race is not to the ſwift, nor the battell to the ſtrong, nor yet bread to the wiſe, nor riches to men of vnderſtanding, nor fauour to men of knowledge; but time and chance commeth to them all.
            
            If my paines ſhall be aiudged vnneceſſary, yet my comfort is, I haue onely ſpent my owne meanes about it, and not vnder the colour or pretence of being imployed, fedde my ſelfe fat on the patrimonies of the Church, without effecting (or ſo much as intending) any thing to her aduantage. And if it be thought profitable; that profit ſhall be gained without hinderance to any other mans preferment. For I neuer intend (though my neceſſities were more importunate) to petition for ſo much as a lay-Prebend in recompence of my labours. Only your benediction, your loues, & your holy Prayers, next vnto Gods glory, is my principall aime. 
And ſeeing neither the manner of my education, nor the courſe of my life, nor the performance of this worke (though I will not iuſtifie my ſelfe) can yet appeare to be ſuch as may diſparage the Church to receiue theſe endeauours at my hands: So much confidence haue I in your Fatherly diſpoſitions towards all well affected perſons, of what outward condition ſoeuer they be, that I am verely perſwaded you would not for a few ouer-ſights, ſleight all my paines; but rather to the encouragement of others (for no affront in theſe ſtudies can diſhearten me) graciouſly vouchſafe in ſome meaſure to accept what I here make humble proffer of vnto your RRces. Which if you pleaſe to doe, I ſhall euer acknowledge my ſelfe obliged for your Chriſtian reſpect, and ſtudy ſuch things, as (perhaps) will make me hereafter more worthy of your eſteeme.
            So, preſuming that if I haue deliuered Reaſon, it ſhal be with your Wiſedomes, euery whit as Authenticke as if I had begun, continued, and ended this Epiſtle with the Prouerbs, or ouer-worne Sentences of olde Authors: I humbly wiſh (according to the cuſtome of my Countrey on this day) a happy NEVV-YEERE to all your RRces, and to the whole Church, in her ſeuerall af
               
                  ••
               ires, a moſt proſperous ſucceſſe.
            
               
                  
                     Ianuary the 1. 1621.
               
            
         
         
            
            A Table of the Songs.
            
               Song.
               
                  Pag.
               
               
                  1 The firſt Song of Moſes.
               
                  1
               
               
                  2 The ſecond Song of Moſes.
               
                  6
               
               
                  3 The Song of Deborah. &c.
               
                  15
               
               
                  4 The Song of Hannah.
               
                  24
               
               
                  5 Nehemiahs Prayer.
               
                  29
               
               
                  6 King Lemuels Song.
               
                  34
               
               
                  7 The firſt Song of Eſay.
               
                  38
               
               
                  8 The ſecond Song of Eſay.
               
                  42
               
               
                  9 The third Song of Eſay.
               
                  45
               
               
                  10 Hezekiahs Prayer.
               
                  50
               
               
                  11 Hezekiahs Thankeſgiuing.
               
                  53
               
               
                  12 The Prayer of Daniel.
               
                  59
               
               
                  13 The Prayer of Ionah.
               
                  6
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  14 The Prayer of Habakkuk.
               
                  6
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE Firſt ſong of MOSES. Exod. 15.
            
               The Argument and the Vſe.
               
                  THis Song (as appeares in the hiſtory of Iſraels deliuerie out of Aegypt) was ſung by Moſes and the people, to the praiſe of God, for their wonderfull preſeruation; and the ſeuerity which he vſed againſt their enemies the Aegiptians, in the red Sea. Wherein, they glorifie the Lord for his Power, his Knowledge in warre, his Maieſtie, his incomparable Dietie, his Sanctitie, his Awfulneſſe, his Fame, his merueilous Acts, and the eternitie of his Kingdome. Moreouer, they here ſet forth the malitious violence of their aduerſaries, before their deſtruction, the ſudaine ruine of thoſe that were deſtroyed: with the terrour, which this ouerthrow ſhould ſtrike into their ſuruiuing enemies. And laſtly, they doe at once prophecie, and pray for, the poſſeſſion of that promiſed Land, in which the holy Temple ſhould be builded.
               This Song was made, and ordained by the holy Ghoſt, to be ſung, as well by euery Chriſtian Congregation, 
as by Moſes, and the Iewes. For, this preſeruation of theirs, was a tipe of our deliuerance from the bondage of our Spirituall Aduerſaries. Pharaoh, which (in the originall tongue) ſignifieth Vengeance, (being Miſtically and anagogically conſidered) was a Tipe, both of Antichriſt, a temporall aduerſarie of the Church; and of our enemie the Deuill, who purſues to ouerthrow vs in our voyage towards heauen, which was alſo in a third ſence figured by the land of Promiſe. Pharaohs hoaſt, ſignifieth all kindes of perſecutions, ſinnes, and temptations. The Red Sea, which we paſſe through, and wherein they are drowned, meaneth our Baptiſme, 1 Cor. 10.2. By Paleſtine, and Canaan, which were names of the promiſed Country, before the Church was remoued thither, (and which the holy-Ghoſt here ſaith, ſhall grieue, and faint, at the newes of our regeneration) are thoſe vnderſtood, who haue falſly and wrongfully vſurped the priuiledges belonging to the faithfull congregation. By the Dukes of Edom, with the Princes of Moab, (who are ſaid to tremble at this deliuerie) all the ſeuerall powers of the kingdome of darkeneſſe are vnderſtood.
               Now euery good Chriſtian, may (at any time) ſing this Hymne to the praiſe of his Redeemer and in memory of the Churches (with his owne particular) deliuerance from the ſlauerie of Sinne and the Deuill. Yea, and not vnfitly vpon ſome temporall deliuerances. But it will be indeed moſt properly vſed, both in publike and priuate, after the adminiſtration of Baptiſme: Seeing the paſſage through the Red Sea, and the deſtruction of the Aegyptians there, was a type of that Sacrament, according to the Interpretation of St. Paul.
               
            
            
               
               The Song.
               Then ſang Moſes and the Children of Jſrael this Song vnto the LORD, and ſpake, ſaying:
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  NOw to the Lord my ſong of praiſe ſhall be, Who hath a moſt renowned triumph woone: This is the Lord that makes me ſtrong, For in the ſea, the horſe and horſe-man he, Hath both at once together ouer-throwne. Hee is my ſafety and my ſong; My God for  whom I will a houſe prepare, My Fathers God whom I on high will reare.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  Well knowes the LORD to war what doth pertaine;
                  And for that reaſon is the LORD his name:
                  He, Pharo'hs Charr'ots, and his armed Traine,
                  Amid the Sea ore'-whelming overcame.
                  He, in the Ruddy-ſea hath drown'd,
                  His Captaines that were moſt renownd:
                  The deeps a couering ouer them hath throwne,
                  And to the bottome ſunke they, like a ſtone.
               
               
                  LORD by thy power thy right hand's famous grow'n,
                  Thy right hand LORD, thy foe deſtroyed hath;
                  Thou by thy glorie haſt thy Foes ore-thrown;
                  And ſtuble-like, conſum'ſt them in thy wrath.
                  Thou by thy noſtrils angry blaſt,
                  The waters backward driuen haſt
                  And (rowl'd on heapes,) the billowes and the floud,
                  In middle of the Sea, congealed ſtood.
               
               
                  I will purſue them (thus the Foe did crye)
                  I will ore'take them and the ſpoile enioy;
                  My pleaſure on them, now fulfill will I;
                  With ſword vnſheath'd my hand ſhall them deſtroy.
                  
                     Then with thy breath thou didſt but blow;
                  And ouer them the Sea did flow:
                  Where they, the mighty waters ſanke into,
                  As we may ſee a peece of lead will doe.
               
               
                  LORD, who like thee among the gods is there?
                  In holineſſe, ſo glorious who may be?
                  Whoſe praiſes, ſo exceeding dreadfull are?
                  Or who in doing wonders i
                        •
                      like thee?
                  Thy right hand thou aloft didſt reare,
                  And in the earth they ſwallow'd were:
                  Whil'ſt thou, didſt by thy mercy, forward lead,
                  This people, whoſe redemption thou haſt paid.
               
               
                  Them, by thy ſtrength, thou haſt been pleaſ'd to bear
                  Vnto a holy dwelling place of thine:
                  The Nations at report thereof ſhall feare,
                  And they ſhall grieue, who dwell in Paleſtine.
                  
                  On Ed
                           •
                        ms Dukes will horror fall;
                  Yea Moabs mightie Princes ſhall
                  With trembling ſhake, when they of this heare tell:
                  And they ſhall faint that doe in Canaan dwell.
               
               
                  By that great power, which in thine Arm
                           •
                        
                      thou haſt,
                  Let feare and terrour vpon them be brought:
                  Stone-quiet make them till thy people paſſe;
                  LORD, till this people pas, which thou haſt bought.
                  Then, to thy hill, let them repaire,
                  LORD plant them there, where thou art heire:
                  Eu'n where thy place of dwelling is prepar'd,
                  That holy place, which thine own hands haue rear'd
               
               
                  The LORD ſhall euer, and for euer raigne,
                  No ending, ſhall his large dominion know;
                  
                     For, when as Pharaoh downe into the Maine
                  Did with his Charr'ots and his Horſemen goe,
                  The LORD the waues did then recall,
                  And brought the ſea vpon them all;
                  Whil'ſt, through the place where deepeſt waters lye,
                  The ſeed of Iſrael paſſed ouer drye.
               
            
         
         
            THE Second Song of MOSES. Deut. 32.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  THis Song is found in the 32. chap. of Deut. and was written by the commandement of God, to be kept in the Arke of Couenant, for a teſtimony againſt the people of Iſrael, when they ſhould forget Gods benefits, and rebell againſt him: As it is there fore-told, and as appeares in the 31. Chap. of the foreſaid booke. Now, the holy Prophet hauing after his Exordium, (wherein hee calleth heauen and earth to witneſſe) made a Narration of the Jewes peruerſeneſſe; Hee prophecieth of three principall things in this Hymne. Firſt, of their future Idolatry with their puniſhment for it. Secondly, of their hatred to Chriſt, with their finall Abiection. 
And laſtly, of the grace which ſhould be vouchſafed vnto the Gentiles.
               
               And in this triple-prophecie, there are alſo many particularities laid downe, as conſiderable. Firſt, how perfect, how wiſe, how faithfull, and how iuſt God is in his owne nature. Secondly, how vnreaſonably peruerſe his people were. Thirdly, how neuertheleſſe, God was louing, and heaped vpon them innumerable benefits (ſome of which are here reckoned vp.) Fourthly, how ingratefully, and deuelliſhly they ſtill requited him. Fiftly, how he puniſhed them with grieuous plagues, but forbare a while their finall ouerthrow, to await their repentance. Sixtly, how reſpectleſſe they ſhould be of all this fauour; and what horrible inhumanities they ſhould be guiltie of. Seauenthly, how mindefull the LORD would be of their obſtinacy; how ſuddainely hee would ruine them; how ſafe they ſhould be, who profeſſed the true God, when his enemies were viſited; how vnable thoſe ſhould be to helpe them in whom they had truſted; how ſeuere, and irrecouerable the iudgement ſhould be; how certaine, in regard the LORD had ſworne it; and how all this ſhould turne to the aduantage of his Elect.
               The Vſe which we are to make of this Song; is to repeate it often, in remembrance of Gods Iuſtice and Mercy: and to put our ſelues in minde, by the Iewes example, how ſeuerely God will puniſh ſuch as continue obſtinate in their ſinnes. For, euery man (if he would conſider it) ſhall finde that he in his owne particular, hath receiued as much fauour from his Redeemer, and as vnthankefully requited it. This Song ought alſo to ſtirre vs vp to a better conſideration of our owne eſtate: and as St. Paul counſelleth; If God hath not ſpared the naturall branches, take wee 
heed leſt he ſpare not vs. Rom. 11.21. Yea, when we ſhall reade or ſing this Hymne (which is left as well for our vſe, as for the Iewes) let vs as St. Paul aduiſeth, in the fore-named Chapter, Meditate the goodneſſe and ſeueritie of God; on them which fell ſeuerity; but towards vs goodneſſe, if we continue in his goodneſſe, and that otherwiſe wee ſhall be cut off.
               
            
            
               The Song.
               And Moſes ſpake in the eares of all the Congregation of Jſrael; the words of this Song, vntill they were ended, &c.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  TO what I ſpeake, an eare O hea-uens lend, And heare oh earth what words I vtter will, Like drops of raine, my ſpeaches ſhall  deſcend, And as the dew, my doctrine ſhall diſtill, As doth the raine that ſhowreth ſmall on tender flow'rs, And as vpon the graſſe doe fall the greater ſhow'rs, For I the LORD'S gre
                     •
                  t name will publiſh now. Vnto our God the glory render you.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  He is that Rock, whoſe Workes perfection are;
                  For all his waies with Iudgement guided be:
                  A God of truth, from all wrong-doing cleare,
                  A truly iuſt, and righteous-One is He.
                  Yet they with ſpots themſelues defilde,
                  Vnlike his Sonnes;
                  And are a race of crooked, wilde,
                  And froward ones.
                  Vnwiſe and fooliſh nation, doſt thou ſo
                  Thy ſelfe vnto the LORD vngratefull ſhow?
               
               
                  Thy Father, and Redeemer, is not he?
                  Hath he not made, and now confirm'd thee faſt?
                  Oh call to minde the dayes that older be,
                  And weigh the yeeres, of many Ages paſt,
                  Thy Father will, (if thou deſire)
                  Informe thee well;
                  Thy elders, (when thou ſhalt enquire,)
                  Can alſo tell
                  How, the moſt high did Adams Sonnes diuide;
                  And ſhares for euery Kindred did prouide.
               
               
                  How, he the Nations Limits did prepare,
                  In number with the Sonnes of Iſrael,
                  
                  The LORD had in his people then his ſhare;
                  And Iacob, for his part allotted fell.
                  Them, in a deſert rude, he found,
                  Poſſeſt of none:
                  A place of terrour, and a ground
                  Vaſt and vnknowne.
                  He taught them there, he led them farre and nigh:
                  And kept them as the apple of his eye.
               
               
                  
                  Eu'n as an Eagle, to prouoke her young,
                  About her neaſt doth houer here and there;
                  Spread forth her wings, to traine her birds along;
                  And ſometime, on her backe, her younglings beare:
                  Right ſo, the LORD conducted them,
                  Himſelfe alone,
                  And for aſſiſtant, there with him
                  Strange God was none:
                  Them, on the High-lands of the earth he ſet,
                  Where they the plenties of the fields might eate.
               
               
                  For them he made the Rocke with hony flowe,
                  They ſuckt out oyle from flints, and they did feed
                  On milke of ſheepe, on butter of the Cowe,
                  Fat lambs and goates, and rammes of Baſhan breed;
                  Of wheat he gaue them for their food,
                  The fulleſt feede,
                  And they did drinke the pureſt blood
                  The grape did bleed.
                  But, here-withall; vnthankefull Iſrael,
                  
                  Soone fat became, and ſpurned with his heele.
               
               
                  They waxed fat, and groſſe, and couer'd o're;
                  And then their God and Maker did forſake:
                  Their Rocke of health regarded was no more,
                  But with ſtrange Gods him Iealous did they make:
                  Yea, they with what was moſt abhor'd,
                  His wrath entiſ
                        •
                     ;
                  To deuils (not vnto the LORD)
                  They ſacrifice:
                  To gods vnknowne, that new inuented were,
                  And ſuch, as their fore-fathers did not feare.
               
               
                  
                  They minded not the Rocke, which them begat,
                  But haue forgot the God that form'd them hath,
                  Which, when the LORD perceiu'd, it made him hate
                  His ſonnes and daughters, mouing him to wrath.
                  I will, to marke their end, (ſaith he)
                  Obſcure my face;
                  For they, vnfaithfull Children be,
                  Of froward race:
                  My wrath, with what was not a God they mou'd;
                  And haue mine anger, with their follies prou'd.
               
               
                  But, by a people, without being (yet)
                  Their Iealous wrath, will I prouoke for this,
                  And by a fooliſh nation make them fret,
                  For in my wrath a fire enflamed is;
                  And to the depth of hell it ſhall
                  Deuouring goe,
                  Earth with her fruits and mountaines all
                  Conſuming to.
                  In heapes, I miſchiefes will vpon them throw,
                  And ſhoot mine arrowes, till I haue no moe.
               
               
                  With hunger parched, and conſum'd with heat,
                  I will enforce them to a bitter end,
                  The teeth of beaſts, vpon them I will ſet,
                  And the invenom'd duſt-fed, Serpent ſend.
                  The ſword without, and terrour grimme
                  Within ſhall ſlay,
                  Young men, and maides, the babe and him
                  Whoſe haire is gray:
                  Yea, I had vow'd to ſpread them here and there,
                  Vntill that men forget they euer were.
               
               
                  
                  But this, the Foe compel'd me to delay,
                  Leſt that their Aduerſaries prouder growne,
                  Should when they ſaw it; thus preſume to ſay:
                  This, not the LORD; but our high-hand hath done·
                  For, they a people are in whom
                  No Counſell is:
                  And neuer will their dulneſſe, come
                  To iudge of this.
                  Oh! would their wiſedome, this might comprehend;
                  And that they would conſider of their end!
               
               
                  How ſhould one make a thouſand runneaway?
                  Or two men put tenne thouſand to the foile;
                  Except their Rocke, had ſold them for a pray;
                  And that the LORD, had cloſ'd them vp the while?
                  For with our God their God compare
                  They neuer may,
                  And if our foes the iudges were,
                  Thus would they ſay:
                  But, they haue Vines of thoſe that Sodome yeelds,
                  And ſuch as grow within Gomorrha fields.
               
               
                  The Grapes are gall (that grow vpon their vine)
                  Their Cluſters, are extreamely bitter all,
                  Yea, made of Dragons venome is their wine;
                  And of the cruell Aſpes infectious gall.
                  And may I this forget to beare
                  In minde with me?
                  Or ſhall it not be ſealed where
                  My treaſures be?
                  Yes, mine is vengeance, and I will repay:
                  Their feet ſhall ſlide at the appointed day.
               
               
                  
                  Their time of ruine, neare at hand is come,
                  Thoſe things, that muſt befall them, haſte will make:
                  For ſure, the LORD ſhall giue his people doome,
                  And on his Seruants will compaſſion take.
                  Yea, when he ſees, their ſtrength is all
                  Bereft and gone;
                  And they ſhut vp in priſon, ſhall
                  Be left alone:
                  Where are their Gods, become (then will he ſay)
                  Their Rocke on whom they did affiance lay?
               
               
                  Who eate the fatteſt of their ſacrifice?
                  Who, of their drinke oblations, dranke the wine?
                  Let thoſe vnto their ſuccour now ariſe,
                  And vnder their protection them enſhrine.
                  Oh! therefore now, conſider this,
                  That I am Hee;
                  That I am Hee, and that there is
                  No God with mee.
                  I kill, and make aliue, I wound, I cure:
                  And there is none, can from my hand aſſure.
               
               
                  For, vp to heauen I my hand doe reare,
                  And (as I liue for euer) this I ſay,
                  If once I whet my ſword, that ſparkles cleare,
                  And ſhall my hand to acting vengeance lay;
                  I will not ceaſe, till I my foes,
                  With vengeance quite,
                  Nor till I haue repaid all thoſe
                  That beare me ſpite.
                  And in the bloud, which I ſhall make to flow,
                  I'le ſteepe mine arrowes, till they drunken grow.
               
               
                  
                  My ſword ſhall feed on fleſh and bloud of thoſe,
                  That either ſhall be ſlaine, or kept in thrall,
                  When I beginne to quit me of my foes.
                  Then, with his people Ioy you kindreds all;
                  For he their bloud (that ſerue him) will
                  With bloud purſue;
                  And all his foes repayeth ſtill
                  With vengeance due.
                  But, to his land will mercy ſhewing be,
                  And thoſe that are his people pitties He.
               
            
         
         
            THE Song of Deborah and Barak. Iudges 5.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  IN the booke of Iudges, Chapter 4. you may read, that the ouerthrow giuen to Siſera (by Deborah and Barak) occaſioned this Song of deliuerance; and therefore, referring you thither to be informed concerning the particular circumſtances; I will here, ſhew you the generall ſcope of this Hymne, to be a Thankeſgiuing, for a great ouerthrow, gotten on their enemies. Wherein many things are remarkable. Firſt, in their Introduction, 
attributing the glory to God, (and inciting all Potentates of the world to conſider it) they ſet forth with what Maieſtie the LORD came to their deliuerance. Secondly, the excellency of the benefit receiued, is illuſtrated, by the great deſolation they were formerly in▪ the little meanes they had to protect themſelues, and the happie tranquillity which they ſhould afterward enioy. Thirdly, they ſhew the cauſe of their former diſtreſſe, to haue beene Apoſtacie from God. Fourthly, they memorize thoſe, who were forward in that iuſt warre, and vpbraid ſuch as drew backe in ſo good a cauſe. Fiftly, they declare what powerfull enemies they had; and what miraculous aſſiſtance God vouchſafed. Sixtly, a curſe is denounced againſt ſuch as refuſe to fight the LORDS battailes; and She is bleſſed who was the happy Inſtrument of their deliuery. Laſtly, here is a deſcription of the manner of Siſerah's death, an Ironicall expreſſion of the Aduerſaries vaine hope of preuailing, and a propheticall imprecation, that all Gods enemies may ſo periſh, to the aduancement of his Church.
               Jt is obſerued by the Auncients; that there is no Song mentioned in the Old or New Teſtament, but it was compoſed vpon ſome extraordinary benefit or deliuerance, which the Church receiued: and that in all the ſongs of the old Teſtament (eſpecially) there is (beſide the plaine literall ſence) ſome Miſtery of the Chriſtian Religion prophetically aymed at, couertly or openly, vnder the paſſages thereof. And therefore, this Song is not onely to be ſung of vs Chriſtians, to glorifie God in memorizing his protecting our mother the Church, among the Iewiſh Nation, in her Infancie: But, wee are to vſe it alſo, as a thanks-giuing for euery particular deliuerance, which is vouchſafed to the viſible Church 
                  
in theſe times. As in memoriall of our miraculous preſeruation, in the yeare 1588. when our Princely Deborah (the Queene of this kingdome) gaue an ouerthrow to the Spaniſh Siſera: For then, the powers of heauen apparantly fought againſt him (as it is ſaid in this Song.) The Sea, more terrible then their brooke Kiſhon, ſwept moſt of them away: And euen then (as the mother of the Cananitiſh commander, is here ſcoffed at by Deborah, for her vaine expectation: So, the whore of Babilon (who was mother to that other Siſera) in vaine longed to behold him returne a conquerour: till being ridiculouſly confident of the ſpoile; ſhe was by the true Church laughed to ſcorne for her preſumption. And then alſo; this propheticall imprecacation (which) we finde in the Epilogue of this Song) was partly fulfilled. Thine enemies oh LORD ſhall periſh; but they that loue thee ſhall be as the Sunne when he riſeth in his might. For, as the firſt Siſera was ſhamefully ruined by a woman: ſo, God gaue that laſt Siſera (with his ſeeming inuincible forces) into the hand of a woman, whoſe honour (with his ſhame) was thereby ſpread through as great a part of the world, as the Sunne ſhineth ouer at mid-day.
               This Song (as J ſaid before) would properly be ſung alſo vpon many other deliuerances which the Church hath or may haue. As for that of the powder-Treaſon and ſuch like. For were it not that J ſhould be ouerlarge in my Prologue to this Song, J could make it very probable, how the holy Ghoſt, was ſo farre from making this Hymne to fit the Iewes after that victory onely; as that the names therein mentioned, doe well enough expreſſe any that are, or ſhall be Inſtruments againſt the peace of Gods Church, or for the protection thereof.
            
            
               
               The Song.
               Then ſang Deborah, and Barak the ſonne of Abinoam on that day▪ ſaying:
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  SIng praiſes to the Lord That Iſre'l to acquite, The people of their owne ac-cord Went forth vnto the fight: You Kings giue eare, you Princes heare, I to the Lord will raiſe  My voyce aloud, and ſing to God The Lord of Iſr'ell prayſe.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  LORD, when thou wentſt from Seir,
                  
                  When thou lef'ſt Edom field;
                  Earth ſhooke, and heauen dropped there,
                  The Clouds did water yeeld,
                  LORD, at thy ſight a trembling fright,
                  Vpon the Mountaines fell:
                  And at thy looke, Mount Sinai ſhooke,
                  LORD God of Jſrael.
                  
               
               
                  Erewhile in Shamghar's dayes,
                  Old Anah's valiant ſonne,
                  And late in Jaels time, the wayes
                  Frequented were of none;
                  The paſſengers were wanderers
                  In crooked pathes vnknowne;
                  And none durſt dwell, through Jſrael
                  
                  But in a walled towne.
               
               
                  Vntill I Deborah 'roſe.
                  I roſe a mother here
                  In Jſr'el, when new Gods they choſe
                  That fil'd their gates with warre.
                  
                     And they had there nor ſhield nor ſpeare,
                  In their poſſeſſion then;
                  To arme for fight, one Iſraelite,
                  'Mong forty thouſand men.
               
               
                  My hearts affection, ſet
                  On Iſraels Leaders is;
                  Who with the willing people met,
                  Oh praiſe the LORD for this.
                  Sing all of yee, who vſed be,
                  To ride on Aſſes gray:
                  All you that yet in Middin ſi
                        •
                     ,
                  Or trauaile by the way.
               
               
                  Where they their water drew,
                  Thoſe places being cleare
                  From noyſe of Archers; Let them ſhew
                  The LORD's vprightnes there.
                  Through Jſrael all, the hamlets ſhall
                  His righteouſneſſe record:
                  And downe vnto the gates ſhall goe,
                  The people of the LORD.
               
               
                  Riſe Deborah, ariſe,
                  Riſe, riſe, and ſing a ſong,
                  
                     Abinoams ſonne, oh Barak riſe;
                  Thy Captiues lead along.
                  By him made thrall, their Princes all,
                  To the Suruiuer be,
                  To triumph on the mightie one;
                  The LORD vouchſafed me.
               
               
                  A root from Ephraim,
                  
                  Gainſt Amaleck aroſe,
                  
                     And of the people next to him,
                  The Beniamites were thoſe.
                  From Machir, where good leaders are,
                  Came well experienc't men:
                  And they came downe from Zabulon
                  
                  That handle well the penne.
               
               
                  With Deborah did goe
                  The Lords of Iſachar,
                  
                  Eu'n Iſachar; and Barak to,
                  Was one among them there;
                  Who forth was ſent, and downe he went,
                  On foote the lower way.
                  In Ruben there, diuiſions were,
                  Great thoughts of heart had they.
               
               
                  The bleating flockes to heare
                  Oh wherefore didſt thou ſtay?
                  In Ruben there diuiſions were,
                  Great thoughts of heart had they.
                  And why did they of Gilead ſtay,
                  On Iordan's other ſide?
                  Or what was than, the reaſon Dan,
                  
                  Did in his Tents abide?
               
               
                  Among his harbours nigh
                  The ſea, there Aſher lay;
                  But Zabulon, nor Nepthali.
                  
                  Did keepe themſelues away:
                  Theſe people are, who feareleſſe dare
                  Their liues to death expoſe;
                  And would not yeeld the hilly-field,
                  Yet Kings did them oppoſe.
               
               
                  
                  The Cananitiſh Kings,
                  At Tana'ch fought that day,
                  Cloſe by Megiddoes water-ſprings;
                  Yet bore no prize away.
                  The Starres from out the heauens fought,
                  Gainſt Siſera they ſtroue:
                  They in their courſe, and ſome with force,
                  Away brocke Kiſhon droue;
               
               
                  Old Kiſhon, that was long
                  A famous Torrent knowne.
                  Oh thou my ſoule, oh thou the ſtrong
                  Haſt brauely trodden downe!
                  Their horſes by their prauncing high,
                  Their broken hoofes did wound;
                  Thoſe of the ſtrong, that kickt and flung,
                  And fiercely beat the ground.
               
               
                  A curſe on Meroz lay,
                  Curſt let her dwellers be;
                  The Angell of the LORD, doth ſay,
                  Extreamely curſe it yee.
                  The cauſe of this accurſing is,
                  They came not to the fight,
                  To helpe the LORD, to help the LORD,
                  Againſt the men of might.
               
               
                  But Iael, Hebers Spouſe,
                  The Kenite, bleſt be ſhe,
                  More then all women more then thoſe,
                  That vſe in Tents to be.
                  To him doth ſhe, giue milke when he
                  Doth but for water wiſh:
                  
                     She butterfets, and forth it ſets
                  Vpon a Lordly diſh.
               
               
                  Her left hand reacht a Nayle,
                  A workmans hammer ſtreight
                  Her right hand takes, and therewithall,
                  She Siſera doth ſmite.
                  His head ſhe tooke, when ſhe had ſtrooke
                  His pierced temples through;
                  He fell withall, and in the fall,
                  Hee at her feete did bow▪
                  
               
               
                  He at her feete did bow,
                  Whom falling life forſooke;
                  And Siſera his mother now,
                  Doth from her window looke.
                  Thus cries ſhe at the lattice grate,
                  Why ſtaies his Charr'ot ſo,
                  Returning home? oh wherefore come,
                  His Charr'ot wheeles ſo ſlowe?
               
               
                  There-with her Ladies wiſe,
                  To her an anſwere gaue;
                  Yea, to her ſelfe, her ſelfe replies,
                  Sure ſped, ſaith ſhe, they haue.
                  And all this while, they part the ſpoile;
                  A damzell one or twaie
                  Each homeward beares, and Siſera ſhares,
                  A particolour'd pray.
               
               
                  A pray diſcolour'd trimme,
                  And wrought with paintings rare:
                  Wrought through; and for the necke of him
                  That taketh ſpoiles to weare.
                  
                     So LORD, ſtill ſo, thy foes ore'throw,
                  But who in thee delight,
                  Oh let them be, Sunne-like, when he
                  Aſcendeth in his might.
               
            
         
         
            THE Song of HANNAH. 1 Samuel 2.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  
                     HAnnah, the wife of Elkanah, being barren, and therefore vpbraided, and vexed by Peninnah her Husbands other wife; prayeth vnto the LORD for a Sonne. And, hauing obtained him (as you may read in 1 Sam. and the ſecond chapter) praiſeth God in this Song for being ſo gratious vnto her. And therein diuers things are obſeruable. Firſt, ſhe reioyceth in God her Sauiour, for ſtrengthning her, and giuing her the vpper hand of her Aduerſary. Secondly, ſhe declareth the holineſſe, the ſingularitie, and the vnequal'd power of God; at a reaſon, why her enemie ſhould be no more ſo arrogant. Thirdly, ſhe proceeds to ſhew, how vaine her aduerſaries preſumption muſt needs be, by further demonſtrating her Redeemers knowledge, his ſtrength 
with the certaintie of his decrees: and by declaring in ſome particulars, the workes of his Mercy and Juſtice. Fourthly, ſhe foretelleth the confuſion of ſinners; the weakeneſſe of humane 
                     •
                  ſſi
                     •
                  tance; the deſtruction of thoſe that reſiſt God; and the glorious exaltation of him, whoſe aduancement the LORD hath decreed.
               The Song euery good Chriſtian may ſing in a literall ſence, with reſpect to his owne afflictions, and the goodneſſe of God, whenſoeuer by reaſon of his pouerty, or any oppreſſion, the vncharitable, proud, and malitious worldling, ſhall inſult ouer him: If ſo be he finde, himſelfe either outwardly deliuered, or inwardly comforted by the ſpirit of God. But th
                     •
                   
                  Hymne, doth moſt properly appertaine to the whole Congregation; to be ſung in the perſon of the Church. And we ſhall much iniure the meaning of the holy-ſpirit, if we imagine that in this Song of the holy Propheteſſe, there is no other cauſe of it conſiderable, then the vnkindneſſe betweene her and Peninnah; and the Joy ſhe receiued by the birth of Samuel. We muſt then know that Annah (which ſignifieth Grace, or Gracious) was a type of the Church ef Chriſt: and that Peninnah (which is interpreted Forſaken, or Deſpiſed) was a figure of the Iewiſh Synagogue: Seeing without this knowledge, we looſe the principall conſolations which the Song affordeth vs. For, when Annah had obtained her ſonne of God, and entred into conſideration of thoſe particulars which had befallen her; She did, by contemplating them, not onely foreſee what other things ſhould come to paſſe concerning her Sonne; the Commonwealth of the Iewes; and her owne Family: but being further enlightned, prophecied alſo of the Kingdome of Chriſt.
               
               By contemplating how Peninnah had triumphed 
on her barrenneſſe, ſhe foreſaw h
                     •
                  w the Sinagogue of the Iewes ſhould boaſt her ſelfe againſt the Gentiles in their firſt conuerſion. By her comfort in the birth of Samuel; ſhe apprehended the Churches Ioy in the natiuitie of Chriſt. By her fruitfulneſſe, and the weakeneſſe of Peninnah; ſhee was informed how the ſpirituall Ofspring of the Church ſhould be multiplied, and the children of the Synagogue decreaſe. Yea, raiſing her meditations aboue the firſt and ſecond obiects; ſhe prophetically perſonates the Spouſe of Chriſt, and deliuers a moſt excellent confeſſion of her Redeemer: Jn whom all theſe things are come to paſſe, as appeared at, and ſince his manifeſtation. For, the bleſſed Virgin Mary in her Magnificat, acknowledgeth many particular ſayings of this Song, to be euen then fulfilled.
               Moreouer, this Hymne, may be ſung in our reformed Churches, to comfort vs againſt the pride and arrogancie of the Romiſh Strumpet. For, though ſhee, Peninnah-like, lately vaunted the multitude of her iſſue, and vpbraided the true Church, as Mother, (onely) of a few poore, and obſcure Children: Thanks be to God, ſhe that had ſo many; is now growne feebler. And our holy Mother, hath had ſeauen Children, (euen many) that are aduanced to be Kings▪ and to ſit vpon the moſt eminent thrones of glory in the earth, according to this Prophecy.
               
            
            
               
               The Song.
               And Hannah prayed, and ſaid.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  NOw in the Lord my heart doth pleaſure take, My horne is in the Lord aduanced high, Vnto my foes an anſwere will I make, Be-cauſe in thy ſaluation ioy had I. Like thee there is not any holy one, For other Lord without  thee, there is none.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  Nor with our God may any God compare;
                  So proudly vaunt not then as heretofore;
                  But let your tongues hereafter now forbeare;
                  From all preſumptuous words for euermore.
                  For why the Lord's a God, that each thing knowes
                  And all that is intended doth diſpoſe.
               
               
                  Their bow is broken now who were ſo ſtout;
                  Girt round with vigor, thoſe who ſtumbled are:
                  The full, themſelues for bread haue hyred out,
                  Which they haue left to doe, that hungry were▪
                  
                  The barren now, doth ſeauen children owne;
                  And ſhe that had ſo many, weake is growne.
               
               
                  The LORD doth ſlay, and he reuiues the ſlaine;
                  He to the graue doth bring, and backe he beares:
                  The LORD makes poore, and rich he makes againe:
                  He throweth downe, and vp on high he reares.
                  He from the duſt, and from the dunghill brings
                  The begger, and the poore, to ſit with Kings.
               
               
                  He reares them, to inherit glories throne,
                  Becauſe the LORD'S the earth's ſupporters be;
                  He hath the world erected thereupon;
                  The footing of his Saints preſerueth He.
                  And dumbe in darkeneſſe ſinners ſhall remaine;
                  For, in their ſtrength, are all men ſtrong in vaine.
               
               
                  
                  The LORD, will to deſtruction bring them all,
                  Eu'n eu'ry one, that ſhall with him contend,
                  The LORD from heauen thunder on them ſhall,
                  And iudge the world vnto the fartheſt end.
                  He ſhall his King with ſtrength enough ſupply,
                  And raiſe the power of his Annointed high.
               
            
         
         
            THE Prayer of NEHEMIAH. Nehem. 1.5.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  
                     NEhemiah, being in Babilon; and hauing receiued intelligence by one of his brethren that came from Iudea, of the miſerable eſtate wherein Ieruſalem, and the houſe of God then ſtood. The Text ſaith, he wept at the re
                     •
                  ation; faſted, and made this prayer vnto God, in behalfe of the Iſraelites. In which Prayer, (firſt acknowledging the Maieſtie, Juſtice, and mercy of God) he humbly deſireth his importunate ſuit may haue fauourable audience: And the ſooner to obtaine it, (he renouncing all worthineſſe in his owne or his peoples merits) confeſſeth the hainouſneſſe both of his, and their offences. Secondly, he vrgeth Gods promiſed mercies, 
vpon repentance. Thirdly, he is earneſt, in regard they are his owne elected people, for whom he prayes; and thereupon renewes againe his petition: The effect whereof is, that God would be pleaſed to proſper him in the affaires he had in hand, and graunt him fauour in the Kings ſight, whom (as by the ſequell in the ſtory it appeared) he then intended to ſolicite; touching the re-edifying of the Cittie and houſe of God.
               This Prayer, may be (in a literall ſence) ſaid, or ſung by the Church of God, when in any affaire of hers, ſhe needeth the fauour of ſome temporall Prince. Or by any member of hers (in her perſon) vpon a publike occaſion. Yea, for his particular neceſſitie and in his owne perſon alſo he may vſe it when he would deſire the goodwill of man, in ſuch things as nearely concerne him and his family. And me thinkes it ſhould not onely beget in vs a great hope of good-ſpeed, when we come to God with thoſe words whereunto he hath giuen 
                     〈◊〉
                   proſperous ſucceſſe, (as he did to theſe) but we may be the more confident alſo in our prayers; when we vſe thoſe formes of ſpeech, which the holy-spirit hath inuented. Moreouer, this Prayer, leauing out the two laſt lines, will ſerue for a confeſſion of our ſinnes, before any ſuit which we would preſent vnto the Maieſtie of God. Or, if we will but alter according to our ſeuerall neceſſities; it will ſerue for a Hymne in many other occaſions. As for example, if thou wouldeſt vſe it before thou and thy family beginne their labour, in ſtead of the laſt Diſticke ſing thus:

                     And be thou pleaſ'd (Oh LOLD) to bleſſe
                     Our labours, with a good ſucceſſe.
                  
If thou, with others haſt any iourney in hand, change it thus:

                     And LORD, all dangers keepe vs from,
                     
                        Both going forth, and comming home.
                  
If thou be a commander and leading thy company to the battell; alter it thus:

                     And be thou pleaſed in the fight;
                     To make vs victors, by thy might.
                  
If it be in a time of great famine, turne it thus:

                     And LORD, vouchſafe thou in this need;
                     Our ſoul
                           •
                        s and bodi
                           •
                        s both to feed.
                  
If thou be a Diuine, or Schoolemaſter, imployed abo
                     •
                  t the inſtruction of others, and wouldeſt beginne thy exerciſes with this Hymne, end it thus:

                     And grant that we LORD, in thy feare;
                     M
                           •
                        y to our profit, ſpeake and heare.
                  
And thus, you may due vpon many other occaſions, according as your nec
                     •
                  ſſities, and deuotion ſhall moue you. But leſt the ignorant may thinke, the Title of the Sons of Jſrael will be improperly applied to vs Chriſtians: Or, leſt they may imagine, that the mentioning of Gods threatning a diſperſion, with his promiſe of gathering his people againe vnto his houſe, will be impertinent to vs, or our occaſions. For the firſt, let them read Saint Paul, and he will tell them who are true Iewes and Iſraelites. Romans 2.28. and Romans 9.6.7.8. And as for the laſt ſuppoſition. They muſt know, that euery Childe of God, may be (in a ſpirituall ſence) ſaid to be disperſed among the heathen, whenſoeuer by his ſinnes, he is driuen from the preſence of God, and diſtracted by the ſeuerall vanities of the world. And as often as he returnes by repentance, with hearty prayer, he is brought backe from his wand
                     •
                  ings to be more ſetled in the Church, which is the place God hath choſen for his Name. And ſo no part of this Hymne will ſeeme impertinent to vs.
            
            
               
               The Song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  LOrd God of heauen, thou that art, The mighty God, and full of fear
                     •
                  , Who neuer promiſe-breaker wert, But euer ſhewing mercy where, They doe affection beare to thee, And of thy lawes obſeruers be.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  Giue eare, and lift thine eyes I pray,
                  That heard thy ſeruants ſuit may be,
                  Made in thy preſence night and day;
                  For Iſraels ſeed, that ſerueth thee:
                  For Iſraels ſeed; who (I confeſſe)
                  Againſt thee grieuouſly tranſgreſſe.
               
               
                  I, and my fathers houſe did ſinne,
                  Againſt thy will haue we miſdone;
                  Our dealing hath corrupted bin,
                  Law, or decree obſeru'd we none:
                  Not thoſe Commands, which to keepe faſt
                  Thou charg'd thy ſeruant Moſes haſt.
               
               
                  Oh! yet remember I thee pray,
                  Theſe words which thou didſt heretofore
                  Vnto thy ſeruant Moſes ſay,
                  If ere (ſaidſt thou) they vexe me more,
                  I will diſperſe them here and there
                  Among the nations euery where.
               
               
                  But if to me they ſhall conuert,
                  To doe thoſe things my lawes containe,
                  Though ſpread to heauen's extreameſt part
                        •
                     
                  
                  I would collect them thence againe.
                  And bring them there to make repoſe
                  Whereas to place my name I choſe.
               
               
                  Now theſe thy people are of right,
                  The ſeruants who to thee belong,
                  Whom thou haſt purchaſt by thy might
                  And by thine Arme, exceeding ſtrong.
                  O let thine eare LORD I thee pray
                  Attentiue be to what I ſay.
               
               
                  
                  The prayer of thy ſeruant heare,
                  Oh heare thy ſeruants when they pray,
                  (Who haue a will thy name to feare.)
                  Thy ſeruant proſper thou to day:
                  And be thou pleaſ'd to grant that he
                  In this mans ſight may fauour'd be.
               
            
         
         
            THE Song of King LEMVEL. Prou. 31.10.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  WEe finde this Hymne annexed to the Prou
                        •
                     rbs of Solomon, and reckoned as part of their 31. Chapter. which hath this title. The words of King Lemuel, &c. (who as ſome write was Solomon. The Song is Alphabetically in the originall, diuided into St
                        •
                     nz
                        •
                     's, anſwerable to the number, and order of the He
                     ••
                  ew letters and comprehendeth an Admirable deſc
                     •
                  ipt
                     •
                  on of a good 
                     〈◊〉
                  . In which are three principa
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  h
                     •
                  ngs conſiderable. Firſt, what aduantage her 
                     〈◊〉
                   receiue
                     •
                  h by her: Secondly, what commend
                     •••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhe hath 
                     •
                  n her ſelfe: and thirdly, what profit th
                     •
                  y bring vnto her alſo at the laſt. The chiefe 
benefits her husband enioyes by her are theſe: Firſt, he is free from diſtruſt and vnquietneſſe of minde: Secondly, he ſhall not need to liue by vniuſt dealings: Thirdly, he ſhall be enriched in his eſtate: and fourthly, to place of honour and eſteeme in the common-wealth. That which is commendable in her, is two-fold: outward induſtrie of the body; and inward vertue of the minde. Her bodily induſtry, is ſet forth in diuers particular actions, tending to the prouiding for, & diſpoſing of her houſhold affaires: in which, her cheerefulneſſe, her prouidence, her courage, and her vnweariedneſſe, is alſo applauded. Her inward vertues are, continuall loue to her husband; liberality and charity to the poore: the gouernement of her tongue, and heedfulneſſe of thoſe courſes her houſhold takes. The commodities ſhe her ſelfe receiueth hereby are theſe; her husband is confident in her; ſhe ſhall haue comfort in her labours; her poſterity ſhall bleſſe her; her husband ſhall praiſe her aboue other women; ſhe ſhall be honoured of the beſt whilſt ſhe liues; and ſhall haue ioy after her death.
               This is the Analiſis, and in my opinion it is an excellent Marriage-Song, fit alwaies to be ſung after the ſolemnizing of thoſe rites. And (perhaps) if men would often vſe it in their families, in ſtead of their wanton Sonnets, and drunken Catches, the Muſicke thereof would make leſſe diſcord there; and inſtruct ſome of their wiues, to become greater bleſſings vnto them, then formerly they haue beene.
            
            
               
               The Song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  WHo findes a woman good and wiſe, A Iemme more worth then pearles hath got, Her husbands heart on her relies, To liue by ſpoiles he needeth not.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  His comfort all his life is ſhe,
                  But, euill none delights to doe,
                  For wooll and flaxe, her ſearches be,
                  And cheerefull hands ſhe puts thereto.
               
               
                  
                  The Merchant-ſhip reſembling right,
                  She from a farre, her food doth fet.
                  Er'e day ſhe wakes, that ſet ſhe might
                  Her maides a taske; her houſhold meat.
               
               
                  A field ſhe vieweth, which ſhe buyes:
                  Her hand doth plant a vineyard there.
                  Her Loines with courage vp ſhe ties,
                  Her Armes with vigour ſtrengthned are.
               
               
                  If good her huſwifery ſhe feele,
                  By night, her Candle goes not out.
                  She puts her fingers to the wheele,
                  Her hand the ſpindle twirles about.
               
               
                  To ſuch as poore, and needy are,
                  Her hand (yea both) extendeth ſhe,
                  The winter, none of hers doth feare,
                  For double cloath'd her houſhold be.
               
               
                  She makes her Mantles wrought by hand,
                  And ſilke and purple cloathing gets:
                  Among the Rulers of the land,
                  Knowne in the gate, her husband ſits.
               
               
                  For ſale, fine linnin weaueth ſhe:
                  And girdles to the Merchant ſends.
                  Her cloathings, ſtrength and honour be:
                  And Ioy, her latter-time attends.
               
               
                  She ſpeakes with wiſedome, when ſhe talkes,
                  The law of grace her tongue hath learn'd.
                  She heeds the way her houſhold walkes:
                  And feedeth not on bread vn-earn'd.
               
               
                  
                  Her Children riſe, and bleſt her call,
                  Her husband thus applaudeth her,
                  Oh thou haſt farre ſurpaſt them all;
                  Though many daughters thriuing are!
               
               
                  Deceitfull fauour, quicklie weares,
                  And beautie ſuddenly decaies:
                  But if the LORD ſhe truely feares,
                  That woman well deſerueth praiſe.
               
               
                  The fruit her handy-works obtaine,
                  Without repining grant her that:
                  And giue her what her labours gaine,
                  To doe her honour in the gate.
               
            
         
         
            THE Firſt Song of ESAY. Eſay 5.
            
               The Argument and the Vſe.
               
                  THis Song, you ſhall finde in the fift of Eſay: and the Prophet here, vnder the ſimilitude of a Vineyard, excellently deſcribes the eſtate of Iuda and Ieruſalem; with what God had done 
for them. And therein complaineth againſt his vineyard, becauſe, after the paines beſtowed in fencing and manuring therof (inſtead of the ſweet fruit he expected) it neuertheleſſe brought forth ſower grapes. Next, he ſummoneth their owne conſciences, (whom he had couertly vpbraided) to be iudges of his great loue and their vnprofitableneſſe. Thirdly, he foretels, how he intends to deale with his Vineyard. And laſtly, he directly declareth whom he meanes by the Parable.
               According to this propheticall Hymne, euen ſo hath it fallen out with the Nation of the Iewes, whether you vnderſtand it of them temporally, or ſpiritually. And therefore we are to make a two-fold vſe of this Ode. Firſt, to memorize thereby the mercy, iuſtice, and foreknowledge of God. His Mercy, in ſhewing what he hath done for his people. His iuſtice, in declaring how ſeuere he is, euen to his owne vineyard if it continue vnfruitfull in good works, anſwerable to his husbandry. His foreknowledge, in relating how thoſe things which we know are come to paſſe on the Iewes, were long before reuealed by him, vnto his Prophets. The ſecond vſe, is by ſinging and meditating thereon, to warne our ſelues to conſider what benefits we haue receiued at Gods hands, and to ſtirre vs vp to be fruitfull in ſpirituall graces and thankeſgiuings, leſt he take away his bleſſings, and leaue vs vnguarded to be ſpoiled, and laid waſt by our Aduerſaries, as he did the Iewes. For; by this Vineyard the holy Ghoſt did not onely meane Iuda and Ieruſalem, but euery congregation of Chriſtians alſo, who bearing the face of a viſible Church, haue heretofore abuſed or ſhall hereafter neglect the grace of God. As we may aſſure our ſelues by the deſtruction of Antioch, Laodicea, Epheſus, and many other particular Churches, who hauing (after God 
had a long time manured them (by the husbandry of his Apoſtles, and other miniſters) in ſtead of the ſweet Cluſters of pure doctrine and good life, brought forth the ſower grapes of hereſies and vncleanneſſe: Were depriued of their defence, and had both the dewes of Gods ſpirit, and the ſhowers of his word, with-held from them, till they brought forth nothing but thornes and bryars, the fruits of their owne naturall corruption.
            
            
               The Song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  A Song of him whom I loue beſt, And of his vineyard ſing I will. A vineyard once my loue poſſeſt, Well ſeated on a fruitfull  hill, He kept i
                     •
                   cloſe immured ſtill, The earth from ſtones he did refine. An
                     •
                   ſet it with the choi-ſeſt vine.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  He in the mid'ſt a Fort did reare,
                  A Wine-preſſe therein alſo wrought:
                  But, when he look't i
                        •
                      grapes ſhould beare,
                  Thoſe grapes were wilde one, that it brought.
                  
                     Ieruſalem come ſpeake thy thought,
                  And you of Iudah, Iudges be,
                  Betwixt my vineyard here and me:
               
               
                  Vnto my Vineyard what could more
                  Performed be, then I haue done?
                  Yet looking it ſhould grapes haue bore
                  Saue wilde ones, it afforded none.
                  But goe to, (let that now alone)
                  I am reſolu'd to ſhew you to,
                  What with my Vineyard I will doe▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  The hedge I will remoue from thence,
                  That what ſo will deuoure it may,
                  I will breake downe the walled fence,
                  And through it make a trodden way.
                  Yea, all of it, I waſte will lay.
                  None ſhall to digge, or dreſſe it care
                  But thornes, and bryars it ſhall beare.
               
               
                  The Clouds I alſo will compell,
                  That there no raine deſcend for this:
                  For loe, the houſe o
                        •
                      
                     Iſrael
                  
                  The LORD of Armies vineyard is;
                  And Iudah is that plant of his;
                  That pleaſant one, who forth hath brought,
                  Oppreſſion, when he iudgement ſought.
                  He Iuſtice ſought but found therein,
                  In ſtead thereof a crying ſinne.
               
            
         
         
            THE Second Song of ESAY. Eſay 12.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  THe Prophet Eſay being extraordinarily enlightned with foreſight of the miſteries of our Redemption, and hauing in the eleauenth Chapter of this Prophecie, foretold many things concerning the incarnation of Chriſt, 
                  
and the excellency of his Kingdome; doth in his next Chapter, fore-ſhew the Church, what Song ſhe ſhall ſing in that day. And it is this, which here followeth. Wherein are theſe particular actions of the Church obſeruable. Firſt, that ſhe doth perceiue, and to the praiſe of her Redeemer acknowledge, that although God had formerly afflicted her for ſinnes; yet now, he turnes his wrath into conſolation. Secondly, that without feare ſhe vnderſtands, (and confeſſeth to others) how God is aſſuredly become her ſtrength and ſaluation. Thirdly, ſhe exhorteth all to come and draw the ſpirituall waters of life from their owne Fountaines. Laſtly, vpon conſideration of Chriſts extraordinary workes and miracles, ſhe earneſtly ſtirreth vp her ſelfe, and others ioyfully to ſing the praiſes of him, her Lord and Sauiour.
               This Song, euery Childe of God ought often to r
                     •
                  
                  peate, to the honour of Ieſus Chriſt, for his gratious redemption of mankinde. And ſeeing the holy Prophet (foreknowing the good cauſe ſhe ſhould haue to make vſe thereof) hath prophecied that this ſhould be the Churches Hymne, after the manifeſtation of our Sauiour in the fleſh: Doubtleſſe, it would be very properly vſed vpon thoſe dayes, which we ſolemnize in memory of our Sauiours Natiuitie, and Epiphany: and vpon all ſuch other occaſions as the Congregation may haue, to giue thankes for that great worke of our Redemption.
            
            
               The Song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  LOrd I will ſing to thee, For angry  though thou waſt, Yet thou with-drewſt thy wrath from me, And ſent me comfort haſt.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  Loe, God's my health; on whom,
                  I feareleſſe▪ truſt will 
                        •
                     ay,
                  For oh the LORD, the LORD's become
                  My ſtrength, my Song, my ſtay.
               
               
                  And you, with Ioy (for this)
                  Shall water fetch away,
                  Out of thoſe wels, where ſafetie is:
                  And thus, then ſhall you ſay.
               
               
                  Oh ſing vnto the LORD,
                  His Name and works proclaime▪
                  
                  Vnto the people beare record,
                  That glorious is his Name.
               
               
                  Vnto the LORD oh ſing:
                  For, wonders he hath done,
                  Yea, many a renowned thing,
                  Which through the earth is knowne.
               
               
                  
                  Sing forth, aloud all yee,
                  That doe in Sion dwell:
                  For loe, thy holy-One in thee,
                  Is great, oh Iſrael.
                  
               
            
         
         
            THE Third Song of ESAY. Eſay 26.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  THe Prophet Eſay, before the people of Iſrael were led into Captiuity, compoſed this Song thereby to comfort them; that they might with the more patience beare out their affliction, and become confident in the promiſed mercies of God. Firſt, it informeth them, that the protection of God being (whereſoeuer they are) nothing leſſe auaileable then a defenced Cittie,) they ought for euer to truſt in that firme peace, which they may haue in him. Secondly, this Song teacheth them, to confeſſe, that the pride of Sinners muſt be puniſhed, & how the true Church of Godwil conſtantly await his pleaſure, amid thoſe iudgements, and in their chaſtening, flye vnto their Redeemer. Thirdly, ſeeing the wicked are ſo euilly diſpoſed, that they will neither repent for fauour nor puniſhment: their confuſion is 
here prophecied, and the peace of the godly promiſed: who are reſolued not to forſake the ſeruice of their Lord for any perſecution. Fourthly, they ſing the vtter deſolation of Tyrants, and the increaſe of the Church: whoſe endurance is illuſtrated by the pangs of a Childe-bearing woman. Fiftly, her deliuerance from perſecution, with the reſurrection of the dead, through Chriſt is foretold. And laſtly, the fai
                     •
                  hfull are exhorted to attend on the LORD their Sauiour, who will ſhortly come to iudgement: and take account for the bloud of his 
                     •
                  aints.
               This Song is made in the perſon of the whole Church. And the particular members thereof may alſo ſing the ſame, to comfort themſelues, and to encourage one another to be confident in all their chaſtiſements and perſecutions, vpon conſideration of the ſhortneſſe of the time, and the certaintie of their Redeemers comming. They may alſo when they pleaſe make vſe of it, thereby to praiſe God for his iudgements, for his fauour to his people, and for the confirmation of their owne faiths in both thoſe.
            
            
               The Song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  A Citty now haue we obtain'd, Where ſtrong defences are, And God ſaluation  hath ordai'nd, For wa's and Bulwarkes there.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  The gates thereof wide open ſet;
                  Thoſe righteous people who
                  The Truths obſeruers are, may get
                  Admittance thereinto.
               
               
                  There, thou in peace wilt keepe him ſure,
                  (Whoſe thoughts well grounded be)
                  In peace, that euer ſhall endure,
                  Becauſe he truſted thee.
                  For-euermore vpon the LORD
                  Without diſtruſt depend,
                  For in the LORD, th'eternall LORD,
                  Is ſtrength that hath no end.
               
               
                  He makes the lofty City yeeld,
                  And her proud dwellers bow:
                  He layes it leuell with the field,
                  And with the duſt below.
                  Their feet, who poore and needy are,
                  Their feet thereon ſhall tread:
                  Their way is right that righteous are
                  Whoſe path thou well doſt heed.
               
               
                  Vpon thy Courſe of iudgements wee,
                  Oh LORD attending were,
                  And to record thy Name,and Thee,
                  Our ſoules deſirous are.
                  
                     On thee, my minde with ſtrong deſires
                  Is fixed in the night,
                  And after thee my heart enquires,
                  Before the morning light.
               
               
                  For, when thy righteous Iudgements are
                  Vpon the earth diſcern'd
                  By thoſe that doe inhabite there,
                  Vprighneſſe ſhould be learn'd.
                  Yet ſinners for no terror will,
                  Iuſt dealing vnderſtand:
                  But they continue doing ill,
                  Eu'n in the righteous land.
               
               
                  Vnto the glory of the LORD,
                  They will not heedfull be:
                  Thy hand aduanc't on high, oh LORD,
                  They will not daigne to ſee.
                  But they ſhall ſee, and ſee with ſhame,
                  That doe thy people ſpight:
                  Yea, from thy foes ſhall riſe a flame,
                  That will deuoure them quite.
               
               
                  Then LORD, for vs, thou wilt procure,
                  That wee in peace may be:
                  Becauſe that eu'ry worke of our,
                  Is wrought for vs, by thee.
                  And LORD our God, though we are brought,
                  To other Lords in thrall:
                  Of thee alone ſhall be our thought,
                  Vpon thy name to call.
               
               
                  They are deceaſt and neuer ſhall,
                  A farther life obtaine:
                  
                     They die and ſhall not riſe at all,
                  To tyrannize againe.
                  For to that end thou viſited,
                  And wide diſperſ't them haſt:
                  Vntill their fame was periſhed,
                  And vtterly defac'ſt.
               
               
                  But LORD, encrea'ſt thy people are,
                  Encrea'ſt they are by thee:
                  And thou art glorified as farre
                  As any lands there be.
                  For LORD, in their diſtreſſes, when
                  Thy chaſt'ning on them lay:
                  They vnto thee did haſten then,
                  And without ceaſing pray.
               
               
                  As ſhe with Childe is pain'd when as
                  Her throwes of bearing be:
                  And cryes in pangs; before thy face,
                  Oh LORD, ſo fared We.
                  We haue conceiu'd, beene pain'd, and all
                  Was for a windie birth:
                  The world no ſafetie yeeld's; nor fall,
                  The dwellers of the earth.
               
               
                  Thy dead ſhall liue; they riſe againe
                  With my dead body ſhall:
                  Oh you, that in the duſt remaine,
                  Awake and ſing you, all.
                  For as the dewe doth hearbs renewe,
                  That buried ſeem'd before:
                  So earth ſhall through thy heau'nly dewe,
                  Her dead aliue reſtore.
               
               
                  
                  My people, to thy Chambers fare,
                  Shut cloſe the dore to thee;
                  And ſtay a while (a moment there)
                  Till paſt the furie be.
               
               
                  For loe, the LORD doth now ariſe;
                  He commeth from his place;
                  To puniſh their impieties,
                  Who doe the world poſſeſſe.
                  And now the earth no longer ſhall,
                  The blouds in her conceale:
                  But ſhee, ſhall be compelled all
                  Her murthers to reueale.
               
            
         
         
            THE Prayer of HEZEKIAH. Eſay 37.15.
            
               The Argument and the Vſe.
               
                  IT is recorded, in the 36. and 37. of Eſay, that Senacharib King of Aſiria, ſent an army againſt Ieruſalem; and that Rabſhakah his principall commander, not onely threatned to take it, but blaſphemed alſo againſt the power of God. Which when Hezekiah 
                  
receiued notice of: it is ſaid, he repaired vnto the houſe of the LORD, and made this Prayer there. Wherein (hauing by the attributes there giuen him, acknowledged how able God was to be auenged,) he deſires the LORD, both to heare him, and to conſider the blaſphemy of his aduerſarie. Then, to manifeſt the neceſſitie of aſſiſtance: He vrgeth the power of that foe, ouer thoſe that ſerued not the true God. And as it ſeemes, deſireth deliuerance, not ſo much in regard of his owne ſafetie, as that the blaſphemer, (and all the world) may know the difference betweene the power of the LORD, and the arrogant braggs of Man.
               This Prayer may be vſed by the Church, whenſoeuer her powerfull and open aduerſarie the Turke, or any other Aduerſarie, whom God hath ſuffered to preuaile againſt falſe worſhippers; ſhall thereupon growe proud, and threaten Her, alſo: as if in deſpight of God he had formerly preuailed by his owne ſtrength. And the name of Senacharib may be miſtically applied to any ſuch enemy. Moreouer, it may ſerue any of vs Chriſtians for a prayer, againſt thoſe ſecret blaſphemies, which the Deuill whispers vnto our ſoules. Or, when by temptations, he ſeekes to make vs dispaire, and threatens to be our ruine, maugre our Redeemer; laying before our eyes how many others he hath deſtroyed, who ſeemed to be in as good eſtate as we. For this is (indeed) the Enemie, who hath ouerthrowne whole Countries and Nations: and he doth at this day ruine many thouſands, with their gods, (euen the meanes whereby they truſted to be ſafe:) for ſtrength, temporall power, riches, ſuperſtitious worſhips, the wiſedome of fleſh and bloud vnſanctified; Moral vertues, worldly policie, Idols, & ſuch like, wherein many put their truſt; are the works of mens hands, and may he rightly termed, the gods which 
that miſticall Aſirian Prince, and our aduerſarie hath power to deſtroy.
            
            
               The Song.
               And Hez
                        •
                     kiah prayed vnto the LORD: ſaying.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Lord of hoaſts, and God of Iſra-el, Thou who betweene the Cherubins doſt dwell, Of all the world thou God alone art King, And heau'n and earth vnto their forme did'ſt bring.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  Lord bow thine eare, to heare attentiue be;
                  Lift vp thine eyes, and daigne oh LORD to ſee
                  What words Senacharib hath caſt abroad:
                  And his proud meſſage to the liuing God.
               
               
                  Truth LORD it is, that lands, and kingdomes all,
                  Haue to the Kings of Aſhur beene a thrall:
                  Yea, they their Gods into the fire haue throwne,
                  For Gods they were not, but of wood and ſtone:
               
               
                  Mens work they were, men therfore ſpoil'd them haue.
                  Then from his power, vs LORD our God now ſaue,
                  That all the kingdomes of the earth may ſee,
                  Thou art the LORD, and onely thou art hee.
               
            
         
         
            
               Hezekiahs ſong of Thankſgiuing. Eſay 38.10.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  WE finde this Song in the 38. Chapter of Eſay, where is ſet before it this Title. The writing of Hezekiah: King of Iuda, when he had beene ſicke and was recouered of his ſickneſſe. By which, you may perceiue the occaſion of it: And if you conſider the Song it ſelfe, 
many particular circumſtances are remarkable; whereby the Author ſheweth Gods mercy to haue beene exceeding great vnto him: Firſt, in reſpect that he ſhould elſe haue beene cut off in the beſt of his Age (and perhaps, when his ſinnes might haue made him ripe, aſwell for hell, as the graue.) Secondly, in regard he ſhould neuer haue ſeene againe the Temple of the Lord, to praiſe him there, with the reſt of his people. Thirdly, if he had beene then taken away, His dwelling, that is, his poſteritie, had beene cut off (for at that time he had no children) and ſo he had not loſt his life onely, but the hope of the Meſſias, his Redeemer. Fourthly, his diſeaſe was ſo violent and vnſufferable, that he thought not to haue liued out one day. Fiftly, God deliuered him when he was not tormented in body onely, but when he ſuffered alſo extreame agonies of the Soule. Laſtly, the greatneſſe of Gods mercy is here praiſed, in that when be deliuered him from the terrors of death; he forgaue him alſo his ſinnes, which were the cauſe of that ſickeneſſe. Then ſeeming to haue entered into a ſerious conſideration of all this. He confeſſeth who they are, that are moſt bound to celebrate Gods praiſes; and voweth this Deliuerance to euerlaſting memorie.
               By our priuate Meditations, we may vſe this for a Song of thankeſgiuing after our deliuerances from temporall ſickneſſes; which is one and the firſt ſence wherein Hezekiah vſed it. But in the ſecond, and moſt principall ſenſe, he ſung it in the perſon of the Miſticall body; who was by Chriſt cured of the deadly ſickneſſe of ſinne and death; for Hezekiah, which ſignifieth helped or ſtrengthned of the LORD, was a type of the Church, healed by God; and Iſaiah, who brought the medicine that cured the diſeaſe, and is interpreted, The ſaluation of the LORD, figured 
our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt. And indeede it is not lik
                     •
                  
                  ly that ſo good a Prince as Hezekiah, would haue been ſo extreamely deiected, if he had apprehended nothing more fearefull then his preſent ſickneſſe, with the naturall ſeparation of the ſoule and body; or that it was his neuer ſeeing againe of Gods temporall houſe, that made him ſo paſſionate. For, if that had beene a matter worthy ſuch griefe, it ſhould haue beene alwayes ſo, and then neither he nor any man could haue departed this life willingly. But there was a greater miſtery in it; yea, if you well conſider that this Deliuerance herein memorized, was confirmed by one of the greateſt miracles (to wit) the Sunne going backe ten degrees, I thinke you will then beleeue that it had reſpect to ſome greater thing then the particular recouery of Hezekiah. For that the Sunne went really backe (and did not appeare onely ſo to doe) is manifeſted in theſe places, 2 King. 20.12. 2 Chron. 32.31. Jſ. 39.1. for thence J gather, that it was obſerued in Aſiria, and that Meſſengers were ſent from thence to H
                        •
                     zekiah, to know the reaſon of that wonder: which if we ſhould affirme to be for a ſigne of Hez
                        •
                     kiahs recouery onely; we muſt confeſſe the ſigne greater then that which it was ſent to ſignifie: whereas if we will vnderſtand Hezekiah to be a type of the Church, and that God gaue this for a token to aſſure him that as he ſhould be healed, ſo he would alſo ſend his Sonne to heale the generall infirmity of Mankinde: we ſhall then make the thing figured, proportionable to the figure. For the redemption of Man, being a worke much greater then the Sunnes retrogradation, it was well worthy of ſo admirable a Type.
               But I ſhall make this prologue ouer-large, or elſe J would ſo plainly declare vnto you, how Hezekiah was 
a Type of the Church, how in euery circumſtance of his ſickneſſe he pattern'd out the infirmity of mankinde, laboring vnder ſinne; and how naturally that miracle of the Sunnes retrogradation repreſented the ſending of Chriſt to be our deliuerer, that you ſhould confeſſe this Song was made for vs and the Church, to ſing throughout all Ages, for a memoriall of her former vnſpeakeable miſery; and to ſet forth the praiſe of God, for that vnequal'd benefit of her Redemption.
            
            
               The Song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  WHen I ſuppos'd my dayes were at an end, Thus ſpeaking to my ſelfe, I made my moane: Now to the gates of Hell I muſt deſcend, And all the remnant of my yeares be  gone, The Lord (ah mee) the Lord I cry'd Where now the liuing be, Nor man that doth on earth abide, Shall I for euer ſee.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  As the remouing of a Shepherds tent,
                  Or as a Weauer cuts his webbe away,
                  My dwelling ſo; yea, ſo my age was ſpent,
                  And ſo my ſickneſſe did my life decay;
                  Each day, ere night ſhould end the ſame
                  My death expected I,
                  And euery night ere morning came,
                  I did ſuppoſe to dye:
               
               
                  For he ſo Lyon-like my bones did breake,
                  That I my life accounted ſcarce a day;
                  A noyſe I did like Cranes or Swallowes make,
                  And at the Turtle I lamenting lay;
                  My fainting eyes I vpward caſt,
                  And thus my moane did make;
                  
                     Oh, I extreamely am oppreſt,
                  For me, LORD vndertake.
               
               
                  What ſhall I ſay? his word to me he gaue,
                  And as he promis'd, he performed it;
                  For which, I will not whil'ſt that life I haue,
                  Thoſe bitter paſſions of my ſoule forget:
                  But all that after me ſuruiue,
                  Yea all that liue, ſhall know,
                  How thou my ſpirit didſt reuiue,
                  And health on me beſtow.
               
               
                  Vpon my peace, did bitter ſorrowes come,
                  But in the loue which to my ſoule thou haſt,
                  The all-conſuming graue thou keptſt me from.
                  And my offences all behind thee caſt.
                  For neither can the graue, nor death,
                  Or praiſe or honour thee,
                  Nor are they hopefull of thy truth
                  That once entombed be.
               
               
                  Oh, he that liues; that liues as I doe now,
                  Eu'n he it is that ſhall thy praiſe declare;
                  Thy Truth the father to his ſeede ſhall ſhow,
                  And how, oh LORD, thou me haſt dain'd to ſpare,
                  And in thy houſe (for this) will we,
                  (Oh LORD throughout our dayes)
                  On inſtruments that ſtringed be,
                  Sing ſongs vnto thy praiſe.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE Prayer of DANIEL. Dan. 9.4.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  THis Prayer is written in the ninth Chapter of Daniels Prophecy: and herein, the Prophet very earneſtly beſeecheth God to be mercifull vnto his people. The principall points conſiderable are theſe. Firſt, he confeſſeth God to be powerfull, iuſt, and mercifull, and that neuertheleſſe from the higheſt to the loweſt they had broken his lawes, and rebelled againſt him; for which, they worthily deſerued confuſion. Secondly, he aggrauateth their offences by diuers circumſtances, acknowledging, that as it is the ſame they haue deſerued, ſo it is the deſtruction they were forewarned of, that is come vpon them. Thirdly, hauing acknowledged thus much, he humbly entreates, that God would be neuertheleſſe mercifull vnto them: Firſt, in regard he had heretofore gotten glory by deliuering them: Secondly, for that they were his owne elected people: Thirdly, ſeeing they were already become a reproach vnto their neighbours: Laſtly, euen for his owne and the 
                  Meſſiahs ſake. And all this he earneſtly entreats, (not for their owne worthineſſe, but) for the tender mercies ſake of God.
               This Song may be properly ſung whenſoeuer any of thoſe particular iudgements are powred out, which the Prophets haue foretold ſhould be inflicted on theſe latter times; and it may be ſaid or ſung by the Church, or any member thereof (in her perſon) during any other affliction befallen her: or if we pleaſe, euen vpon our priuate occaſions, prouided we formerly well apply it by our Meditations.
            
            
               The Song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  LOrd God almighty, great and full of feare, Who alwayes art from bre
                     •
                  ch of promiſe free, And neuer fayling to haue mercy where  They doe obſerue thy lawes and honour thee.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  We haue tranſgreſt; oh! we, haue euill done.
                  We diſobedient and rebellious were;
                  For, from thy precepts we aſtray are gone,
                  And from thy iudgements we departed are.
               
               
                  We did thy ſeruants propheſies withſtand,
                  Who, to our Dukes, our Kings, and Fathers came,
                  And vnto all the people of the land,
                  Proclaimed forth their meſſage in thy name.
               
               
                  In thee oh LORD, all righteouſneſſe haſt thou,
                  But open ſhame to vs doth appertaine;
                  As fares it with the men of Iudah now,
                  And thoſe that in Ieruſalem remaine.
               
               
                  And to all Iſra'l, through thoſe Countries all,
                  In which, they far or nigh diſperſed be,
                  Becauſe of that tranſgreſsion, wherewithall
                  They haue tranſgreſſed and offended thee.
               
               
                  To vs, our Kings, our Dukes, and Fathers doth
                  Diſgrace pertaine (oh LORD) for angring thee▪
                  
                  Yet, mercy (LORD our God) and pardon both
                  To thee belongs, though we rebellious be.
               
               
                  For, as for vs, we ſore haue diſobey'd
                  The Lord our God his voyce, and would not heare
                  To keepe his lawes, which he before vs laid,
                  By thoſe his ſeruants, which his Prophet
                        •
                      were▪
                  
               
               
                  Yea, all that of the race of Iſra'l be;
                  Againſt thy law extreamely haue miſdone:
                  And that they might not 
                        •
                     iſten vnto thee,
                  They from thy voice, oh LORD are backward gone;
               
               
                  
                  Which makes both Curſe and Oth on them deſcend,
                  That in the Law of Moſes written was;
                  The ſeruant of that God whom we offend,
                  And now his ſpeeches he hath brought to paſſe.
               
               
                  On vs, and on our Iudges he doth bring
                  That plague, wherewith he threatned vs and them,
                  For vnder heau'n was neuer ſuch a thing
                  As now is acted on Ieruſalem.
                  
               
               
                  As Moſes written Law doth beare record,
                  Now all this miſchiefe is vpon vs brought,
                  And yet we prayed not before the LORD,
                  That leauing ſinne, we might his Truth be taught.
               
               
                  For this reſpect, the LORD in wait hath laid,
                  That he inflict on vs this miſchiefe might;
                  And ſeeing we his voyce haue diſobay'd.
                  In all his workes, the LORD our God's vpright.
               
               
                  But now, oh LORD our God, who from the land
                  Of cruell Aegypt brought thy people haſt;
                  And by the power of thine almighty hand,
                  Atchieu'd a name which to this day doth laſt:
               
               
                  Though we haue ſinned, and committed ill;
                  Yet LORD by all that righteouſneſſe in thee,
                  From thy Ieruſalem, thy holy hill,
                  Oh let thy wrath and anger turned be.
               
               
                  For by thoſe wicked things which we haue don,
                  And through our fathers ſinnes; Ieruſalem,
                  
                  Yea, thine owne people haue the hatred won
                  And the reproach of all that neighbour them.
               
               
                  Now therefore to thy Seruant's ſuite encline,
                  His prayer heare our God, and let thy face,
                  Eu'n for the LORDS deare ſake, vouchſafe to ſhine
                  Vpon thy, now forſaken, holy place.
               
               
                  
                  Thine eares encline thou, oh my God, and heare;
                  Lift vp thine eyes, and vs oh looke vpon;
                  Vs, who forſaken with thy Citty are,
                  The Citty, where thy name is called on.
               
               
                  For we vpon our ſelues preſume not thus,
                  Before thy preſence our requeſt to make,
                  For any righteouſneſſe that is in vs,
                  But for thy great and tender Mercies ſake.
               
               
                  LORD heare, forgiue oh LORD, and weigh the ſame,
                  Oh LORD performe it, and no more deferre,
                  For thine owne ſake, my God; for by thy name,
                  Thy Citty, and thy people called are.
               
            
         
         
            THE Prayer of IONAH. Ionah 2.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  AS Ionah fled from the preſence of the LORD, he was followed by a tempeſt, whoſe furie would not be allayed, vntil the offender was caſt into the Sea, where God had mercie on him, and ſent a Fiſh to preſerue him; Which in humane reaſon, ſeemed a more terrible danger, then that he was deliuered from. But the ſafetie which at his firſt entrance, hee found in ſo vnſafe a place, made him ſenſible of Gods fauour, and begat in him a firme beliefe that he ſhould be totally deliuered. And thereupon, (being yet in the Fiſhes belly) made this Prayer, to praiſe God for deliuering him in ſo great an extremity. (And he did it as ſpeaking 
of a thing already done, the better to ſhew vs the ſoundneſſe of his faith. The things remarkeable are theſe: The place where he prayed, the terrible and vnauiodable danger that compaſſed him; the diſpaire he was nigh falling into, the timely application of Gods mercy, the comfort it infuſed into him, the occaſions which draw men into theſe perils, the vowe made vpon this deliuerance, and laſtly the reaſon of that vowe.
               Now, this buriall of Ionas in the fiſhes belly, and his deliuery from thence, was a ſigne of the buriall and reſurrection of our bleſſed Sauiour, Mat. 12.40. And therefore, we muſt not thinke he made this Prayer onely in his owne perſon: but in the miſticall body of Ieſus Chriſt alſo. For, by contemplating the circumſtances of his danger and deliuerance, (and hauing the ſpirit of prophecie) he apprehended the miſteries of our Redemption. By the ſhip ready to be ſunke, through that tempeſt in which he was caſt away, he conceiued the wrath of God againſt the world for ſinne; and that it would not be appeaſed without ſatiſfaction. By his owne offence, he foreſaw, h
                     •
                  w Chriſt hauing taken our ſinne vpon him, ſhould (to bring peace vnto the world) be deliuered ouer vnto the rage of Pilate and the Iewes. By his being receiued into the fiſhes belly, and there preſerued aliue; he foreſaw how Chriſt ſhould be ſwallowed vp of the graue, and yet remaine vncorrupted. And by the fore-ſight he had of his owne comming ſafe to the ſhore againe: he apprehended that ioyful reſurrection of our Redeemer: whoſe miſticall body (the Church) lay all that while, as it were in the very Jawes of death and hell. Theſe things Ionah apprehended through the ſpirit of prophecie, (and by the obiects aforeſaid) compoſed this Prayer, to ſet forth the mercies of God, and to expreſſe in what a fearefull eſtate mankinde was, 
vntill Chriſt was riſen againe in victory. And therefore, J thinke, as it will become vs Chriſtians often to ſing it in memory thereof; ſo eſpecially vpon that day which we celebrate in memoriall of our Sauiours Reſurrection.
               
            
            
               The Song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  IN my diſtreſſe I cry'd to thee oh Lord, And thou wert pleaſed my complaint to heare, Out from the bowels of the grau
                     •
                   I roar'
                     •
                  , and to my voyce thou didſt encline thine eare, For I amid the Sea was caſt, And to the  bottome there thou plung'd me haſt.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  The flouds, about me rowling circles made,
                  Thy waues, and billowes, ouer-flow'd me quite,
                  Wherewith (alas) vnto my ſelfe I ſaid,
                  I am for euer-more depriu'd thy ſight.
                  Yet once againe, aduance ſhall I,
                  Vnto thy holy Temple-ward mine eye.
               
               
                  Eu'n to my ſoule, the waters clos'd me had,
                  Or'e-ſwallow'd by the deepes I there was pent,
                  About my head the weedes a wreath had made,
                  Vnto the hils foundation downe I went.
                  And ſo, that forth I could not get,
                  The earth an euer-laſting barre had ſet.
               
               
                  Then thou oh LORD, my God, oh thou wert he.
                  That from corruption didſt my life defend,
                  For when my ſoule was like to faint in me,
                  Thou didſt oh LORD into my thoughts deſcend.
                  My prayer vnto thee I ſent,
                  And to thy holy Temple vp it went.
               
               
                  Thoſe who giue truſt to vaine and fooliſh lies,
                  Deſpiſers of their owne good ſafetie be:
                  But I will offer vp a ſacrifice
                  Of ſinging praiſes, with my voice to thee;
                  And will performe what vow'd I haue:
                  For it belongs to thee, oh LORD to ſaue.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE Song of HABAKKVK. Habak. 3.
            
               The Argument and Vſe.
               
                  BEfore the following Song, is vſually this TITLE. A Prayer of the PROPHET Habakkuk vpon Sigionoth, or (as moſt Tranſlations haue it) For the ignorances, that is, for the comfort and better information of the people, who were diſheartened through their ignorance, in the iudgements and mercies of God. For, the Prophet in his firſt Chapter perſonated the weake members of the Church, who were offended at the proſperity of the vngodly: And hauing there brought them in, complayning, as if they feared all things would continually ſucceede better with their wicked oppreſſors then with them (as it did for that preſent) he in the next Chapter declared the LORDS anſwer to that ignorant complaint of theirs: Shewing that vndoubtedly the pride, couetouſneſſe, cruelty, drunkenneſſe, and idolatry of (the Chaldeans) their tyrannizing enemies ſhould be puniſhed. And afterward in this Song, (which is his third Chapter) he firſt prayeth and prayſeth God for that promiſed deliuerance, ſecondly, ſetteth forth the glorious Maieſty of the Deliuerer, by excellent Allegories and Alluſions to the manner of thoſe former deliuerances, which he had vouchſafed vnto the People the Iewes: And laſtly, (foretelling the miſerable and horrible deſtruction of the Aduerſary) in his owne, and in the perſon of all the Elect, reſolueth (what euer 
happens) to reioyce with confidence in the ſtrength and fauour of God.
               In briefe, this Song hath foure parts: In the firſt, the Sauiour is prayed for, according to the promiſe of God. Jn the ſecond, the Maieſty of his comming is deſcribed. Jn the third, his victory, with the ruine of Antichriſt is declared. And fourthly, the ioy and confidence of the Church is foretold.
               True it is, that by reaſon of the many deepe Miſteries herein contained; this Song is to many very obſcure: Inſomuch, that the latter Hebrew Rabbins, accounted it one of the moſt difficult places of holy Scripture. And ſo ſhall we Chriſtians find it; yea, and little pertinent to vs alſo, if we looke thereon with their blinde eyes, who could ſee no farther then the letter. For they either thought this Prophecy had no further relation then to the temporall deliuery of the Iewes by deſtruction of the Chaldeans, many ages paſt: or elſe imagined (as ſome a little infected with Iudaiſme at this day teach) that it had reſpect to a carnall and temporall reſtoring of that Nation, now in theſe laſt ages of the World. Whereas, it hath indeede a more principall aime. For though it ſhall not be denied, that it had ſomewhat a reſpect to the Iſraelites deliuerance from the Babylonian ſeruitude: yet, if they ſhould be vrged to ſhew vs, how according to their meere litterall ſence, he that diliuered them may be ſaid to come from Theman and Mount Paran: how that maieſty expreſſed here may be applyed to him; what plagues and fire went before him; how he ſtood and meaſured the earth; where mountaines trembled and were remoued; how the Sun and Moone ſtood ſtill, &c. I am perſwaded it would trouble their beſt Expoſitor. But if we will vnderſtand it to haue principall reſpect (as in truth it hath) to the 
                  Churches deliuerance from the ſpirituall Babylon, from the ſlauery of the Diuell, and the rage of Antichriſt; by the firſt and ſecond comming of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt: it will then be eaſie, through the helpe of Gods holy Spirit, to ſhew you that theſe Allegories and Aenigmaticall expreſſions, which are ſo hard to the Iewes, and ſome miſbeleeuers, are plainely vnridled to vs, who beleeue Redemption by the Sonne of God.
               This Song is to be ſung hiſtorically, in memory of our deliuerance by the firſt comming of Ieſus Chriſt, and prophetically for a comfortable remembrance of a perfect deliuery aſſured vs at 
                     〈…〉
                   comming. Both which commings, to thoſe who by the eyes of faith can apprehend the manner of them, will appeare no leſſe glorious then they are here deſcribed by way of Alluſion.
               
               But leaſt Chuſan and Midian, being names of Nations, ſometime temporall enemies to the Iewes, may ſeeme impertinent to theſe times, you muſt know that all the Names of Perſons or Places vſed in the old Teſtament, were giuen for the ſake of thoſe things which they typified more then for their owne: and do
                     •
                   therefore more properly expreſſe their natures. So, in this place; Chuſan ſignifying darke, blacke, or cloudy; and Midian which is interpreted of condemnation, or of iudgement, better agrees to thoſe ſpirituall Aduerſaries whom they prefigured; then to thoſe people who were litterally ſo called: For none are ſo fitly termed people of Darknes, or Condemnation, as the members of Anti-chriſt.
               
            
            
               The Song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  LOrd, thy anſwere did I heare,  And I grew therewith afraid. When the times at fulleſt are, Let thy worke be then declar'd: When the times Lord full doe grow, Then in anger mercy ſhow.  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  The Almighty God came downe,
                  He came downe from Theman-ward,
                  The eternall holy-One, Selah.
                  
                  From mount Paran forth appear'd.
                  Heau'n couering with his raies,
                  And earth filling with his praiſe.
               
               
                  As the Sunns is, was his light,
                  From his hands there did appeare
                  Beaming rayes, that ſhined bright,
                  And his power is ſhrouded there.
                  Plagues before his face he ſent,
                  At his feet hot coles there went.
               
               
                  
                  Where he ſtood, he meaſure tooke
                  Of the earth, and view'd it well;
                  Nations vaniſh't at his looke,
                  Auncient hils to powder fell.
                  Mountaines old caſt lower were,
                  For his waies eternall are.
               
               
                  
                     Cuſhan tents I ſaw diſeaſ'd,
                  And the Midian Curtaines quake,
                  Haue the flouds LORD thee diſpleaſ'd?
                  Did the flouds thee angry make?
                  Was it elſe the ſea that hath;
                  Thus prouoked thee to wrath?
               
               
                  For thou rod'ſt thy horſes there,
                  And thy ſauing Charro'ts through:
                  Thou didſt make thy bowe appeare.
                  And as hath beene by a vowe
                  To the tribes agreed vnto;
                  Thou perform'dſt thy promiſe ſo. Selah.
                  
               
               
                  Thou didſt cleaue the earth and make
                  Rifts, through which did riuers flow:
                  Mountaines ſeeing thee did ſhake,
                  And away the flouds did goe.
                  From the deepe a voice was heard,
                  And his hands on high he rear'd.
               
               
                  Both the Sunne and Moone did ſtay,
                  And remou'd not in their ſpheares:
                  By thine arrowes light went they,
                  By thy brightly-ſhining ſpeares:
                  Thou in wrath the land did'ſt cruſh,
                  And in rage the Nations threſh.
               
               
                  For thy peoples ſafe reliefe,
                  With thy Chriſt for ayd went'ſt thou,
                  Thou haſt alſo pierſt the Chiefe,
                  Of the ſinfull houſhold through.
                  
                     And diſplaid them, till that bare,
                  From the foot to necke they were. Selah.
                  
               
               
                  Thou, with weapons of their owne,
                  Didſt their armies Leader ſtrike:
                  For, againſt me they came downe,
                  To diſperſe me whirle-winde-like.
                  And they Ioy in nothing more,
                  Then vnſeene to ſpoile the poore.
               
               
                  Through the Sea, thou mad'ſt a way,
                  And did'ſt ride thy horſes where
                  Mighty heapes of waters lay.
                  I thereof report did heare:
                  And the voice my bowels ſhooke,
                  Yea my lippes a quiu'ring tooke.
               
               
                  Rottenneſſe my bones poſſeſt,
                  And a trembling ceazed me,
                  I that troublous day might reſt.
                  For, when his approches be
                  Vp vnto the people made,
                  Then his troupes will them inuade.
               
               
                  Bloomeleſſe ſhall the fig-tree be,
                  And the vine no fruit ſhall yeeld,
                  Fade ſhall (then) the oliue tree;
                  Meat ſhall none be in the field:
                  Neither in the fold nor ſtall▪
                  
                  Flocke, or heard, continue ſhall.
               
               
                  Yet the LORD my icy ſhall be,
                  And in him I will delight▪
                  
                  In my God that ſaueth me;
                  God the LORD, who is my ought.
                  And ſo guides my feet, that I,
                  Hinde-like, walke my places high.
               
            
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   