
      
         
            
            
            ¶ An excellent Epitaffe of syr Thomas wyat, with two other compendious dytties, wherin are touchyd, and set furth the state of mannes lyfe.
            
               
            
            
               
                  WYat resteth here, that quicke coulde neuer rest.
               Whose heuenly gyftes, encreased by desdayne
               And vertue sanke, the deper in his brest
               Suche profyte he, of enuy could optayne
            
            
               ¶ A Head, where wysdom mysteries dyd frame
               Whose hammers beat styll in that lyuely brayne
               As on a styth, where some worke of fame
               Was dayly wrought, to turn to Brytayns game
            
            
               ¶ A Uysage sterne and mylde, where both dyd groo
               Uyce to contempne, in vertues to reioyce
               
                  
Amyd great stormes, whome grace assured soo
               To lyue vprighte and smyle at fortunes choyse.
            
            
               ¶ A Hand that taught what might be saide in rime
               That refte Chaucer, the glorye of his wytte
               A marke, the whi
                     •
                  he (vnperfited for tyme)
               Some may approche but neuer none shall hyt:
            
            
               ¶ A Tonge, that serued in foraine realmes his king
               Whose curtoise talke, to vertu dyd enflame.
               Eche noble harte a worthy guyde to brynge
               Our Englyishe youth, by trauayle vnto fame.
            
            
               ¶ An Eye, whose iudgement, no affect coulde blind
               Frendes to allure, and foes to reconcyle
               Whose pearcynge looke, dyd represent a mynde.
               with vertue fraught, reposed, voyde of gyle.
            
            
               ¶ A Harte, where drede yet neuer so imprest
               To hide the thought yt might the trouth auaunce
               In neyther fortune lyfte nor so represt
               To swell in welth, nor yelde vnto mischaunce
            
            
               ¶ A valiaunt Corps, where force and beautye met
               Happy, alas, to happy but for foos.
               Lyued, and ran 
                     •
                  he race that nature set
               Of manhodes shape, where she the mold did loos
            
            
               ¶ But to the heauens that symple soule is fleed.
               Which lefte with such, as couet Christe to knowe
               witnes of faith that neuer shalbe deade
               Sent for our welth, but not receiued so
               Thus for our gylt, this iewell haue we lost
               The earth his bones, the heuen possesse his goost
               AMEN.
            
            
               
               ¶ The myrroure or Glasse of Fortune.
               
                  WHan fortune fauoureth, and setteth a loft
                  In hye estate man for to raigne
                  Then all men cometh to him sull ofte
                  And couey
                        •
                     s with him, for to remaine
                  His company none will disdaine,
                  Thus frendes he getteth, many a one
                  But if he fall, I saye certaine.
                  Of all his frendes then hath he none.
               
               
                  ☞ Whan he doth rule him they obeye
                  And serue him styll, at all assayes
                  Attentifely, without delaye.
                  Great paines they take both nightes and dayes
                  With all their power him for to please
                  Thus frendes he getteth many a one
                  But if he fall they turne theyr wayes.
                  Of all his frendes then hath he none:
               
               
                  ¶ As longe as he, is in his welth
                  Nothinge to him than shall be deare.
                  In his estate, haue he his helth
                  All honour to him than shall appeare
                  Of most and lest, both farre and nere
                  Thus frendes he getteth many one
                  But if he fall, than euerye where,
                  Of al his frendes, than hath he none.
               
               
                  ¶ Man thus a loft, knoweth not his frende.
                  For all men than, to him applye
                  Shewynge them selues, to him moste kynde.
                  
                     
As though they wolde both lyue and dye
                  At his byddynge alway readye,
                  Thus frendes he getteth many a one
                  But if he fall they hym denye
                  Of all his frendes, than hath he none.
               
               
                  ¶ In his estate they wyll ensewe
                  To folowe him all that they may
                  In right or wronge, false or trewe
                  Hys wyll truely, none will gaynesaye
                  Though by and by they hym bewraye
                  Suche fayned frendes, be many one
                  And if he fall they him denaye
                  Of all his frendes, than hath he none.
               
               
                  ¶ Whan fortune on the dothe laugh or smyle
                  Geuynge the greate possessyon
                  Belowly and gentle all the whyle
                  Thinking on her progression
                  Some she exalteth, some by suppression
                  Falleth vnder fote, as doth manye one
                  So turneth the whele, without intercession
                  Some to good chaunce, and some to none.
               
               
                  ¶ Whan thou art downe, farewell a dew
                  No more seruyce, thou hast at all
                  Whan broken is thy retinew
                  On thy name than no man wyll call
                  Disdaynfull wordes, on the go shall
                  Foes thou shalt haue, many a one
                  Which wyll reioyce, at thy great fall
                  Of all thy frendes, than hast thou none.
               
               
                  ¶ Thus vnder fote whan thou arte brought
                  
                     
Whom thou doost fauour moost of all
                  By the truly wyll set right nought
                  Scant a good worde gyue the he shall
                  Unmyndfull how beneficiall
                  Thou wast than to many a one
                  And whan thy dignitie doth fall
                  Of all thy frendes, than hast thou none.
               
               
                  ¶ Thus fareth the worlde, both to and fro
                  Whan man is in aduersitie
                  Who is he than, that wyll him knowe
                  Or helpe him in extremitie
                  Whan he is stricke, without pitie
                  With the foule darte, of cruell disdayne
                  None than on him shall haue mercy
                  Lye he in wo, pynynge in payne.
               
               Finis.
            
            
               A compendious dittie Wherin is touched the state of mās lyfe,
               
                  NO wyght in this world, that welth can attayne
                  Onelesse he beleue, that all is but vayne
                  And loke how it cometh, so leaue it to go
                  As tydes vse their tymes, to ebbe and to flo,
                  This mucke on the molde, that men so desyre
                  Doth worke them much wo, and moueth thē to yre
                  With grefe it is gotte, with care it is kepte
                  With sorowe sone lost, that longe hath ben'repte
                  And wo worth that man, that first dolue the moulde
                  To fynde out the myne, of syluer and golde
                  For whan it lay hyd, and to vs vnknowen
                  Of stryfe and debate, the sede was not sowen
                  
                     
Than lyued man wel and helde them content
                  With meate, drynke and cloth without any rente
                  Theyr houses but poore to shroude them selues in
                  For castels and towres, were than to begine
                  No towne had his wall, they feared no warre
                  Nor ennemies hoste to seke them afarre
                  So ledde they their lyues in quiete and reste
                  Tyll hourde began hate from East vnto west
                  And golde for to growe a lorde of great pryce
                  Which chaunged the worlde from vertue to vyce
                  And turned all thinge so farre from his kynde
                  That howe it shulde be, is worne out of mynde
                  For rychesse beareth nowe the fame and the brute
                  And onelye the cause of all our pursute.
                  Which maketh among vs muche mischief to reigne
                  And shall tyll we seke the right waye agayne
                  whan mariage was made for vertue and loue,
                  Than was no diuorse goddes knette to remoue.
                  whan iudges wolde suffer no brybes in theyr syghte,
                  Their iudgementes was than according to right
                  whan prelates had not possessions nor rent
                  They preached the truthe and truelye they wente
                  whan men dyd not flatter for fauoure nor mede,
                  Than kinges herd the truth, & how the world yede
                  And men vnto honour through vertue did rise
                  But all this is turned contrarywise
                  For money maketh all, and ruleth as a god
                  Which ought not to be, for Christ it forbod
                  And bad that we shulde take nothynge in hand
                  But for the lordes loue, and welth of the lande
                  And willes vs full ofte, that we shulde refraine
                  From wrastynge his wil, to make our owne gaine,
                  For couetous folke of euery astate.
                  As hardely shall enter within heauen gate
                  
                     
As through a nedles eye a camell to crepe
                  Why do these madde mē thē hourde vp and kepe,
                  Ye more then maie serue them selues to suffice
                  As though perfecte blysse shulde that waye arise
                  But if they wolde suffer to sinke in their brest
                  What trouble of mynde what vnquiete reste
                  What myschiefe, what hate this mony dothe bringe,
                  They woulde not so toyle for so vyle a thinge
                  For they that haue much, are euer in care
                  Whiche waie to wynne, and how for to spare
                  Theyr slepes be vnsounde for feare of the theefe
                  The losse of a littell doth worke them much grefe
                  In sekyng theyr lacke they want that they haue
                  And subiecte to that which shuld be their slaue
                  They neuer doo knowe, whyles ryches doth reygne
                  Attende of effecte from him that doth seygne
                  For flatterers seeke where fortune doth dwell
                  And whan that she lowreth, they byd thē farewel
                  The poore doth them curse as ofte as they want
                  In hauyng so much to make it so scant
                  Theyr children somtymes do wysshe them in graue
                  That they myght possesse that rychesse they haue
                  And that which they wyne with trauayle and stryfe
                  Oftentymes (as we se) doth cost them theyr lyfe
                  To these be the fruites that rychesse bryngeth forth
                  With many other mo, whiche be no more worth
                  For monie is cause of murder and thefte
                  Of bataile & bloudshed, which wold god wer
                        •
                     left
                  Of rauyne, of wronge, of false witnesse bearyng
                  Of treason conspired, and eke of forswearynge.
                  And for to be shorte and knyt vp the knot
                  Fewe mischeues at all that money makethe not.
                  But though it be yll, whan it is abused,
                  Yet neuertheles it may be well vsed.
                  
                     
Nor I do not fynde, that men be denyde
                  Of sufficient thynges them selues to prouyde,
                  Accordynge as god hath put them in place,
                  To haue and to holde a tyme and space:
                  So it be well wonne and after well spent:
                  For it is not theirs, but for that intent,
                  And if they so do, than it is good skyll,
                  They haue that is mete to vse at their will
                  As priestes shuld not take promocions in hande
                  To lyue at their ease lyke lordes of the lande
                  But onely to feade gods flocke with the truth
                  To preache and to teache without any slouth
                  Nor folkes shulde not neade great ryches to wynne
                  But godly to lyue and for to flee synne
                  Hys wyll for to worke that is theyr soules helth
                  And thā may they thynke, they lyue in much welth
                  For in this vayne worlde that we be nowe in
                  Is nothynge but misery, myschefe and synne
                  Temptation, vntrouthe, contencion, and strife
                  Than lette vs nat sette by so vyle a lyfe
                  But lyfte vp our eyes, and loke throughe our faythe
                  Beholdynge his mercies, that many tymes saithe
                  The iuste men shall lyue by theyr good belefe
                  And shall haue a place where can be no grefe
                  But gladnesse and myrth that none can amende
                  Unspeakable toyes, whiche neuer shall ende
                  With pleasures that passe all that we haue sought
                  Felicities such as can not be thought
                  Whiche place they shall haue that his wyll intendes
                  With lyfe euerlastynge, and thus my tale endes.
                  Vinit post funera uirtus.
               
            
            ¶ Imprvnted at London by Iohn Herforde for Roberte Toye.
         
      
   