
      
         
            
            
            THE ELEMENTS
OF
ARCHITECTVRE,
Collected by
HENRY WOTTON Knight,
from the best Authors
and Examples.
            LONDON
Printed by IOHN BILL.
M.DC.XXIV.
         
         
            
            
            THE
PREFACE.
            
               
                  I
                Shall not neede (like
the most part of
Writers) to celebrate
the Subiect
which I deliuer. In that point I
am at ease. For Architecture,
can want no commendation, where
there are Noble Men, or Noble
mindes; I will therefore spend
this Preface, rather about those,
from whom I haue gathered my
knowledge▪ For I am but a gatherer
and disposer of other mens
stuffe, at my best value.
            
               
Our principall Master is Vitruuius
and so I shall often call
him; who had this felicitie, that
he wrote when the Roman Empire
was neere the pitch; Or at
least, when Augustus (who fauoured
his endeauours) had some
meaning (if he were not mistaken)
to bound the Monarchie▪
               
               Tacit. lib. 1. Annal.
This I say was his good happe;
For in growing and enlarging
times, Artes are commonly
drowned in Action: But on the
other side, it was in truth an vnhappinesse,
to expresse himselfe
so ill, especially writing (as he did)
in a season of the ablest Pennes;
And his obscuritie had this
strange fortune; That though he

were best practised, and best followed
by his owne Countrymen;
yet after the reuiuing and repolishing
of good Literature, (which
the combustions and tumults of
the middle Age had vnciuillized)
he was best, or at least, first
vnderstood by strangers: For of
the Italians that tooke him in
hand, Those that were Gramarians
seeme to haue wanted Mathematicall
knowledge; and the
Mathematicians perhaps wanted
Gramer: till both were sufficiently
conioyned, in Leon-Batista
Alberti the Florentine,
whom I repute the first learned
Architect, beyond the Alpes;
But hee studied more indeede to

make himselfe an Author, then
to illustrate his Master. Therefore
among his Commenters, I
must (for my priuate conceite)
yeild the chiefe praise vnto the
French, in Philander; and to the
high Germans, in Gualterus Riuius:
who, besides his notes, hath
likewise published the most elaborate
translation, that I thinke is
extant in any vulgar speech of
the world: though not without bewayling,
now and then, some defect
of Artificiall tearmes in his
owne▪
                as I must likewise; For
if the Saxon, (our mother
tongue) did complaine; as iustly
(I doubt) in this point may the
Daughter: Languages, for the

most part in tearmes of Art and
Erudition, retayning their originall
pouertie, and rather growing
rich and abundant, in complementall
phrases and such froth.
Touching diuers moderne men
that haue written out of meere practise,
I shall giue them their due,
vpon occasion.
            And now, after this short Censure
of others, I would faine satisfie
an Obiection or two, which
seeme to lie somewhat heauily vpon
my selfe; It will be said that I
handle an Art, no way suteable
either to my employments, or to
my fortune. And so I shall
stand charged, both with Intrusion,
and with Impertinency.
            
            
               
To the First I answere, that
though by the euer acknowledged
goodnesse of my most deare and
gracious SOVERAIGNE;
and by his long indulgent toleration
of my defects. I haue borne
abroad some part of his ciuill
seruice; yet when I came home,
and was againe resolued into mine
owne simplicitie, I found it fitter
for my Pen (at least in this first
publique aduenture) to deale with
these plaine compilements, and
tractable Materials; then with the
Laberynthes and Mysteries of
Courts and States; And lesse
presumption for mee, who haue
long contemplated a famous Republique,
to write now of Architecture;
               
then it was anciently for
Aristot. 2. lib. Politi. cap. 6. 
               Hippodamus the Milesian, to
write of Republiques, who was
himselfe but an Architect.
            
            To the Second, I must shrinke
vp my shoulders, as I haue learn'd
abroad, and confesse indeed, that
my fortune is very vnable to exemplifie,
and actuate my Speculations
in this Art, which yet in
trueth, made mee the rather euen
from my very disabilitie, take encouragement
to hope; that my present
Labour, would find the more
fauour with others, since it was vndertaken
for no mans sake, lesse
then mine owne. And with that
cofidence, I fel into these thoughts;
Of which, there were two wayes to

be deliuered▪ The one Historical,
by description of the principall
workes, performed already in
good part, by Giorgio Vassari in
the liues of Architects: The
other Logicall, by casting the
rules and cautions of this Art, into
some comportable Methode:
whereof I haue made choice; not
onely as the shortest and most Elementall;
but indeed as the soundest.
For though in practicall
knowledges, euery complete example,
may beare the credite of a
rule; yet peraduēture rules should
precead, that we may by them, be
made fit to iudge of examples:
Therefore to the purpose; for I
will preface no longer.
         
      
      
         
            
            OF
THE ELEMENTS
OF
ARCHITECTVRE.
            The I. part.
            
               IN Architecture as in all other
Operatiue Arts, the
end must direct the Operation.
            
            The end is to build well.
            Well building hath three Conditions.
Commoditie, Firmenes, and Delight.
A common diuision among the Deliuerers
of this Art, though I know not

how, some what misplaced by Vitruuius
himselfe lib. 1. cap. 3. whom I shalbe
willinger to follow, as a Master of
Proportion, then of Methode.
            
            Now, For the attayning of these Intentions,
wee may consider the whole
Subiect, vnder two generall Heads.
            The Seate, and the Worke.
            
            Therefore first touching Scituation.
            
            The Precepts thereunto belonging,
doe either concerne the Totall Posture,
(as I may tearm it) or the Placing of the
Parts: wherof the first sort, howsoeuer
vsually set downe by Architects as a
piece of their Profession: yet are in truth
borrowed, from other Learnings: there
being betweene Arts and Sciences, as
well as betweene Men, a kinde of good
fellowship, and communication of
their Principles.
            
            For you shall finde some of them, to
bemeerely Physicall, touching the qualitie

and temper of the Aire: which
being a perpetuall ambient, and ingredient,
and the defects thereof, incorrigible
in single Habitations (which I
most intend) doth in those respects,
require the more exquisite caution;
That it be not too grosse, nor too penetratiue;
Not subiect to any foggy noysomnesse,
from Fenns or Marshes neere
adioyning; nor too Mineral exhalations,
from the Soile it selfe. Not vndigested,
for want of Sunne, Not vnexercised,
for want of Winde: which
were to liue (as it were) in a Lake, or
standing Poole of Aire, as Alberti the
Florentin Architect, doth ingeniously
compare it.
            Some doe rather seeme a little Astrological,
as when they warne vs from
Places of malign Influence: where Earthquakes,
Contagions, Prodigious Births, or
the like, are frequent without any euident
cause: whereof the Consideration
is peraduenture not altogether

vaine: Some are plainely Oeconomical;
As that the Seate be well watered, and
well fewelled, That it bee not of too
steepie and incommodious Accesse to
the trouble both of friends and familie.
That it lie not too farre, from some
nauigable Riuer or Arme of the Sea, for
more ease of prouision and such other
Domestique notes.
            Some againe may bee said to bee
Optical? Such I meane as concerne the
Properties of a well chosen Prospect:
which I will call the Royaltie of Sight.
For as there is a Lordship (as it were)
of the Feete, wherein the Master doth
much ioy when he walketh about the
Line of his owne Possessions: So there
is a Lordship likewise of the Eye which
being a raunging, and Imperious, and
(I might say) an vsurping Sence, can
indure no narrow circumscription; but
must be fedde, both with extent and
varietie. Yet on the other side, I finde
vaste and indefinite viewes which

drowne all apprehension of the vttermost
Obiects, condemned, by good
Authors, as if thereby some part of the
pleasure (whereof we speake) did perish.
Lastly, I remember a priuate
Caution, which I know not well how
to sort, vnlesse I should call it Political.
By no meanes, to build too neere a
great Neighbour; which were in truth
to bee as vnfortunately seated on the
earth, as Mercurie is in the Heauens, for
the most part, euer in combustion, or obscuritie,
vnder brighter beames then his
owne.
            From these seuerall Knowledges as I
haue said,Ioannes Heurnius Instit: Medicin: lib. 7. cap. 2. and perhaps from some other
doe Architects deriue their Doctrine
about election of Seats: wherin
I haue not beene so seuere, as a great
Scholer of our time, who precisely restrayneth
a perfect Scituation, at least for
the maine point of health, Ad locum
contra quem Solradios suos fundit cum sub
Ariete oritur, That is, in a word hee

would haue the first salutation of the
Spring. But such Notes as these, wheresoeuer
we finde them in graue or slight
Authors, are to my conceite rather
wishes then Precepts; and in that qualitie,
I will passe them ouer. Yet I must
withall say that in the seating of our
selues (which as a kinde of Marriage
to a Place) Builders should bee as circumspect
as Wooers; lest when all is
done that Doome befall vs,Opidum quidem aedificatum eleganter sed imprudenter positum. which our
Master doth lay vpon Mitylene: A
Towne in truth (saith hee) finely built,
but foolishly planted. And so much
touching that, which I termed the Totall
Posture.
            
            The next in Order is the placing of
the Parts; About which (to leaue as
little as I may in my present labour,
vnto Fancie, which is wilde and irregular)
I will propound a Rule of mine
owne Collection, vpon which I fell in
this maner. I had noted, that all Arte
was then in truest perfection, when it

might bee reduced to some naturall
Principle. For what are the most iudicious
Artisans but the Mimiques of Nature?
This led me to contemplate the
Fabrique of our owne Bodies, wherein
the High Architect of the world, had
displaied such skill, as did stupifie, all
humane reason. There I found the
Hart as the fountaine of Life placed
about the Middle, for the more equall
communication of the vitall spirits.
The Eyes seated aloft, that they might
describe the greater Circle within their
view. The Armes proiected on each
side, for ease of reaching. Briefly (not
to loose our selues in this sweet speculation)
it plainely appeareth, as a
Maxime drawne from the Diuine
light; That the Place of euery part, is
to be determined by the Vse.
            
            So then, from naturall structure, to
proceed to Artificiall; and in the rudest
things, to preserue some Image of
the excellentest. Let all the principall

chambers of Delight, All Studies and
Libraries, be towards the East: For the
Morning is a friend to the Muses. All
Offices that require heat, as Kitchins,
Stillatories, Stoues, roomes for Baking,
Brewing, Washing, or the like, would be
Meridionall. All that need a coole and
fresh temper, as Cellers, Pantries, Butteries,
Granaries, to the North. To the
same side likewise, all that are appointed
for gentle Motion, as Galleries, especially
in warme Climes, or that otherwise
require a steadie and vnuariable
light, as Pinacothecia (saith Vitruuius) by
which he intendeth, (if I may guesse
at his Greeke, as wee must doe often
euen at his Latine) certaine Repositories
for workes of rarity in Picture or
other Arts, by the Italians called Studioli,
which at any other Quarter,
where the course of the Sunne doth
diuersifie the Shadowes, would
loose much of their grace. And by this
Rule hauing alwayes regarde to the

               Vse, any other Part may bee fitly accommodated.
            I must here not omit to note that
the Ancient Grecians, and the Romanes
by their example in their buildings abroad,
where the Seat was free, did almost
Religiously scituate the Front of
their houses, towards the South; perhaps
that the Masters Eye, when hee
came home▪ might not be dazeled, or
that being illustrated, by the Sunne, it
might yeeld the more gracefull Aspect;
or some such reason. But from this,
the Moderne Italians doe varie▪ wherof
I shall speake more in another place.
Let thus much suffice at the present for
the Position of the seuerall Members,
wherein must bee had as our Author
doth often insinuate, and especially
lib. 6. cap. 10. a singular regard, to the
nature of the Region: Euery Nation,
being tyed aboue al Rules whatsoeuer,
to a discretion, of prouiding against
their owne Inconueniences: And therefore

a good Parler in Aegypt would
perchance make a good Celler in England.
            There now followeth the second
Branch of the generall Section touching
the Worke.
            
            In the Worke, I will first consider the
principall parts, and afterwards the
Accessorie, or Ornaments; And in the
Principall, first the Preparation of the
Materials, and then the Disposition,
which is the Forme.
            
            Now, concerning the Materiall part;
Although surely, it cannot disgrace an
Architect, which doth so well become
a Philosopher, to looke into the properties
of Stone and Wood: as that Firre
Trees, Cypresses, Cedars, and such other
Aereall aspiring Plants, being by a
kinde of naturall rigour (which in a
Man I would call pride) inflexible
downewards are thereby fittest for
Posts or Pillars or such vpright vse; that

on the other side, Oake, and the like
true hartie Timber being strong in all
positions, may bee better trusted in
crosse and trauerse worke, for Summers,
or guirding and binding beames,
as they tearme them. And so likewise
to obserue of Stone, that some, are better
within, and other to beare Weather:
Nay, to descend lower euen to examine
Sand and Lyme, and Clay (of all which
things Vitruuius hath discoursed, without
any daintines, & the most of new
Writers) I say though the Speculatiue
part of such knowledge be liberall: yet
to redeeme this Profession, and my
present paynes, from indignitie; I must
heere remember that to choose and
sort the materials, for euery part of the
Fabrique, is a Dutie more proper to a
second Superintendent, ouer all the Vnder
Artisans called (as I take it) by our
Author, Officinator lib. 6. cap. 11. and in
that Place expressely distinguished,
from the Architect, whose glory doth

more consist, in the Designement and
Idea of the whole Worke, and his truest
ambition should be to make the Forme,
which is the nobler Part (as it were)
triumph ouer the Matter: whereof I
cannot but mention by the way, a forreigne
Paterne, namely the Church of
Santa Giustina in Padoua: In truth a
sound piece of good Art, where the
Materials being but ordinarie stone,
without any garnishment of sculpture,
doe yet rauish the Beholder, (and hee
knowes not how) by a secret Harmony
in the Proportions. And this indeede is
that end, at which in some degree, we
should ayme euen in the priuatest
workes: whereunto though I make
haste, yet let me first collect, a few of
the least triuiall cautions, belonging to
the Materiall Prouision.
            
            
               Leon Batista Alberti, is so curious,
as to wish all the Timber, cut out of the
same Forrest, and al the Stone, out of the
same Quarrie.

Philibert del'Orme the French Architect
goes yet somewhat further, and would
haue the Lyme made of the very same
Stone, which wee intend to imploy in
the Worke; as belike imagining that
they will sympathize and ioyne the
better, by a kinde of Originall kindred.
But such conceits as these seeme somewhat
too fine among this Rubbage,
though I doe not produce them in
sport. For surely the like agreements
of nature, may haue oftentimes a discreet
application to Art. Alwayes it
must be confessed, that to make Lyme
without any great choyce of refuse
stuffe, as we commonly do, is an English
error, of no small moment in our
Buildings. Whereas the Italians at this
day, and much more the Ancients did
burne their firmest stone, and euen fragments
of Marble where it was copious,
which in time became almost Marble
againe, or at least of indissoluble duritie,
as appeareth in the standing Theaters.
               
I must here not omit, while I am
speaking of this part, a certain forme of
Bricke described by Daniele Barbaro Patriarch
of Aquileia, in the largest Edition
of his Commentary vpon Vitruuius.
The Figure triangular, euery side a
foot long, and some inch and a halfe
thicke, which he doth commend vnto
vs for many good conditions: As that
they are more commodious in the management,
of lesse expence, of fayrer
show, adding much beautie & strength
to the Murall Angles, where they fall
gracefully into an indented Worke: so
as I should wonder that wee haue not
taken them into vse, being propounded
by a man of good authoritie in
this knowledge; but that all Nations
doe start at Nouelties, and are indeede
maried to their owne Moulds. Into this
place might aptly fall a doubt, which
some haue wel moued; whether the ancient
Italians did burne their Bricke or
no; which a passage or two in Vitruuius
               
hath left ambiguous. Surely where
the Naturall heat is strong enough, to
supply the Artificiall, it were but a curious
folly to multiply both Labour
and Expence. And it is besides very
probable, that those Materials with a
kindely and temperate heate would
proue fairer, smoother, and lesse distorted,
then with a violent: Onely, they
suffer two exceptions. First, that by
such a gentle drying much time will
bee lost which might otherwise bee
employed in compiling. Next, That
they will want a certaine sucking and
soaking Thirstinesse, or a fiery appetite
to drinke in the Lime, which must
knit the Fabrique. But this question
may be confined to the South, where
there is more Sunne and patience. I
will therefore not hinder my course,
with this incident scruple, but close
that part which I haue now in hand,
about the Materialls, with a principall

caution: That sufficient Stuffe and Money
bee euer ready before we beginne:
For when wee build now a piece, and
then another by Fits, the Worke dries
and sinkes vnequally, whereby the
Walles growe full of Chinques, and Creuices;
Therefore such pawsings are
well reprooued by Palladio, lib. 1. cap. 1.
and by all other. And so hauing gleaned
these few remembrances, touching
the preparation of the Matter, I may
now proceede to the Disposition thereof,
which must forme the Worke. In
the Forme, as I did in the Seate, I will
first consider the generall Figuration,
and then the seuerall Members.
            
            
               Figures are either simple or Mixed.
The simple be either Circular or Angular.
And of Circular, either Compleate,
or Deficient, as Ouals, with
which kindes I will bee contented,
though the Distribution might bee
more curious.
            
               
Now the exact Circle is in truth a
Figure, which for our purpose hath
many fit and eminent properties; as
fitnesse, for Commodity and Receit,
being the most capable; fitnesse for
strength and duration, being the most
vnited in his parts; Fitnesse for beautie
and delight, as imitating the celestiall
Orbes, and the vniuersall Forme.
And it seemes, besides, to haue the approbation
of Nature, when shee worketh
by Instinct, which is her secret
Schoole: For birds doe build their
nests Spherically: But notwithstanding
these Attributes, it is in truth a very
vnprofitable Figure in priuate Fabriques,
as being of allother the most
chargeable, and much roome lost in
the bending of the Walles, when it
comes to bee diuided: besides an ill
distribution of light, except from the
Center of the Roofe. So as anciently it
was not vsual, saue in their Temples and
Amphi-Theaters, which needed no

Compartitions. The Ouals and other
imperfect circular Formes, haue the
same exceptions, and lesse benefite of
capacity: So as there remaynes to bee
considered in this generall suruey of
Figures, the Angular, and the Mixed of
both. Touching the Angular, it may
perchance sound somewhat strangely,
but it is a true obseruation, that
this Art doth neither loue many Angles
nor few. For first, the Triangle which
hath the fewest sides and corners, is of
all other the most condemned, as being
indeed both incapable and infirme
(wherof the reason shall be afterwards
rendred) and likewise vnresoluable
into any other regular Forme then it
selfe, in the inward Partitions.
            
            As for Figures of fiue, six, seuen, or
more Angles; They are surely fitter
for Militar Architecture, where the Bulworks
may be layed out at the Corners,
and the sides serue for Curtaines, then
for ciuill vse; though I am not ignorant

of that famous Piece at Caprarola,
belonging to the house of Farnese,
cast by Baroccio into the forme of a
Pentagone, with a Circle inscribed,
where the Architect did ingeniously
wrestle with diuers inconueniences in
disposing of the Lights, and in sauing
the vacuities. But as designes of such
nature doe more ayme at Rarity, then
Commoditie: so for my part I had
rather admire them, then commend
them.
            These things considered, we are
both by the Precepts and by the Practise
of the best Builders, to resolue vpon
Rectangular Squares, as a meane betweene
too few, and too many Angles;
and through the equall inclination of
the sides (which make the right Angle)
stronger then the Rhombe, or Losenge,
or any other irregular Square.
But whether the exact Quadrat, or the
long Square be the better, I finde not
well determined, though in mine

owne conceit I must preferre the latter,
prouided that the Length doe not
exceede the Latitude aboue one third
part, which would diminish the beauty
of the Aspect, as shall appeare when
I come to speake of Symmetry and Proportion.
            
            Of mixed Figures, partly Circular,
and partly Angular, I shall neede to say
nothing; because hauing handled the
simple already, the mixed according
to their composition, doe participate
of the same respects. Onely against
these, there is a proper Obiection, that
they offend Vniformity: Whereof I
am therefore opportunely induced to
say somewhat, as farre as shal concerne
the outward Aspect, which is now in
Discourse.
            In Architecture, there may seem to be
two opposite affectations, Vniformitie
and Varietie, which yet will very well
suffer a good recōcilement, as we may
see in the great Paterne of Nature, to

which I must often resort: For surely
there can be no Structure, more vniforme,
then our Bodies in the whole Figuration:
Each side, agreeing with the
other, both in the number, in the qualitie,
and in the measure of the Parts:
And yet some are round, as the Armes,
some flat, as the Hands, some prominent,
and some more retired: So as vpon
the Mater, wee see that Diuersitie
doth not destroy Vniformitie, and that
the Limmes of a noble Fabrique, may
bee correspondent enough, though
they be various; Prouided alwayes, that
we doe not runne into certaine extrauagant
Inuentions, whereof I shall
speake more largely, when I come to
the parting and casting of the whole
Worke. We ought likewise to auoyde
Enormous heights of sixe or seuen
Stories, as well as irregular Formes; and
the contrary fault of low-distended
Fronts, is as vnseemely: Or againe,
when the Face of the Building, is narrow

and the Flank deepe; To all which
extreames, some particular Nations, or
Townes, are subiect, whose Names
may be ciuilly spared: And so much
for the generall Figuration, or Aspect of
the Worke.
            
            Now concerning the Parts in Seueraltie.
All the parts of euery Fabrique,
may be comprised vnder fiue Heads,
which Diuision I receiue from Batista
Alberti, to doe him right. And they
be these.
            
               The Foundation.
               
               The Walles.
               
               The Appertions or Ouertures.
               
               The Comparti
                        •
                     ion.
               
               And the Couer.
               
            
            About all which I purpose to gather
the principall Cautions, and as I passe
along, I will touch also the naturall
Reasons of Art, that my discourse may
be the lesse Mechanicall.
            
            First then concerning the Foundation,
which requireth the exactest care; For

if that happen to dance, it will marre
all the mirth in the House: Therefore,
that wee may found our Habitation
firmely, we must first examine the Bed
of Earth (as I may tearme it,) vpon
which we will Build; and then the vnderfillings,
or Substruction, as the Auncients
did call it: For the former, we
haue a generall precept in Vitruuius
twice precisely repeated by him, as a
point indeed of mayne consequence,
first lib. 1. cap. 5. And againe more fitly
lib. 3. cap. 3. in these words as Philander
doth well correct the vulgar Copies.
            
               Substructionis Fundationes fodiantur
(saith he) si queant inueniri adsolidum, &
insolido. By which words I conceiue
him to commend vnto vs, not onely, a
diligent, but euen a iealous examination
what the Soile will beare: aduising
vs, not to rest vpon any appearing Soliditie,
vnlesse the whole Mould through
which wee cut, haue likewise beene
solid; But how deepe wee should goe

in this search, hee hath no where to
my remembrance determined, as perhaps
depending more vpon Discretion▪
               
then Regularitie, according to the
weight of the Worke; yet Andrea Palla
                     •
                  dio
hath fairely aduentured to reduce
it into Rule: Allowing for that Ca
                     •
                  uazione
(as he calleth it) a sixt part of
the height of the whole Fabrique,
               Vnderdiging, or Hollowing of the Earth. vnles
                  •
               
the Cellers be vnder ground, in which
case hee would haue vs, (as it shoul
                  •
               
seeme) to sound somewhat lower.
            Some Italians doe prescribe, that
when they haue chosen the Floore, or
Plot, and laid out the Limits of the
Worke, wee should first of all Digge
Wels and Cesternes, and other vnderconducts
and conueiances, for the
Suillage of the House, whence may arise
a double benefit, for both the Nature
of the Mould or Soile, would thereby
be safely searched, and moreouer those
open vents, will serue to discharge such
Vapours, as hauing otherwise no issu
                  •
               
               
might peraduenture shake the Building.
This is enough for the naturall
Grounding, which though it bee not a
part of the solid Fabrique, yet here was
the fittest place to handle it.
            There followeth the Substruction, or
Ground-worke of the whole Edifice,
which must sustaine the Walles; and
this is a kinde of Artificiall foundation,
as the other was Natural. About which
these are the chiefe Remembrances.
First, that the bottome be precisely leuell,
where the Italians therefore commonly
lay a platforme of good Bord;
Then that the lowest Ledge or Row be
meerely of Stone, and the broader the
better, closely layd without Morter,
which is a generall caution for all
parts in Building, that are contiguous
to Bord or Timber, because Lime amd
Wood are insociable, and if any where
vnfit confiners, then most especially in
the Foundation. Thirdly, that the
bredth of the Substruction bee at least

double to the insistent Wall, and more
or lesse, as the weight of the Fabrique
shall require; for as I must againe repeate,
Discretion may be freer then Art.
Lastly, I finde in some a curious precept,
that the Materials below, be layd
as they grew in the Quarrie, supposing
them belike to haue most strength in
their Naturall and Habituall Posture.
For as Philippe de l'Orme obserueth, the
breaking or yeelding of a stone in this
part, but the bredth of the backe of a
knife, will make a Cleft of more then
half a foot in the Fabrique aloft, So important
are Fundamentall errors. Among
which notes I haue sayd nothing of
Pallification, or Pyling of the Groundplot,
commanded by Vitruuius, when
we build vpon a moist or marshy soile,
because that were an error in the first
choyce. And therefore all Seats that
must vse such prouision below (as Venice
for an eminent example) would
perhaps vpon good enquiry, be found

to haue beene at first chosen by the
counsell of Necessity.
            
            Now the Foundation being searched,
and the Substruction layd, wee
must next speake of the Wals.
            
            
               Wals are either entire and continuall,
or intermitted; and the Intermissions be
either Pillars or Pylasters; for here I had
rather handle them, then as some others
doe, among Ornaments.
            
            The entire Muring is by Writers diuersly
distinguished: By some, according
to the quality of the Materials, as
either Stone or Brick, &c. where, by the
way, let me note, that to build Wals and
greater Workes of Flint, whereof wee
want not example in our Iland, & particularly
in the Prouince of Kent, was
(as I conceiue) meerly vnknown to the
Ancients, who obseruing in that Materiall,
a kinde of Metalicall Nature, or at
least a Fusibility, seeme to haue resolued
it into nobler vse; an Art now vtterly
lost, or perchance kept vp by a few Chymicks.
               
Some againe doe not so much
consider the quality, as the Position of
the sayd Materials: As when Bricke or
squared stones are laid in their lengths
with sides and heads together, or their
points conjoyned like a Networke (for
so Vitruuius doth call it reticulatum opus)
of familiar vse (as it should seeme) in
his Age, though afterwards growne
out of request, euen perhaps for that
subtill speculation which hee himselfe
toucheth; because so layd, they are
more apt in swagging down, to pierce
with their points, then in the jacent
Posture, and so to creuice the Wall:
But to leaue such cares to the meaner
Artificers, the more essentiall are
these.
            That the Walles bee most exactly
perpendicular to the Ground-worke:
for the right Angle (thereon depending)
is the true cause of all Stability;
both in Artificiall and Naturall positions;
A man likewise standing firmest,

when he stands vprightest. That
the massiest and heauiest Materials bee
the lowest, as fitter to beare, then to
be borne. That the Worke as it riseth,
diminish in thicknesse proportionally,
for ease both of weight, and of expence.
That certaine courses or Ledges
of more strength then the rest, be
interlayed like Bones, to sustaine the
Fabrique from totall ruine, if the vnder
parts should decay. Lastly, that the
Angles bee firmely bound, which are
the Nerues of the whole Edifice, and
therefore are commonly fortified by
the Italians, euen in their Bricke buildings,
on each side of the corners, with
well squared stone, yeelding both
strength and grace And so much touching
the entire or solid Wall.
            
            The intermissions (as hath beene
sayd) are either by Pillars, or Pylasters.
            
            
               Pillers which we may likewise call
Columnes (for the word among Artificers
is almost naturallized) I could

distinguish into Simple & Compounded.
But (to tread the beaten and plainest
way) there are fiue Orders of Pillers,
according to their dignity and perfection,
thus marshalled:

                  The Tuscan.
                  
                  The Dorique.
                  
                  The Ionique.
                  
                  The Corinthian.
                  
               
            
            And the Compound Order, or as
some call it the Roman, others more
generally the Italian.
            
            In which fiue Orders I will first
consider their Communities, and then
their Proprieties.
            
            Their Communities (as farre as I obserue)
are principally three. First, they
are all Round; for though some conceiue
Columna Atticurges mentioned by
Vitruuius, lib. 3. cap. 3. to haue beene a
squared Pillar, yet wee must passe it ouer
as irregular, neuer receiued among
these Orders, no more then certaine other
licentious inuentions, of Wreathed,
               
and Vined, and Figured Columnes,
which our Author himselfe condemneth,
being in his whole Booke a professed
enemy to Fancies.
            
            Secondly, they are all Diminished,
or Contracted insensibly, more or lesse,
according to the proportion of their
heights, from one third part of the
whole Shaft vpwards, which Philander
doth prescribe by his owne precise
measuring of the Ancient remainders,
as the most gracefull Diminution. And
here I must take leaue to blame a practice
growne (I know not how) in
certaine places too familiar, of making
Pillars swell in the middle, as if they
were sicke of some Tympany, or Dropsie,
without any Authentique Paterne
or Rule, to my knowledge, and vnseemely
to the very iudgement of
sight. True it is that in Vitruuius, lib.
3. cap. 2. wee finde these words, De adiectione,
quae adijcitur in medijs Columnis,
quaa apud Grecos 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   appellatur, in extremo

erit formatio eius; which passage,
seemeth to haue giuen some coutenance
to this error. But of the promise
there made, as of diuerse other
elsewhere, our Master hath fayled vs,
either by slip of memory, or iniury of
time, and so wee are left in the darke.
Alwayes sure I am, that besides the authority
of example which it wanteth,
It is likewise contrary to the Originall
and Naturall Type, in Trees, which at
first was imitated in Pillars, as Vitruuius
himselfe obserueth, lib. 5. cap. 1. For
who euer saw any Cypresse, or Pine,
(which are there alledged) small below
and aboue, and tumerous in the
middle, vnlesse it were some diseased
Plant, as Nature (though otherwise the
comliest Mistresse) hath now and then
her deformities and Irregularities.
            
            Thirdly, they haue all their Vndersettings,
or Pedistals, in height a third
part of the whole Columne, comprehending
the Base and Capitall; and their

vpper Adiuncts, as Architraue, Frize,
and Cornice, a fourth part of the sayd
Pillar; which rule of singular vse and
facility I find setled by Iacobo Baroccio,
and hold him a more credible Author,
as a man that most intended this
piece, then any that vary from him in
those Dimentions.
            
            These are their most considerable
Communities and agreements.
            Their Proprieties or Distinctions will
best appeare by some reasonable description
of them all, together with
their Architraues, Frizes, and Cornices,
as they are vsually handled.
            First therefore the Tuscan is a plain,
massie, rurall Pillar, resembling some
sturdy well-limmed Labourer, homely
clad, in which kinde of comparisons
Vitruuius himselfe seemeth to take pleasure,
lib. 4. cap. 1. The length thereof
shall be six Diameters, of the grossest of
the Pillar below. Of all proportions,
in truth, the most naturall; For our

Author tells vs, lib. 3. cap. 1. that the
foote of a man is the sixt part of his
bodie in ordinary measure, and Man
himselfe, according to the saying of
Protagoras (which Aristotle doth somewhere
vouchsafe to celebrate) is

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : as it were the Prototype
of all exact Symmetrie, which we
haue had other occasion to touch before:
This Columne I haue by good
warrant called Rurall, Vitru. cap. 2. lib. 3.
And therefore we need not consider
his rank among the rest. The distance
or Intercolumniation (which word Artificers
doe vsually borrow) may bee
neere foure of his owne Diameters,
because the Materials commonly layd
ouer this Pillar, were rather of wood
then stone; through the lightnesse
whereof the Architraue could not suffer,
though thinnely supported, nor
the Columne it selfe being so substantiall.
The Contraction aloft shall be
(according to the most receiued practice)

one fourth part of his thicknesse
below. To conclude, (for I intend only
as much as shall serue for a due Distinguishment,
and not to delineate
every petty member) the Tuscan is of
all the rudest Pillar, and his principall
Character Simplicity.
            
            The Dorique Order is the grauest
that hath beene receiued into ciuill
vse, preseruing, in comparison of those
that follow, a more Masculine Aspect,
and litle trimmer then the Tuscan that
went before, saue a sober garnishment
now and then of Lions heads in the
Cornice, and of Triglyphs and Metopes
alwayes in the Frize. Sometimes likewise,
but rarely, chaneled, and a little
slight sculpture about the Hypotrachelion,
or Necke vnder the Capitall. The
length, seuen Diameters. His ranke or
degree, is the lowest by all Congruity,
as being more massie then the other
three, and consequently abler to support.
The Intercolumniation, thrice as

much as his thicknesse below. The
Contraction aloft, one fift of the same
measure. To discerne him, will bee a
peece rather of good Heraldry, then of
Architecture: For he is best knowne by
his place, when he is in company, and
by the peculiar ornament of his Frize
(before mentioned) when he is alone.
            The Ionique Order doth represent a
kinde of Feminine slendernesse, yet
saith Vitruuius, not like a light Housewife,
but in a decent dressing, hath
much of the Matrone. The length
eight Diameters. In degree as in substantialnesse,
next aboue the Dorique,
sustayning the third, and adorning the
second Story. The Intercolumniation
two of his owne Diameters. The Contraction
one sixt part. Best knowne by
his trimmings, for the bodie of this
Columne is perpetually chaneled, like
a thicke plighted Gowne. The Capitall
dressed on each side, not much vnlike
womens Wires, in a spirall wreathing,

which they call the Ionian Voluta.
The Cornice indented. The Frize swelling
like a pillow; And therefore by
Vitruuius, not vnelegantly tearmed
Puluinata. These are his best Characters.
            
            The Corinthian, is a Columne, laciuiously
decked like a Curtezane, and
therein much participating (as all Inuentions
doe) of the place where they
were first borne: Corinthe hauing been
without controuersie one of the wantonest
Townes in the world. This
Order is of nine Diameters. His degree,
one Stage aboue the Ionique, and alwaies
the highest of the simple Orders.
The Intercolumniation two of his Diameters,
and a fourth part more, which
is of all other the comeliest distance.
The Contraction one seuenth Part. In
the Cornice both Dentelli and Modiglioni.
The Frize,
               Our Artizans call them Teeth and Cartonzes. adorned with all kinds
of Figures and various Compartments
at Pleasure. The Capitall, cut into the

beautifullest leafe, that Nature doth
yeeld, which surely next the Aconitum
Pardalianches (reiected perchance as
an ominous Plant) is the Acanthus
or Branca Vrsina though Vitruuius
doe impute the choice thereof vnto
Chance, and wee must be contented
to beleeue him: In short, As
Plainenesse did Charactarize the Tuscan,
so must Delicacie and Varietie the Corinthian
Pillar, besides the height of
his Ranke.
            The last is the Compounded Order:
His name being a briefe of his Nature.
For this Pillar is nothing in effect, but
a Medlie, or an Amasse of all the precedent
Ornaments, making a new kinde,
by stealth, and though the most richly
tricked, yet the poorest in this, that
he is a borrower of all his Beautie. His
length, (that he may haue somewhat
of his owne) shalbe of ten Diameters.
His degree should, no doubt, bee the
highest by reasons before yeelded.

But few Palaces Auncient or Moderne
exceede the third of the Ciuill Orders.
The Intercolumniation, but a Diameter
and an halfe, or alwayes somewhat
lesse then two. The Contraction of this
Pillar must be one eight Part lesse aboue
then belowe. To know him
will be easie by the verie mixture of his
Ornaments, and Cloathing.
            
            And so much touching the fiue Orders
of Columnes, which I will conclude
with two or three, not impertinent
Cautions:
            
            First, that where more of these Orders
then one, shalbe set in seuerall
Stories or Contignations, there must bee
an exquisite care, to place the Columnes
precisely, one ouer another, that so,
the solid may answere to the solid, and
the vacuities to the vacuities, as well
for Beautie, as strength of the Fabrique:
And by this Caution the Consequence
is plaine, that when wee speake of the
Intercolumniation or distance, which is

due to each Order, we meane in a Dorique,
Ionicall, Corinthian Porch, or Cloister,
or the like of one Contignation, and
not in Storied buildings.
            Secondly, let the Columnes aboue
be a forth part lesse then those below,
saith Vitruuius, lib. 5. cap. 1. A strange
Precept, in my opinion, and so strange,
that peraduenture it were more sutable,
euen to his owne Principles, to
make them rather a fourth Part greater,
For lib. 3. cap. 2. where our Master
handleth the Contractions of Pillars,
wee haue an Optique Rule, that the
higher they are, the lesse should be alwayes
their diminution aloft, because
the Eye it selfe, doth naturally contract
all Obiects more or lesse, according to
the Distance; which consideration,
may, at first sight, seeme to haue beene
forgotten in the Caution wee haue
now giuen; but Vitruuius (the best Interpreter
of himselfe) hath in the same
place of his fift Booke, well acquitted

his memorie by these words: Columnae
superiores quarta parte minores, quàm inferiores,
sunt constituendae; proptereà quòd,
operi ferendo quaesunt inferiora, firmiora
esse debent; preferring like a wise Mechanick,
the naturall Reason, before
the Mathematicall, and sensible conceits
before abstracted. And yet lib. 4. cap. 4.
he seemeth againe, to affect Subtiltie,
allowing pillars the more they are chaneled,
to bee the more slender; because
while our Eye (saith hee) doth as it
were distinctly measure, the eminent
and the hollowed Parts, the Totall Obiect
appeareth the bigger, and so as
much as those excauations, doe subtract,
is supplied by a Fallacie of the
Sight: But here mee thinks, our Master
should likewise haue rather considered,
the naturall Inconuenience;
for though Pillars by chaneling, bee
seemingly ingrossed to our Sight, yet
they are truely weakened in themselues;
and therefore ought perchance

in sound reason not to bee the more
slender, but the more Corpulent, vnlesse
apparances preponder truths, but
Contra Magistrum, non est disputandum.
            
            A third Caution shalbe that all the
proiected or Iutting Parts (as they are
tearmed) be very moderate, especially,
the Cornices of the lower Orders, for
whilest some thinke to 
                  •
               iue them, a
beautifull and royall Aspect, by their
largenesse, they sometimes hinder both
the Light within, (whereof I shall
speake more in due place) and likewise
detract much from the viewe of
the Front without, as well appeareth in
one of the principall Fabriques at Venice,
namely the Palace, of the Duke
Grimani on the Canal Grande, which by
this magnificent errour, is somewhat
disgraced: I neede now say no more
concerning Columnes & their Adiuncts,
about which Architects make such a
noyse in their Bookes, as if the very
tearmes of Architraues, and Frizes,
               
and Cornices, and the like, were enough
to graduate a Master of this
Art; yet let me before I passe to other
matter, preuent a familiar Obiection;
It will perchance bee said, that all this
Doctrine touching the fiue Orders,
were fitter for the Quarries of Asia
which yeelded 127 Columnes of 60 Foote
high, to the Ephesian Temple, or for
Numidia where Marbles abound; then
for the Spirits of England, who must be
contented with more ignoble Materials:
To which I answere, that this
neede not discourage vs: For I haue
often at Venice viewed with much pleasure,
an Atrium Graecum (we may translate
it an Anti porch, after the Greeke
manner) raised by Andrea Palladio, vpon
eight Columnes of the Compounded
Order; The Bases of Stone, without
Pedistals, The shafts or Bodies, of
meere Brick; three foote and an halfe
thicke in the Diameter below, and consequently
thirty fiue foote high, as

himselfe hath described them in his second
Booke; Then which, mine Eye,
hath neuer yet beheld any Columnes,
more stately of Stone or Marble; For
the Bricks, hauing first beene formed
in a Circular Mould, and then cut before
their burning into foure quarters or
more, the sides afterwards ioyne so
closely, and the points concenter so
exactly, that the Pillars appeare one
entire Peece; which short description, I
could not omit, that thereby may appeare,
how in truth wee want rather
Art then stuffe, to satisfie our greatest
Fancies.
            
            After Pillars, the next in my distribution,
are Pylasters, mentioned by
Vitruuius, lib. 5. cap. 1. and scant any
where else vnder the name of Parastates,
as Philander conceiueth, which
Grammaticall point (though perchance
not very cleere) I am contented to examine
no farther. Alwayes, what we
meane by the thing it selfe, is plaine

enough in our owne vulgar; Touching
which, I will briefly collect the
most considerable notes.
            
               Pylasters, must not bee too tall and
slender, least they resemble Pillars, nor
too Dwarfish and grosse, least they imitate
the Piles or Peeres of Bridges:
Smoothnesse doth not so naturally become
them, as a Rusticke Superficies,
for they ayme more at State & Srength,
then Elegancie. In priuate Buildings
they ought not to be narrower, then
one Third, nor broader then two
parts of the whole Vacuity, betweene
Pylaster and Pylaster; but to
those that stand at the Corners, may be
allowed a little more Latitude by discretion,
for strength of the Angles: In
Theaters and Amphi-theaters, and such
weighty Workes, Palladio obserueth
them, to haue beene as broad as the
halfe, and now and then as the whole
Vacuitie: Hee noteth likewise (and
others consent with him) that their

true Proportion, should bee an exact
Square; But for lessening of expence,
and inlarging of roome, they are commonly
narrower in Flanke, then in
Front: Their principall Grace doth
consist in halfe or whole Pillars, applied
vnto them; in which case it is
well noted by Authors, that the Columnes
may bee allowed somewhat aboue
their ordinary length, because
they leane vnto so good Supporters.
And thus much shall sufice touching
Pilasters, which is a cheape, & a strong,
and a noble kinde of Structure.
            
            Now because they are oftner, both
for Beauty and Maiesty, found Arched,
then otherwise; I am heere orderly
led to speake of Arches, and vnder the
same head of Vaults: for an Arch is nothing
indeed but a contracted Vault,
and a Vault is but a dilated Arch:
Therefore to handle this Piece both
compendiously, and fundamentally, I
will resolue the whole businesse into a
few Theoremes.
            
            
               
               Theoreme 1.
               All solid Materials free from impediment,
doe descend perpendicularly
downewards, because ponderosity is a
naturall inclination to the Center of
the World, and Nature performeth
her motions by the shortest lines.
            
            
               Theoreme 2.
               Brickes moulded in their ordinary
Rectangular forme, if they shall be layd
one by another in a leuell row, betweene
any Supporters sustayning the
two ends, then all the pieces between,
will necessarily sinke, euen by their
owne naturall Grauity, and much more
if they suffer any depression by other
waight aboue them, because their
sides being paralell▪
                   they haue roome
to descend perpendicularly, without impeachment,
according to the former
Theoreme▪
                   Therefore to make them
stand, wee must either change their
Posture, or their Figure, or both.
            
            
               
               Theorme 3.
               If Brickes moulded, or Stones squared
Cuncatim (that is, Wedge wise, broader
aboue then below) shall be layd in
a Row leuell, with their ends supported,
as in the precedent Theoreme, pointing
all to one Center; then none of the
pieces betweene can sinke till the Supporters
giue way, because they want
roome in that Figuration, to descend
perpendicularly. But this is yet a weake
piece of Structure, because the Supporters
are subiect to much impulsion, especially
if the line be long; for which
reason this Forme is seldome vsed, but
ouer Windowes, or narrowe Doores.
Therfore to fortifie the Work as in this
third Theoreme wee haue supposed the
Figure of all the Materials different from
those in the second: So likewise wee
must now change the Posture, as will
appeare in the Theoreme following.
            
            
               Theoreme 4.
               If the Materials figured as before

                  Wedge-wise, shall not be disposed leuelly,
but in forme of some Arch, or portion
of a Circle, pointing all to the same
Center: In this case neither the pieces
of the sayd Arch, can sinke downewards,
through want of roome to descend
By the first Theor. perpendicularly: Nor the Supporters
or Butments (as they are tearmed)
of the sayd Arch can suffer so
much violence, as in the precedent
flat Posture, for the roundnesse will
alwayes make the Incumbent waight,
rather to rest vpon the Supporters, then
to shoue them▪ whence may be drawn
an euident Corolary; that the safest of
all Arches is the Semicircular, and of all
Vaults the Hemisphere, though not absolutely
exempted from some naturall
weakenesse,Which is the sole prerogatiue of perpendicular lines and 
                        •
                     ight Angles. as Barnardino Baldi Abbot
of Guastalla, in his Commentary vpon
Aristotles Mechaniques, doth very well
prooue, where let me note by the way,
that when any thing is Mathematically
demonstrated weake, it is much more

                  Mechanically weake: Errors euer occurring
more easily in the management
of Grosse Materials, then Lineall Designes.
               
            
            
               Theoreme 5.
               As Semicircular Arches, or Hemisphericall
Vaults, being raised vpon the
totall Diameter, bee of all other the
roundest, and consequently the securest,
by the precedent Theoreme: So
those are the gracefullest, which keeping
precisely the same height, shall
yet bee distended, one fourteenth part
longer then the sayd entire Diameter;
which addition of distent will conferre
much to their Beauty, and detract
but little from their Srength.
               
               This obseruation I finde in Leon-Batista
Alberti; But the practice how
to preserue the same height, and yet
distend the Armes or ends of the Arch,
is in Albert Durers Geometry, who taught
the Italians many an excellent Line, of
great vse in this Art.
               
               
                  
Vpon these fiue Theoremes, all the
skill of Arching and Vaulting is grounded:
As for those Arches, which our
Artizans call of the third and fourth
point; And the Tuscan writers diterzo,
and di quarto acuto, because they alwayes
concurre in an acute Angle,
and doe spring from diuision of the
Diameter, into three, foure, or more
parts at pleasure; I say, such as these,
both for the naturall imbecility of the
sharpe Angle it selfe, and likewise for
their very Vncomelinesse, ought to bee
exiled from judicious eyes, and left to
their first inuentors, the Gothes or
Lumbards, amongst other Reliques of
that barbarous Age.
               
               Thus of my first Partition of the
parts of euery Fabrique, into fiue
Heads, hauing gone through the two
former, & been incidently carried into
this last doctrine touching Arches and
Vaults. The next now in order are
the Apertions; vnder which tearme I

doe comprehend Doores, Windowes,
Staire-cases, Chimnies, or other Conducts:
In short, all Inlets or Outlets;
To which belong two generall Cautions.
               
               First, That they bee as few in number,
and as moderate in Dimension,
as may possibly consist with other due
respects: for in a word, all Openings
are Weaknings.
               
               Secondly, That they doe not approach
too neere the Angles of the
Wals; for it were indeed a most essentiall
Solecisme to weaken that part,
which must strengthen all the rest: A
precept well recorded, but ill practised
by the Italians themselues, perticularly
at Venice, where I haue obserued
diuerse Pergoli, or Meniana (as Vitruuius
seemeth to call them, which
are certaine ballised out-standings to
satisfie curiosity of sight) very dangerously
set forth, vpon the very point it
selfe, of the Murall Angle.
               
               
                  
Now, Albeit I make haste, to the
casting and comparting of the whole
Worke, (being indeede the very Definitiue
Summe of this Art, to distribute
vsefully and gracefully a well chosen
Plot) yet I will first vnder their seuerall
Heads, collect briefly some of the choisest
notes belonging to these particular
Ouertures.
               
            
            
               Of Doores and Windowes.
               THese In
                        •
                     lets of Men and of Light, I
couple together, because I find their
due Dimensions, brought vnder one
Rule, by Leone Alberti (a learned Searcher)
who from the Schoole of Pythagoras
(where it was a fundamentall
Maxime, that the Images of all things
are latent in Numbers) doth determine
the comeliest Proportion, betweene
breadths and heights; Reducing Symmetrie
to Symphonie, and the harmonie
of Sounde, to a kinde of harmonie in
Sight, after this manner: The two

principall Consonances, that most rauish
the Eare, are by consent of all Nature,
the fift, and the Octaue; whereof the
first riseth radically, from the proportion,
betweene two and three. The other
from the double Interualle, betweene
One and Two, or betweene Two
and Foure &c. Now if we shall transport
these proportions, from Audible
to visible Obiects; and apply them as
they shall fall fittest (the nature of the
Place considered) Namely in some
Windowes, and Doores, the Symmetrie of
Two to Three, in their Breadth and
Length; In others the double as aforesaid;
There will indubitably result
from either, a gracefull and harmonious
contentment, to the Eye;
Which speculation though it may appeare
vnto vulgar Artizans, perhaps too
subtile, and too sublime, yet wee must
remember, that Vitruuius himself doth
determine many things in his profession;
by Musicall grounds, and much

commendeth in an Architect, a Philosophical
Spirit; that is, he would haue him
(as I conceaue it) to be no superficiall,
and floating Artificer; but a Diuer into
Causes, and into the Mysteries of Proportion;
Of the Ornaments, belonging both
to Doores and Windowes, I shall speake
in other place; But let mee heere adde
one obseruation; That our Master (as
appeareth by diuers passages, and particularly
lib. 6. cap. 9) seemes to haue
beene an extreame Louer of Luminous
Roomes; And indeede I must confesse
that a Franke Light, can misbecome
noe A Edifice whatsoeuer, Temples onely
excepted; which were anciently darke,
as they are likewise at this day in some
Proportion. Deuotion more requiring
collected then defused Spirits.
                  Lum en est diffusiuum sui & alieni▪
                   Yet on
the other side we must take heede to
make a House (though but for ciuill
vse) all Eyes, like Argus; which in Northerne
Climes would be too could, In
Southerne, too hot: And therefore the

matter indeede importeth more then
a merry comparison. Besides, There
is no part of Structure either more expencefull,
then Windowes; or more
ruinous; not onely for that vulgar
reason, as being exposed to all violence
of weather; but because consisting of
so different and vnsociable pieces, as
Wood, Iron, Leade, and Glasse, and those
small and weake, they are easily shaken;
I must likewise remember one thing,
(though it be but a Grammatical note)
touching Doores. Some were Fores, &
Some were Valuae. Those (as the very
word may seeme to import) did open
outwards, These inwards; And were
commonly of two Leaues or Panes, (as
we call them) thereby requiring indeed,
a lesser Circuit in their vnfoulding;
And therefore much in vse among Italians
at this day; But I must charge
them with an Imperfection▪ for
though they let in as well as the former,
yet they keepe out worse.
            
            
               
               Of Staire-cases.
               TO make a compleate Staire-case,
is a curious peece of Architecture:
The vulgar Cautions
are these.
               That it haue a very liberall Light, against
all Casualtie of Slippes, and
Falles.
               
               That the space aboue the Head, bee
large and Airy, which the Italians vse
to call Vn bel
                        •
                     sfogolo, as it were good
Ventilation, because a man doth spend
much breath in mounting.
               That the Halfe-paces bee well distributed,
at competent distances, for reposing
on the way.
               That to auoyd Encounters, and besides
to gratifie the beholder, the whole
Staire-case haue no nigard Latitude,
that is, for the principall Ascent, at
least ten foot in Royall Buildings.
               
               That the breadth of euery single
Step or Staire bee neuer lesse then one

foote, nor more then eighteen inches.
               That they exceede by no meanes
halfe a foot in their height or thicknesse;
for our Legges doe labour more
in Eleuation, then in Distention: These
I say are familiar remembrances, to
which let meadde;
               That the steps bee layd where they
joyne Con vn tantino di scarpa; we may
translate it somewhat sloaping, that so
the foot may in a sort both ascend and
descend together, which though obserued
by few, is a secret and delicate
deception of the paines in mounting.
               Lastly, to reduce this doctrine to
some Naturall, or at least Mathematicall
ground, (our Master, as we see, lib. 9.
cap. 2.) borroweth those proportions,
that make the sides of a Rectangular
Triangle, which the Ancient Schoole
did expresse in lowest tearmes, by the
numbers of 3. 4. and 5. That is, Three
for the Perpendicular, from the Staire-head
to the ground; Foure for the

                  Ground-line it selfe, or Recession from
the wall; And Fiue for the whole Inclination
or slopenesse in the ascent,
which proportion, saith he, will make
Temperatas graduum librationes. Hitherto
of Staire-cases which are direct: There
are likewise Spirall, or Cockle staires, either
Circular, or Ouall, and sometimes
running about a Pillar, sometimes vacant,
wherein Palladio, (A man in this
point of singular felicity) was wont
to diuide the Diameter, of the first sort
into three parts, yeelding one to the
Pillar, and two to the Steps; Of the second
into foure, whereof he gaue two
to the Staires, and two to the Vacuitie,
which had all their light from aboue,
And this in exact Ouals, is a
Master-piece.
            
            
               OF CHIMNIES.
               IN the present businesse, Italians (who
make very frugall fires, are perchance
not the best Counsellers.) Therefore

from them we may better learne, both
how to raise faire Mantels within the
roomes, and how to disguise gracefully
the shafts of Chimnies abroad (as
they vse) in sundry formes (which I
shall handle in the latter part of my labour)
and the rest I will extract from
Philippe de l' Orme: In this part of his
Worke more diligent, then in any other,
or, to doe him right, then any
man else.
               First, hee obserueth very soberly,
that who in the disposition of any
Building will consider the nature of
the Region, and the Windes that ordinarily
blow, from this, or that Quarter;
might so cast the roomes, which shall
most need fire; that hee should little
feare the incommodity of Smoake, and
therefore hee thinkes, that inconuenience,
for the most part to proceede
from some inconsiderate beginning.
Or if the error lay not in the Disposition
but in the Structure it selfe; then hee

makes a Logicall enquiry▪ That either
the Winde is too much let in aboue, at
the mouth of the Shafte, or the Smoke
stifeled below; If none of these, Then
there is a repulsion of the Fume, by
some higher Hill or Fabrique, that shall
ouertoppe the Chimney and worke the
former effect: If likewise not this,
Then he concludes, that the Roome
which is infested, must bee necessarily
both little and close, so as the smoke
cannot issue by a naturall Principle,
wanting a succession and supply of
new Ayre.
               
               Now, In these cases he suggesteth
diuers Artificiall remedies; of which I
will allow one, a little Description, because
it sauoureth of Philosophie, and
was touched by Vitruuius himselfe, lib. 1
cap. 6. but by this man ingeniously applied
to the present vse: Hee will
haue vs prouide two hollow brasse
Balles of reasonable capacitie, with little
holes open in both, for reception of

Water, when the Aire shalbe first
sucked out; One of these wee must
place with the hole vpwards, vpon
an yron Wire, that shall trauerse the
Chimney, a little aboue the Mantell, at
the ordinary height of the sharpest
heate or flames, whereof the water
within being rarified, and by rarifaction
resolued into Winde, will breake out,
and so force vp the smoke, which otherwise
might linger in the Tunnell, by
the way, and oftentimes reuert; With
the other, (saith he) wee may supply
the place of the former, when it is exhausted,
or for a neede blow the Fire
in the meane while; Which Inuention
I haue interposed for some little intertainement
of the Reader; I will conclude
with a note from Palladio, who
obserueth that the Ancients did warme
their Roomes, with certaine secret
Pipes that came through the Walles,
transporting heate (as I conceiue it)
to sundry parts of the House, from one

common Furnace; I am ready to baptize
them Caliducts, as well as they are
tearmed Venti-ducts, and Aquae-ducts
that conuey Winde and Water; which
whether it were a custome or a delicacie,
was surely both for thrift, and
for vse, far beyond the German Stoues;
And I should preferre it likewise before
our owne fashion, if the very sight
of a fire, did not adde to the Roome a
kinde of Reputation,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Hom. Epig. as old Homer doth
teach vs in a verse, sufficient to prooue
that himselfe was not blinde, as some
would laie to his charge.
               Touching Conducts for the Suillage
and other necessities of the House,
(which how base soeuer in vse, yet for
health of the Inhabitants, are as considerable,
and perhaps more then the
rest) I finde in our Authors, this Counsell;
That Art should imitate Nature,
in those ignoble conueyances; and separate
them from Sight, (where there
wants a running Water) into the

most remote, and lowest, and thickest
part of the Foundation: with secret
vents passing vp through the Walles
like a Tunnell to the wilde Aire aloft:
which all Italian Artizans commend
for the discharge of noysome vapours,
though else-where to my knowledge
little practised.
               Thus hauing considered the precedent
Appertions, or Ouertures, in seueraltie
according to their particular Requisites,
I am now come to the casting
and Contexture of the whole Worke,
comprehended vnder the tearme of
Compartition: Into which (being the
mainest piece) I cannot enter without
a few generall Precautions, as I haue
done in other Parts.
               First therefore, Let no man that intendeth
to build, setle his Fancie vpon
a draugh
                     •
                   of the Worke in paper, how
exactly soeuer measured, or neately set
off in perspectiue; And much lesse vpon
a bare Plant thereof, as they call

the Schiographia or Ground lines; without
a Modell or Type of the whole
Structure, and of euery parcell and
Partition in Pastboord or Wood.
               
               Next that the said Modell bee as
plaine as may be, without colours or
other beautifying, lest the pleasure of
the Eye preoccupate the Iudgement;
which aduise omited by the Italian
Architects, I finde in Philippe de l' Orme,
and therefore (though France bee not
the Theater of best Buildings) it did
merit some mention of his name.
               Lastly, the bigger that this Type be,
it is still the better, not that I will perswade
a man to such an enormity, as
that Modell made by Antonio Labaco, of
Saint Peters Church in Rome, containing
22. foot in length, 16. in breadth,
and 13 in heighth, and costing
4184. crownes: The price in truth of
a reasonable Chappell: Yet in a Fabrique
of some 40. or 50▪ thousand pounds
charge, I wish 30. pounds at least layd

out before hand in an exact Modell; for
a little misery in the Premises▪
                   may easily
breed some absurdity of greater
charge, in the Con
                        •
                     lusion.
               
               Now, after these premonishments,
I will come to the Comparti
                        •
                     ion it selfe;
By which, the Authors of this Art (as
hath beene touched before) doe vnderstand,
a gracefull and vsefull distribution,
of the whole Ground-plot both
for roomes of Office, and of Reception
or Entertainement, as farre as the Capacity
thereof, and the nature of the Countrey
will comport. Which circumstances
in the present Subiect, are all of
maine consideration, and might yeeld
more discourse then an Elementall Rapsodie
will permit. Therefore (to anatomize
briefly this Definition) the
Gracefulnesse (whereof wee speake)
will consist in double Analogie, or correspondencie.
First, between the Parts
and the Whole, whereby a great Fabrique
should haue great Partitions, great

Lights, great Entrances, great Pillars or
Pylasters; In summe, all the Members
great. The next betweene the Parts
themselues, not only, considering their
Breadths, and Lengths, as before, when
wee spake of Doores and Windowes; but
here likewise enters a third respect of
Height, a point (I must confesse) hardly
reduceable to any generall precept.
               True it is, that the Ancients did determine
the Longitude of all Roomes,
which were longer then broade, by
the double of their Latitude, Vitruuius
lib. 6. cap. 5. And the Heighth by the halfe
of the breadth and length summed together
But when the Roome was precisely
square, they made the Height half
as much more as the Latitude; which
Dimensions the moderne Architects
haue taken leaue to varie vpon discretion:
Sometimes squaring the Latitude,
and then making the Diagoniall or
ouerthwart Line, from Angle to Angle,
of the said Square, the measure of the

                  Heighth sometimes more, but seldome
lower then the full breadth it selfe;
which boldnesse of quitting the old
Proportions, some attribute first to Michael
Angelo da Buonaroti, perchance
vpon the credite he had before gotten,
in two other Arts.
               
               The second point is Vsefulnesse,
which will consist in a sufficient Number
of Roomes, of all sorts, and in their
apt Coherence, without distraction, without
confusion; so as the beholder may
not onely call it, Vna Fabrica ben raccolta:
as Italians vse to speake of well vnited
Workes, but likewise that it may
appeare airie and spiritous, and fit for
the welcome of cheerefull Guests; about
which the principall difficultie
will bee in contriuing the Lightes, and
Staire-cases, whereof I will touch a
note or two: For the first, I obserue
that the ancient Archietects were at
much ease. For both the Greekes and
Romanes (of whose priuate dwellings

                  Vitruuius hath left vs some description)
had commonly two Cloystered open
Courts, one seruing for the Womens
side, and the other for the Men: who
yet perchance now adayes would take
so much seperation vnkindly. Howsoeuer,
by this meanes, the reception of
light, into the Bodie of the building,
was very prompt, both from without
and from within: which we must now
supplie either by some open Forme of
the Fabrique, or among gracefull refuges,
by Tarrasing any Storie, which is
in danger of darkenesse; or lastly, by
perpendicular lights, from the Roofe: of
all other the most naturall, as shalbe
shewed anon. For the second dificultie:
which is casting of the Stayre-cases;
That being in it selfe no hard
point, but onely as they are incombrances
of roome for other vse: (which
lights were not) I am therefore aptly
moued heere to speake of them. And
first of Offices.
               
                  
I haue marked a willingnesse, in the
Italian Artisans, to destribute the Kychin,
Pantrie, Bakehouse, washing Roomes:
and euen the Buttrie likewise, vnder
ground; next aboue the Foundation, and
sometimes Leuel with the plaine, or
Floore of the Cellar: raysing the first
Ascent into the house Fifteene Foote or
more for that Ende, which besides
the benefit of remouing such Annoyes
out of sight, and the gayning of so
much more roome aboue, doth also
by eleuation of the Front, adde Maiestie
to the whole Aspect. And with such a
disposition of the principall Stayre-case,
which commonly doth deliuer vs, into
the Plaine of the second Storie, there
may bee wonders done, with a little
roome, whereof I could alleadge braue
Examples abroad; and none more Artificiall,
and Delicious, then a House
built by Daniele Barbaro Patriarche of
Aquileia before mentioned, among the
memorable Commenters vpon Vitruuius.
                  
But the Definition (aboue determined)
doth call vs to some consideration of
our owne Countrie, where though all
the other pettie Offices (before rehearsed)
may well enough bee so remote,
yet by the naturall Hospitalitie of England,
the Buttrie must be more visible▪
and wee neede perchance for our
Raunges, a more spacious and luminous
Kitchin, then the foresaid Compartition
will beare; with a more competent
neerenesse likewise to the Dyning
Roome Or else besides other Inconueniences,
perhapes some of the Dishes
may straggle by the way; Heere let me
note a common defect, that wee haue
of a very vsefull Roome, called by the
Italians Il Tinello; and familliar, nay almost
essentiall, in all their great Familes.
It is a Place properly appointed,
to conserue the meate that is taken
from the Table, till the Waiters eate,
which with vs by an olde fashion, is
more vnseemely set by, in the meane
while.
               
                  Now touching the distribution of
Lodging chambers; I must here take
leaue to reprooue a fashion, which I
know not how hath preuailed
through Italie, though without ancient
examples, as farre as I can perceiue
by Vitruuius. The thing I meane,
is, that they so cast their partitions as
when all Doors are open, a man may see
through the whole House; which doth
necessariely put an intollerable seruitude
vpon all the Chambers saue the
Inmost, where none can arriue, but
through the rest; or else the Walles must
be extreame thicke for secret passages
And yet this also will not serue the
turne, without at least Three doores
to euery Roome: A thing most insufferable,
in cold & windie Regions, and
euery where noe small weakening to
the whole Worke; Therefore with vs
that want no cooling, I cannot commend
the direct opposition of such
Ouertures, being indeede meerely

grounded vpon the fond ambition
of displaying to a Stranger all our Furniture
at one Sight, which therefore is
most maintained by them that meane
to harbour but a few; whereby they
make onely aduantage of the vanitie,
and seldome proue the Inconuenience.
There is likewise another def
                     •
                  ct (as
absurdities are seldome solitarie) which
will necessarily follow, vpon such a seruile
disposing of inward Chambers.
That they must bee forced to make as
many common great Roomes, as there
shalbe seuerall Stories; which (besides
that they are vsually darke, a point
hardly auoided, running as they
doe, through the middle of the whole
House) doe likewise deuoure so much
Place, that thereby they want other
Galleries, and Roomes of Retreate,
which I haue often considered among
them (I must confesse) with no small
wonder; for I obserue no Nation
in the World, by Nature more priuate
                  
and reserued, then the Italian, and on
the other side, in no Hanitations lesse
priuacie; so as there is a kinde of Conflict,
betweene their Dwelling, and their
Being: It might heere perchance bee
expected, that I should at least describe
(which others haue done in draughts
and designes) diuers Formes of Plants
and Partitions, and varieties of Inuentions;
But speculatiue Writers (as I am)
are not bound, to comprise all particular
Cases, within the Latitude of the
Subiect, which they handle; Generall
Lights, and Directions, and pointings
at some faults, is sufficient. The rest
must be committed to the sagacitie of
the Architect, who will bee often put to
diuers ingenious shifts, when hee is to
wrestle with scarsitie of Ground. As
sometimes *The Italians call it vna stanza dannata, as when a Buttrie is cast vnder a a stayre-Case, or the like. to damme one Roome
(though of speciall vse) for the benefit
and beautie of all the rest; Another
while, to make those fairest, which are
most in Sight, and to leaue the other

(like a cunning Painter) in shadow,
cum multis alijs, which it were infinite
to pursue. I will therefore close this
Part touching Compartition, as cheerefully
as I can with a short description
of a Feasting or entertayning Roome, after
the Aegyptian manner, who seeme (at
least till the time of Vitruuius) from the
auncient Hebrewes and Phenicians
(whence all knowledge did flow) to
haue retayned, with other Sciences, in a
high degree, also the Principles, and
practise of this magnificent Art. For
as farre as I may coniecture by our Masters
Text, lib. 6. cap. 5. (where as in many
other Places he hath tortured his Interpreters)
there could no Forme, for
such a Royall vse, bee comparably
imagined, like that of the foresaide Nation,
which I shall aduenture to explaine.
               Let vs conceiue a Floore or Area of
goodly length, (For example, at least
of 120 foote) with the breadth somewhat

more then the halfe of the Longitude,
whereof the reason shalbe afterwards
rendred. About the two longest
sides, and Head of the said Roome, shall
runne an Order of Pillars, which Palladio
doth suppose Corinthian (as I see by
his designe) supplying that point out
of Greece, because we know no Order,
proper to Aegypt. The fourth side I wil
leaue free for the Entrance: On the
foresaid Pillars was laid an Architraue,
which Vitruuius mentioneth alone:
Palladio addes thereunto (and with
reason) both Freeze and Cornice, ouer
which went vp a continued Wall, and
therein, halfe or three quarter Pillars,
answering directly, to the Order below,
but a fourth Part lesse, and betweene
these halfe Columnes aboue, the
whole Roome was windowed round
about.
               Now, from the lowest Pillars there
was layd ouer a Contignation or Floore,
borne vpon the outward Wall, and the

                  Head of the Columnes with Tarrace and
Pauement, Sub dio (saith our Master)
and so indeed hee might safely determine
the matter in Egypt, where they
feare no Clowds: Therefore Palladio
(wo leaueth this Tarrace vncouered in
the middle, and ballised about) did perchance
construe him rightly, though
therein discording from others: Alwayes
we must vnderstand a sufficient
breadth of Pauement, left between the
open part and the Windowes, for some
delight of Spectators, that might looke
downe into the Roome: The Latitude
I haue supposed contrary to some former
Positions, a little more then the
halfe of the length; because the Pillars
standing at a competent distance
from the outmost Wall, will by interception
of the Sight, somewhat in appearance
diminish the breadth; In
which cases, (as I haue touched once
or twice before) Discretion may bee
more licentious then Art. This is the

description of an Egyptian roome, for
Feastes and other Iollities. About the
Walles whereof wee must imagine entire
Satues, placed below, and illuminated
by the descending Light, from
the Tarrace, as likewise from the Windowes
betweene the halfe Pillars aboue:
So as this Roome had abundant and aduantageous
Light; and besides other
garnishing, must needes receiue much
State by the very heighth of the Roofe,
that lay ouer two orders of Columnes:
And so hauing runne through the
foure parts of my first generall Diuision,
namely, Foundation, Walles, Appertions,
and Compartition; the House may
now haue leaue to put on his Hatte:
hauing hitherto beene vncouered it
selfe, and consequently vnfit to couer
others. Which point though it be the
last of this Art in execution, yet it is
alwayes in Intention the first, For who
would build but for Shelter? Therefore
obtayning both the Place, and the

dignity of a Finall cause, it hath beene
diligently handled by diuerse, but by
none more learnedly then Bernardino
Baldi Abbot of Guastalla (before cited
vpon other occasion) who doth
fundamentally, and Mathematically demonstrate
the firmest Knittings of the
vpper Timbers, which make the Roofe.
But it hath beene rather my Scope, in
these Elements to fetch the ground of
all, from Nature her selfe, which indeed
is the simplest mother of Art. Therefore
I will now onely deliuer a few of
the properest, and (as I may say) of the
naturalest considerations, that belong
to this remayning Piece.
               
               There are two extremities to be auoyded
in the Couer, or Roofe: That
it be not too heauy, nor too light. The
first, will suffer a vulgar obiection of
pressing too much the vnder-worke.
The other, contayneth a more secret
inconuenience; for the Couer is not
onely a bare defence, but likewise a

kinde of Band or Ligature, to the whole
Fabrique, and therefore would require
some reasonable weight. But of the
two extreames, a House Top-heauie
is the worst. Next there must bee a
care of Equality, that the Edifice be not
pressed on the one side more then on
the other; and here Palladio doth
wisely (like a cautelous Artizan) that
the inward Walles might beare some
good share in the burthen, and the
outward be the lesse charged.
               Thirdly, the Italians are very precise
in giuing the Couer a gracefull pendence
or slopenesse, diuiding the whole
breadth into Nine parts; whereof two
shal serue for the eleuation of the highest
Toppe or Ridge, from the lowest.
But in this point the quality of the Region
is considerable: For (as our Vitruuius
insinuateth) those Climes that
feare the falling and lying of much
Snow, ought to prouide more inclining
Pentices: and Comelinesse must yeeld to
Necessity.
               
               
                  
These are the vsefullest Cautions
which I finde in Authors, touching the
last Head of our Diuision, wherewith
I will conclude the first Part of
my present Trauaile. The second remayneth,
concerning Ornaments within,
or without the Fabrique: A Piece
not so dry as the meere Contemplation
of proportions. And therefore I
hope therein, somewhat to refresh
both the Reader, and my selfe.
            
         
         
            
            OF
THE ELEMENTS
OF
ARCHITECTVRE.
            The II. part.
            
               EVERY Mans proper
Mansion House and
Home, being the Theater
of his Hospitality,
the Seate of Selfe-fruition,
the Comfortablest
part of his owne Life, the Noblest of
his Sonnes Inheritance, a kinde of priuate
Princedome; Nay, to the Possessors
thereof, an Epitomie of the whole
World: may well deserue by these Attributes,
according to the degree of the
Master, to be decently and delightfully adorned.
For which ende, there are
two Arts attending on Architecture, like

two of her principall Gentlewomen, to
dresse and trimme their Mistresse; PICTVRE
& SCVLPTVRE: Between whom,
before I proceed any further, I wil venture
to determine an ancient quarrell
about their Precedency, with this Distinction;
that in the garnishing of Fabriques,
Sculpture no doubt must haue
the preheminence, as being indeede of
neerer affinity to Architecture it selfe,
and consequently the more naturall,
and more sutable Ornament. But on the
other side, (to consider these two Arts
as I shall doe Philosophically, and not
Mechanichally) An excellent Piece of
Painting, is to my iudgement the more
admirable Obiect, because it comes
neere an Artificiall Miracle; to make diuerse
distinct Eminences appeare vpon
a Flat, by force of Shadowes, and
yet the Shadowes themselues not to appeare:
which I conceiue to be the vttermost
value and vertue of a Painter,
and to which very few haue arriued in
all Ages.
            
            
               
In these two Arts (as they are appliable
to the Subiect which I handle) it
shall bee fit first to consider how to
choose them; and next, how to dispose
them. To guide vs in the choyce, wee
haue a Rule somewhere (I well remember)
in Pliny, and it is a prettie
obseruation: That they doe mutually
helpe to censure one another. For
Picture is best when it standeth off, as
if it were carued; and Sculpture is best
when it appeareth so tender, as if it
were painted, I meane, when there is
such a seeming softnesse in the Limbes,
as if not a Chissell had hewed them out
of Stone, or other Materiall, but a Pensill
had drawne and stroaked them in
Oyle, which the iudicious Poet tooke
well to his Fancy.
            Excudent alij spirantia mollius aera.
            But this generalitie, is not sufficient
to make a good chooser, without a more
particular contraction of his Iudgement.
Therefore when a Piece of

               Art, is set before vs, let the first Caution
be, not to aske who made it, least the
Fame of the Author doe Captiuate the
Fancie of the Buyer. For, that excellent
Men doe alwaies excellently, is a false
Conclusion; whereupon I obserue among
Italian Artizans three notable
Phrases, which well decipher the degrees
of their Workes.
            They will tell you, that a thing was
done Con diligenza, Constudio, and Con
Amore; The first, is but a bare and ordinary
diligence, The second, is a learned
diligence; The third, is much more, euen
a louing diligence; They meane not
with loue to the Bespeaker of the
Worke, but with a loue and delight in
the Worke it selfe, vpon some speciall
Fancie to this, or that Storie; And
when all these concurre (perticularly
the last) in an eminent Author, Then
perchance Titianus Fecit, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
will serue the Turne, without farther Inquisition;
Otherwise Artizans haue not

onely their growthes and Perfections,
but likewise their Vaines and Tymes.
            
            The next Caution must be (to proceede
Logically) that in Iudging of the
Worke it selfe, wee bee not distracted
with too many things at once; Therefore
first (to beginne with Picture)
we are to obserue whether it bee well
drawne, (or as more elegant Artizans
tearme it) well Design'd; Then whether
it be well Coloured, which bee the
two generall Heads; And each of them
hath two principall Requisites; For in
well Designing, there must bee Truth
and Grace, In well Colouring, Force, and
Affection; All other Praises, are but
Consequences of these.
            
               Truth (as we Metaphorically take
it in this Art) is a Iust and Naturall Proportion,
in euery Part of the determined
Figure. Grace is a certaine free disposition,
in the whole Draught, answerable
to that vnaffected franknes of Fashion,
in a liuing Bodie, Man or Woman,

which doth animate Beautie where it is,
and supplie it, where it is not,
            
               Force consisteth, in the Roundings &
Raisings of the Worke, according as the
Limbes doe more or lesse require it; So
as the Beholder, shall spie no sharpenesse
in the bordering Lines; As when Taylors
cut out a Sute, which Italians doe
aptly tearme according to that comparison,
Contorni taglienti; Nor any flatnesse
within the Bodie of the Figure,
which how it is done, we must fetch
from a higher Discipline; For the Opticques
teach vs. That a plaine, will appeare
prominent, and (as it were) embossed,
if the Parts farthest from the Axeltree
or middle Beame of the Eye, shal be
the most shadowed. Because in all
Darknesse, there is a kinde of Deepenesse,
But as in the Arte of perswasion, one of
the most Fundamentall Precepts is; the
concealement of Arte, Soe here likewise,
the Sight must be sweetly deceaued, by
an insensible passage, from brighter colours,

to dimmer, which Italian Artizans
calle the middle Tinctures; That is, Not
as the whites, and yolkes of Egges lie in
the Shell, with visible distinction; But
as when they are beaten, and blended, in
a Dish: which is the neerest comparison,
that I can suddenly conceiue.
            Lastly, Affection is the Liuely Representment,
of any passion whatsoeuer, as if
the Figures stood not vpon a Cloth or
Boorde, but as if they were acting vpon a
Stage; And heere, I must remember,
in truth with much marueile, a note,
which I haue receiued, from excellent
Artizans, that though Gladnesse, and
Griefe, be opposites in Nature; yet they
are such Neighbours and Confiners in
Arte, that the least touch of a Pensill,
will translate a Crying, into a Laughing
Face; which Instance, besides diuers
other, doth often reduce vnto my memorie,
that Ingenious Speculation, of
the Cardinall Cusanus extant in his
Workes, touching the Coincidence of exextremes.
               
And thus much of the foure
Requisites, and Perfections in Picture.
            
            In Sculpture likewise, the Two first are
absolutely necessarie; The third impertinent;
For Solide Figures neede no
eleuation, by force of Lights, or shadowes;
Therefore in the Roome of this,
wee may put (as hath beene before
touched) a kinde of Tendernesse, by the
Italians tearmed Morbidezza, wherein
the Chissell, I must confesse▪ hath more
glory then the Pensill; that being so
hard an Instrument, and working vpon
so vnpliant stuffe, can yet leaue Strokes
of so gentle appearance.
            
            The Fourth, which is the expressing
of Affection (as farre as it doth depend
vpon the Actiuity, and Gesture of the Figure)
is as proper to the Caruer, as to
the Painter; though Colours, no doubt,
haue therein the greatest Power; whereupon,
perchance, did first grow with
vs the Fashion of colouring, euen Regall
Statues, which I must take leaue to call

an English Barbarisme.
            
            Now in these 
                  •
               ower Requisites already
rehearsed, it is strange to note, that no
Artizan, hauing euer beene blamed for
excesse in any of the three last; onely
Truth (which should seeme the most
Innocent) hath suffered some Obiection,
and all Ages, haue yeelded some
one or two Artificers, so prodigiously exquisite,
that they haue beene reputed
too Naturall, in their Draughts; which
will well appeare, by a famous Passage
in Quintilian, touching the Characters
of the ancient Artizans, falling now
so aptly into my memory, that I must
needes translate it, as in truth it may
well deserue.
            The Place which I intend, is extant
in the last Chapter saue one of his
whole Worke, beginning thus in
Latine.
            
            Primi, quorum quidem opera non vetustatis
modo gratia visenda sunt clari Pictores
fuisse dicuntur; Polygnotus atque Aglaophon &c.
            
                The whole Passage, in English
standeth thus:
            
               
                  
                     
                        THe first Painters of name,
whose Workes bee considerable
for any thing more then onely
Antiquitie, are said to haue beene Polygnotus,
and Aglaophon; whose bare Colourings
(hee meanes I thinke in white and
blacke) hath euen yet so many followers,
that those rude and first Elements, as it
were of that, which within a while,
became an Arte, are preferred, before
the greatest Painters that haue beene
extant after them, out of a certaine
Competition (as I conceiue it) in point
of Iudgement. After these, Zeuxes and
Parasius not farre distant in age, both about
the time of the Peloponesian Warre,
(for in Xenophon wee haue a Dialogue
betweene Parasius, and Socrates) did
adde much to this Arte. Of which
the first is said, to haue inuented the
due disposition of Lights and Shadowes;
                           
The second, to haue more subtilly examined,
the truth of Lines in the
Draught; for Zeuxes did make Limbes,
bigger then the life; deeming his
Figures, thereby the more stately and
Maiesticall; & therein (as some thinke)
imitating Homer, whom the stoutest
forme doth please, euen in Women. On
the other side, Parasius did exactly limit
al the Proportions so, as they call him
the Law giuer because in the Images of
the Gods and of Heroicall Personages, others
haue followed his Paternes like a
Decree; But Picture did most flourish,
about the daies of Phillip and euen to
the Successours of Alexander; yet by
sundry habilities; for Protogenes, did excell
in Diligence; Pamphilus and Melanthius
in due Proportion, Antiphilus in
a Franke Facilitie; Theon of Samos, in
strength of Fantasie and conceiuing of
Passions; Apelles, in Inuention, and
Grace, whereof hee doth himselfe most
vaunte; Euphranor, deserues admiration,

that being in other excellent studies,
a principall Man, he was likewise
a wondrous Artizan, both in Painting
and Sculpture. The like difference we
may obserue among the Statuaries; for
the workes of Calon and Fgesias were
somewhat stiffe, like the Tuscan manner;
Those of Calamis not done with
so cold stroakes; And Myron more tender
then the former; a diligent Decency
in Polycletus aboue others, to whom
though the highest prayse bee attributed
by the most, yet lest he should goe
free from exception, some thinke hee
wanted solemnesse; for as he may perchance
be sayd to haue added a comely
dimension to humane shape, somewhat
aboue the truth; so on the other side,
hee seemed not to haue fully expressed
the Maiesty of the Gods: Moreouer,
hee is sayd not to haue medled willingly
with the grauer age, as not aduenturing
beyond smooth cheekes: But
these vertues that were wanting in Polycletus,
                           
were supplied by Phidias and
Al
                                 •
                              menes, yet Phidias was a better Artizan
in the representing of Gods, then of
Men; and in his workes of Iuorie, beyond
all emulation, euen though hee
had left nothing behinde him, but his
Minerua at Athens, or the Olympian Iupiter
in Elis, whose Beautie seemes to
haue added somewhat, euen to the receiued
Religion; the Maiestie of the
Worke, as it were equalling the Deity.
To Truth, they affirme Lysippus and
Praxiteles, to haue made the neerest
approach: for Demetrius is therein reprehended,
as rather exceeding then
deficient; hauing beene a greater aymer
at Likenes, then at Louelines.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            This is that witty Censure of the
ancient Artizans, which Quintilian
hath left vs, where the last Charactar
of Demetrius doth require a little Philosophicall
examination; How an Artificer,
whose end is the imitation of Nature,
can bee too naturall; which likewise

in our dayes was either the fault,
or (to speake more gently) the too
much perfection of Albert Durer, and
perhaps also of Michael Angelo da Buonaroti,
betweene whom I haue heard
noted by an ingenious Artizan, a prety
nice difference, that the German did
too much expresse that which was; and
the Italian, that which should be: Which
seuere obseruation of Nature, by the
one in her commonest, and by the other
in her absolutest Formes, must needs
produce in both a kinde of Rigidity,
and consequently more naturalnesse
then gracefulnesse: This is the cleerest
reason, why some exact Symmetrists
haue been blamed, for being too
true, as neere as I can deliuer my conceit.
And so much touching the
choyce of Picture and Sculpture: The
next is, the application of both, to the
beautifying of Fabriques.
            
            First therefore touching Picture,
there doth occurre a very pertinent

doubt, which hath beene passed ouer
too slightly, not onely by some Men,
but by some Nations; namely, whether
this Ornament can wel become the Outside
of houses, wherin the Germanes haue
made so little scruple, that their best
Townes are the most painted, as Augusta
and Norembergh. To determine this
question in a word: It is true, that a
Story well set out with a good Hand,
will euery where take a Iudicious eye:
But yet withal it is as true, that various
colours on the Out-walles of Buildings,
haue alwayes in them more Delight
then Dignity: Therfore I would there
admit no Paintings but in Blacke and
White, nor euen in that kinde any Figures
(if the roome be capable) vnder
Nine or Ten foot high, which will require
no ordinary Artizan; because the
faults are more visible then in small
Designes. In vnfigured paintings the noblest
is, the imitation of Marbles, & of
Architecture it selfe, as Arches, Treezes,

Columnes, and the like.
            Now for the Inside, heere growes
another doubt, whether Grotesca (as
the Italians) or Antique worke (as wee
call it) should be receiued, against the
expresse authoritie of Vitruuius himselfe,
lib. 7. cap. 5. where Pictura (saith
hee) Fit eius, quod est, seu potest esse, excluding
by this seuere definition, all
Figures composed of different Natures
or Sexes; so as a Syrene or a Centaure
had beene intolerable in his eye: But
in this wee must take leaue to depart
from our Master, & the rather because
he spake out of his owne profession, allowing
Painters (who haue euer bin as
little limited as Poets) a lesse scope in
their imaginations, euen then the grauest
Philosophers, who sometimes doe
serue themselues of Instances, that haue
no Existence in Nature; as wee see in
Platoes Amphisboena, & Aristotles Hirco-Ceruus.
And (to settle this point) what
was indeede more common and familiar

among the Romanes themselues,
then the Picture and Statue of Terminus,
euen one of their Deities? which yet if
we well consider, is but a piece of Grotesca;
I am for these reasons vnwilling
to impouerish that Art, though I could
wish such medlie and motlie Designes,
confined onely to the Ornament of
Freezes, and Borders, their properest
place. As for other Storied Workes
vpon Walles, I doubt our Clime bee
too yeelding and moist, for such Garnishment;
therefore leauing it to the Dwellers
discretion, according to the qualitie
of his Seat; I will onely adde a caution
or two, about the disposing of
Pictures within.
            First, that no Roome bee furnished
with too many, which in truth were
a Surfet of Ornament, vnlesse they bee
Galleries, or some peculiar Repository
for Rarities of Art.
            
            Next, that the best Pieces be placed
not where there is the least, but where

there are the fewest lights; therefore
not onely Roomes windowed on both
ends, which we call through-lighted;
but with two or moe Windowes on the
same side, are enemies to this Art; and
sure it is, that no Painting can be seene
in full Perfection but (as all Nature is illuminated)
by a single Light.
            Thirdly, that in the placing there be
some care also taken, how the Painter
did stand in the Working, which an intelligent
Eye, will easily discouer, and
that Posture is the most naturall; so as
Italian pieces will appeare best in a
Roome where the Windowes are high;
because they are commonly made to
a descending Light, which of all other
doth set off mens Faces in their truest
Spirit.
            Lastly, that they bee as properly bestowed
for their quality, as fitly for their
grace: that is, chearefull Paintings in
Feasting and Banquetting Roomes; Grauer
Stories in Galleries, Land-schips, and

               Boscage, and such wilde workes in open
Tarraces, or in Summer houses (as
we call them) and the like.
            And thus much of Picture, which
let mee close with this Note; that
though my former Discourse may
serue perchance for some reasonable
leading in the choyce of such delights;
yet let no man hope by such a speculatiue
erudition, to discerne the Masterly
and Mysterious touches of Art, but an
Artizan himselfe; to whom therefore
we must leaue the prerogatiue, to censure
the manner and handling, as hee
himselfe must likewise leaue some
points, perchance of no lesse value to
others; as for example, whether the
Story be rightly represented, the Figures
in true action, the Persons suted to their
suerall qualities, the affections proper
and strong, and such like obseruations.
            Now for Sculpture, I must likewise
begin with a Controuersie, as before
(falling into this Place) or let mee rather

call it a very meere Fancie, strangely
taken by Palladio, who hauing noted
in an old Arch or two at Verona,
some part of the Materials already cut
in fine Formes, and some vnpolished,
doth conclude (according to his
Logicke) vpon this particular, that the
Auncients did leaue the outward Face,
of their Marbles or Free-stone, without
any Sculpture, till they were laid, and
Cimented, in the bodie of the Building;
For which likewise hee findeth a reason
(as many doe now and then very
wittily, euen before the thing it selfe be
true) that the Materialls being left
rough were more managable in the Masons
hand, then if they had beene smooth;
And that so the sides might bee laide
together the more exactly; Which
Conceit, once taken hee seemes to
haue farther imprinted, by marking
in certaine Storied Sculptures, of oulde
time▪ how precisely the parts and Lines
of the Figures that passe from one Stone

to another, doe meete; which hee
thinkes could hardly fall out so right,
(forgetting while he speakes of ancient
things, the auncient Diligence) vnlesse
they had beene cut, after the ioyning
of the Materials, But all these Inducements,
cannot counteruaile the sole Inconuenience
of shaking, and Disioynting
the Commissures with so many Strokes
of the Chissell, be
                  •
               ides an Incommodious
Working on Scaffolds; especially hauing
no testimonie, to confirme it, that
I haue yet seene among the records of
Art; Nay, it is indeede rather true, that
they did square, and Carue, and Polish,
their Stone and Marble Workes, euen in
the very Caue of the Quarrie, before it
was hardened by open Aire; But (to
leaue disputation) I will set downe a
few Positiue notes, for the placing of
Sculpture; because the chusing hath
beene handled before.
            That first of all, it bee not too generall
and abundant, which would make

a House, looke like a Cabbinet, & in this
point, morall Philosophie which tempereth
Fancies, is the Superintendent of Art.
            
            That especially, There bee a due
moderation of this Ornament in
the first approach; where our Authors
doe more commend (I meane
about the Principall Entrance) a Dorique,
then a Corinthian garnishment▪
So as if the great Doore, be Arched, with
some braue Head, cut in fine Stone or
Marble for the Key of the Arch, and
two Incumbent Figures gracefully leaning
vpon it, towards one another, as
if they meant to conferre; I should
thinke this a sufficient entertainement,
for the first Reception, of any Iudicious
Sight, which I could wish seconded,
with two great standing Statues on
each side of a paued way that shall
leade vp into the Fabrique, So as the
Beholder at the first entrance, may
passe his Eye betweene them.
            That the Nices, if they containe Figures
               
of white Stone or Marble, bee not
coloured in their Concauitie too blacke,
For though Contraria iuxta se posita
magis illucescunt (by an olde Rule) yet
it hath beene subtilly, and indeede truely
noted that our Sight, is not well contented,
with those sudden departments,
from one extreame, to another; Therefore
let them haue, rather a Duskish
Tincture, then an absolute blacke.
            
            That fine and delicate Sculptures, be
helped with Neerenes, and Grosse
with distance; which was well seene in
the olde controuersie, betweene Phidias
and Alcmenes about the Statue of
Venus: wherein the First did shew discretion,
and saue labour, because the
Worke was to bee viewed at good
Height, which did drowne the sweete
and diligent strokes of his Aduersarie:
A famous emulation of two principall
Artizans, celebrated euen by the Greeke
Poets.
            
            That in the placing of standing Figures
               
aloft, wee must set them in a Posture
somewhat bowing forward; bebecause
(saith our Master, lib. 3. cap. 3. out
of a better Art then his owne) the visuall
beame of our eye, extended to the
Head of the said Figures, being longer
then to the Foote, must necessarily
make that part appeare farther; so as
to reduce it to an erect or vpright position,
there must be allowed a due aduantage
of stooping towards vs; which
Albert Durer hath exactly taught, in
his fore mentioned Geometry. Our
Vitruuius calleth this affection in the
Eye, a resupination of the Figure: For
which word (being in truth his owne,
for ought I know) wee are almost as
much beholding to him, as for the
obseruation it selfe: And let thus
much summarily suffice, touching the
choice and vse of these adorning Arts.
For to speake of garnishing the Fabrique
with a Row of erected Statues, about
the Cornice of euery Contignation
               
or Story, were discourse more proper
for Athens or Rome, in the time of their
true greatnesse, when (as Plinie recordeth
of his own Age) there were neere
as many carued Images, as liuing Men;
like a noble contention, euen in point
of Fertility, betweene Art and Nature;
which passage doth not onely argue
an infinite abundance, both of Artizans
and Materials; but likewise of
Magnificent and Majesticall desires, in
euery common person of those times;
more or lesse according to their Fortunes.
And true it is indeed that the
Marble Monuments & Memories of well
deseruing Men, wherewith the very
high wayes were strewed on each side
was not a bare and transitory entertainement
of the Eye, or onely a gentle
deception of Time, to the Trauailer:
But had also a secret and strong Influence,
euen into the aduancement of the
Monarchie, by continuall representation
of vertuous examples; so as in

that point ART became a piece of
State.
            
            Now as I haue before subordinated
Picture, and Sculpture to Architecture, as
their Mistresse; so there are certaine inferiour
ARTS likewise subordinate to
them: As vnder Picture, Mosaique; vnder
Sculpture, Plastique; which two, I
onely nominate, as the fittest to garnish
Fabriques.
            
            
               Mosaique is a kinde of Painting in
small Pebbles, Cockles and Shells of sundry
colours; and of late dayes likewise
with pieces of Glasse, figured at pleasure;
an Ornament in trueth, of much
beauty, and long life, but of most vse
in pauements and Floorings.
            
            
               Plastique is not onely vnder Sculpture,
but in deed very Sculpture it selfe:
but with this difference; that the
Plasterer doth make his Figures by Addition,
and the Caruer by Substraction,
whereupon Michael Angelo was wont to
say somewhat pleasantly: That Sculpture
               
was nothing but A purgation of superfluities.
For take away from a piece
of wood, or stone, all that is superfluous,
and the remainder is the intended Figure.
Of this Plastique Art, the chiefe
vse with vs is in the gracefull fretting
of roofes: but the Italians applie it,
to the manteling of Chimneys, with great
Figures. A cheape piece of Magnificence,
and as durable almost within
doores, as harder Forms in the weather.
And here though it bee a little excursion,
I cannot passe vnremembred againe,
 their manner of disguising the
shaftes of Chimneys in various fashions,
whereof the noblest is the Pyramidall:
beeing in trueth a piece of polite and
ciuill discretion, to conuert euen the
conduits of soote and smoake, into Ornaments;
whereof I haue hitherto spoken
as farre as may concerne the Bodie
of the Building.
            Now there are Ornaments also without,
as Gardens, Fountaines, Groues, Conseruatories
               
of rare Beasts, Birds, and Fishes.
Of which ignobler kind of Creatures,
Wee ought not (saith our greatest
Arist. lib. 1 cap. 5. de part. Anim. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Master among the sonnes of Nature)
childishly to despise the Contemplation; for
in all things that are naturall, there is euer
something, that is admirable. Of these
externall delights, a word or two.
            First, I must note a certaine contrarietie
betweene building and gardening:
For as Fabriques should bee regular, so
Gardens should bee irregular, or at least
cast into a very wilde Regularitie. To
exemplifie my conceit; I haue seene
a Garden (for the maner perchance incomparable)
into which the first Accesse
was a high walke like a Tarrace,
from whence might bee taken a generall
view of the whole Plott below; but
rather in a delightfull confusion, then
with any plaine distinction of the pieces.
From this the Beholder descending
many steps, was afterwards conueyed
againe, by seuerall mountings and valings,
               
to various entertainements of his
sent, and sight: which I shall not neede
to describe (for that were poeticall)
let me onely note this, that euery one
of these diuersities, was as if hee had
beene Magically transported into a new
Garden.
            But though other Countreys haue
more benefite of Sunne then wee, and
thereby more properly tyed to contemplate
this delight; yet haue I seene
in our owne, a delicate and diligent curiositie,
surely without parallel among
foreigne Nations: Namely, in the Garden
of Sir Henry Fanshaw, at his seat
in Ware-Parke, where I wel remember,
hee did so precisely examine the tinctures,
and seasons of his flowres, that in
their setting, the inwardest of those
which were to come vp at the same
time, should be alwayes a little darker
then the outmost, and so serue them for
a kinde of gentle shadow, like a piece
not of Nature, but of Arte: which mention

(incident to this place) I haue willingly
made of his Name, for the deare
friendship that was long betweene vs:
though I must confesse, with much
wrong to his other vertues; which deserue
a more solide memoriall, then among
these vacant obseruations. So
much of Gardens.
            
            
               Fountaines are figured, or only plaine
Water'd-workes: Of either of which, I
will describe a matchlesse patterne.
            The first, done by the famous hand
of Michael Angelo da Buonaroti, in the
figure of a sturdie woman, washing and
winding of linnen clothes; in which
Acte, shee wrings out the water that
made the Fountaine; which was a
gracefull and naturall conceit in the
Artificer, implying this rule; That all
designes of this kind, should be proper.
            
            The other doth merite some larger
expressiō; There went a long, straight,
mossie walke of competent breadth,
greene, and soft vnder foot, listed on

both sides with an Aquaeduct of white
stone, breast-high, which had a hollow
channell on the top, where ranne a
prety trickling streame; on the edge
whereof, were couched very thicke all
along, certaine small pipes of lead, in
little holes; so neatly, that they could
not be well perceiued, till by the turning
of a cocke, they did sprout ouer
interchangeably from side to side, aboue
mans height, in forme of Arches,
without any intersection or meeting
aloft, because the pipes were not exactly
opposite, so as the Beholder, besides
that, which was fluent in the Aquaeducts
on both hands in his view, did
walke as it were, vnder a continuall
bowre or Hemisphere of water, without
any drop falling on him. An inuention
for refreshment, surely farre excelling
all the Alexandrian delicacies, and Pneumatiques
of Hero.
            
            
               Groues, and artificiall deuices vnder
ground, are of great expence, and little

dignitie; which for my part I could
wish conuerted here into those Crypteria,
whereof mention is made among
the curious prouisions of Ticho Braghe
the Danish Ptolemie, as I may well call
him: which were deepe concaues in
gardens, where the starres might be obserued
euen at noone. For (by the way)
to thinke that the brightnesse of the
Sunnes body aboue, doth drowne our
discerning of the lesser lights, is a popular
errour; the sole impediment being
that lustre, which by reflection, doth
spread about vs, from the face of the
Earth; so as the caues before touched,
may well conduce, not to a delicious,
but to a learned pleasure.
            In Auiaries of wire, to keepe Birdes
of all sorts, the Italians (though no
wastfull Nation) doe in some places
bestow vast expence; including great
scope of ground, varietie of bushes, trees
of good height, running waters, and
sometimes a Stoue annexed, to contemper

the Aire in Winter. So as those
Chanteresses, vnlesse they be such as perhaps
delight as much in their wing, as
in their voice, may liue long, among so
good prouisions and roome, before
they know that they are prisoners; reducing
often to my memory, that conceit
of the Romane Stoicke, who in comparison
of his owne free contemplations,
did thinke diuers great and splendent
fortunes of his time, little more then
commodious captiuities.
            
            Concerning Ponds of pleasure neere
the habitation, I will referre my selfe
to a graue Author of our owne (though
more illustrious by his otherD
                     •
                   Nugis Curial. &c. worke)
namely Sarisburiensis de Pis
                     •
                  inâ.
            
            And here I will end the second part
touching Ornaments, both within, and
without the Fabrique.
            
            Now as almost all those, which haue
deliuered the Elements of Logicke, doe
vsually conclude, with a Chapter touching
Methode; so I am heere seized

with a kind of critical spirit, & desirous
to shut vp these building Elements, with
some Methodical directiō how to censure
Fabriques alreadie raised: for indeed
without some way to contract our
Iudgement, which among so many particulars
would bee lost by diffusion; I
should thinke it almost harder to be a
good Censurer, then a good Architect:
Because the working part may be helped
with Deliberation, but the Iudging must
flow from an extemporall habite. Therfore,
(not to leaue this last Piece without
some Light) I could wish him that
commeth to examine any noble Work,
first of all to examine himselfe, whether
perchance the sight of many braue
things before (which remaine like impressed
formes) haue not made him
apt to thinke nothing good, but that
which is the best; for this humour were
too sowre. Next, before hee come to
settle any imaginable opinion, let him
by all meanes seeke to informe himselfe

precisely, of the Age of the Worke
vpon which hee must passe his Doome.
And if hee shall finde the apparent decayes
to exceed the proportion of Time;
then let him conclude without farther
inquisition, as an absolute Decree,
that either the Materials were too slight,
or the Seate is nought. Now, after
these premisses, if the House be found
to beare his yeares well, (which is alwayes
a token of sound constitution)
Then let him suddenly runne backewardes,
(for the Methode of censuring is
contrary to the Methode of composing)
from the Ornaments (which first allure
the Eye) to the more essentiall Members,
till at last hee be able to forme this Conclusion,
that the Worke is Commodious,
Firme, and Delightfull; which (as I said
in the beginning) are the three capitall
Conditions required in good Buildings,
by all Authors both Ancient and Moderne.
And this is, as I may tearme it
the most Scientificall way of Censuring.
               
There are two other which I must not
forget. The first in Georgio Vassari,
before his laborious Worke of the liues
of Architects, which is to passe a running
examination ouer the whole Edifice,
according to the properties of a
well shapen Man. As whether the Wals
stand vpright vpon cleane footing and
Foundation; whether the Fabrique bee
of a beautifull Stature, whether for the
breadth it appeare well burnished, whether
the principall Entrance be on the
middle Line of the Front or Face, like
our Mouthes, whether the Windowes, as
our Eyes, be set in equall number and
distance on both sides, whether the
Offices like the Veines in our Bodies, be
vsefully distributed, and so forth. For
this Allegoricall review may be driuen as
farre as any Wit will, that is at leasure.
            The second way, is in Vitruuius himselfe,
lib. 1. cap 2. where hee summarily
determineth six Considerations, which
accomplish this whole Art.
            
            
               
               Ordinatio.
               Dispositio.
               Eurythmia.
               Symmetria.
               Decor, and
               
               Distributio.
            
            Whereof (in my conceit) wee may
spare him the first two; for as farre as
I can perceiue, either by his Interpreters,
or by his own Text (which in that
very place, where perchance he should
be clearest, is of all other the Clowdiest)
hee meaneth nothing by Ordination,
but a well setling of the Modell or Scale
of the whole Worke. Nor by Disposition,
more then a neate and full expression
of the first Idea or Designement
thereof; which perchance doe more
belong to the Artificer, then to the
Censurer. The other foure are enough
to condemne, or absolue any Fabrique
whatsoeuer. Whereof Eurythmia is
that agreeable Harmony, betweene the
breadth, length, and height of all the

Roomes of the Fabrique, which suddenly
where it is taketh euery Beholder,
by the secret power of Proportion:
wherein let mee onely note this, That
though the least error or offence that
can be committed against sight, is excesse
of height; yet that fault is no
where of small importance, because it
is the greatest offence against the
Purse.
            
               Symmetria is the conueniencie that
runneth betweene the Parts and the
VVhole, whereof I haue formerly spoken.
            
               Decor is the keeping of a due Respect
betweene the Inhabitant, and the
Habitation. Whence Palladius did conclude,
that the principall Entrance was
neuer to be regulated by any certaine
Dimensions; but by the dignity of the
Master; yet to exceede rather, in the
more, then in the lesse, is a marke of
Generosity, and may al wayes be excused
with some noble Embleme, or Inscription,
               
as that of the Conte di Beuilacqua, ouer
his large Gate at Verona, where perchance
had beene committed a little
Disproportion.
            
            Patet Ianua: Cor magis.
            And heere likewise I must remember
our euer memorable Sir Philip Sidney,
(whose VVit was in truth the very
rule of Congruity) who well knowing
that Basilius (as hee had painted the
State of his Minde) did rather want
some extraordinary Formes to entertaine
his Fancie, then roome for Courtiers;
was contented to place him in a
Star-like Lodge; which otherwise in
seuere Iudgement of Art had beene an
incommodious Figure.
            
            
               Distributio is that vsefull Casting of
all Roomes for Office, Entertainement,
or Pleasure, which I haue handled before
at more length, then any other
Piece.
            These are the Foure Heads which
euery man should runne ouer, before

hee passe any determinate Censure, vpon
the Works that he shal view, wherewith
I will close this last part, touching
Ornaments. Against which (mee
thinkes) I heare an Obiection, euen from
some well-meaning man; That these
delightfull Craftes, may be diuers wayes
ill applied in a Land. I must confesse
indeede, there may bee a Lasciuious,
and there may be likewise a superstitious
vse, both of Picture and of Sculpture:
To which possibility of misapplication,
not onely these Semi-liberall Arts
are subiect; but euen the highest perfections,
and endowments of Nature. As
Beautie in a light woman, Eloquence
in a mutinous Man, Resolution in an
Assasinate, Prudent obseruation of
houres & humours, in a corrupt Courtier,
Sharpenesse of wit and argument
in a seducing Scholler; and the like.
Nay, finally let mee aske, what ART
can be more pernicious, then euen
RELIGION it selfe, if it selfe be conuerted

into an Instrument of ART:
Therefore, Ab abuti ad non vti, negatur
consequentia.
            
            Thus hauing stitched in some sort
together, these Animaduersions, touching
Architecture, and the Ornaments
thereof; I now feele that contemplatiue
spirits are as restlesse as actiue;
for doubting with my selfe, (as
all weakenesse is iealous) that I may be
thought to haue spent my poore obseruation
abroad, about nothing but
Stone and Timber, and such Rubbage;
I am thereby led into an immodestie
of proclaiming another Worke, which
I haue long deuoted to the seruice of
my Countrey: Namely, A Philosophicall
Suruey of Education, which is indeed,
a second Building, or repairing of Nature,
and, as I may tearme it, a kinde of
Morall Architecture; whereof such
Notes as I haue taken in my foreigne

transcursions or abodes, I hope to vtter
without publike offence, though
still with the freedome of a plaine Kentish
man. In the meane while I haue
let these other Gleanings flie abroad,
like the Bird out of the
Arke, to discouer what footing
may bee, for that
which shall
follow.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Errata.
            
               Pag. 6. lin, 8. for as, reade is. Pag. 48. lin. 2. for cuncatim, reade
cuneatim. Pag. 77. lin. 6. for (wo, read (who. Pag. 80. lin. 9. for
wisely, reade wish. Pag. 88. lin. 19. omitted in the Margin the
verses following, touching the coincidence of extreame affections;
represented by Homer in the person of Hoctors wife; as
Painters and Poets haue alwaies had a kind of congeniality.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .—That is,
            
            Shee tooke her sonne into her armes, we
                  •
               
               pingly
laughing.
         
      
   