
      
         
            
            
            The Pilgrimage to Paradise. Compiled for the direction, comfort, and resolution of Gods poore distressed children, in passing through this irkesome wildernesse of temptation and tryall.
            By Leonard Wright.
            
            
               Acts. 14.22.
               Through much tribulation must wee enter into the kingdome of God.
               Matth. 7.14.
               Straight is the gate, and narrowe is the way that leadeth vnto life, and fewe there be that finde it.
            
            Seene and allowed.
            LONDON Printed by Iohn Wolfe, and are to be solde at his shoppe against the broad South doore of Paules. 1591.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, Ihon, Lord Saint-Ihon, Baron of Bletso: L. Wright wisheth increase of honour and temporall prosperitie: and after death, to ioy with Christ in eternal felicitie.
            
               THE Patriarkes in olde time cōplained (right Honorable) that the dayes of their pilgrimage were short & tedious:Genes. 47 Iob 14. 2. Tim. 3.1. but we may truly say, that the days of our crooked aged are most wretched and dangerous.Apoc. 12.12 Whē Satan (whose wrath being great because he knoweth his time but short) is transformed into an Angel of of light: and his peeuish Ministers fashioned like to the Apostles of Christ,2. Cor. 11 13 14. hauyng their heads so fraught with nouelties, their harts so ful of hypocrisie, and their toongs so smooth, eloquent and plausible: as by the persuadable words of mans wisdome, they are able to deceiue (if it were possible) euen the very elect.Mat. 24.24 They fil our eares with vaine iangling, striuing and contending about Church-plots and principles of doctrine (euer learning,2. Tim. 3.7. and neuer able

to come to the trueth) as though Religion consisted onely in speculation, wythout action, hearing, without doing, or knowledge, without execution To the great discouraging and amazing of many a simple soule. Who though in zeale of conscience very careful to please God, and feareful to offend him: yet by reason of ignorance vnable to discerne medicine from poison, or Religion from Superstition. For whose comfort and directiō in the way of truth, godlinesse and vertue, I haue penned this litle volume. Which, as a true testimony of a thankefull minde, for those fauourable courtesies your Lordship hath vouchsafed to shew me, I haue presumed to dedicate vnto your Honor: in hope, that in passing vnder your good name, the people shal the rather be moued to take the same in good part, and apply it to their profit. Humbly beseeching you to pardon my boldenesse, and accept it as willingly, as I offer it faithfully. And as duety bindes me, my dailie prayers to the Almightie for your Honour shal not cease during life.
         
         
            
            The Author to the Reader.
            
               IT is a true saying (gentle Reader) man doth purpose, but God doth dispose. For I had no sooner determined in discharge of my dutie to frame this litle volume: but that vpon speciall occasion offered by some of Satans broode (who vnder an hipocriticall shew of Religion, sought to corrupt the pure doctrine of the Gospell, deface the ministerie, and subuert the state of Ecclesiasticall gouernement:) I was moued in zeale of conscience to stay my former pretence. And rather (as time then required) to apply my indeuours to the preuenting of eminent daungers: as in my late published labour intituled, A Sommons for sleepers: A Patterne for Pastors: A Display of dutie: and The Hunting of Anti-christ: with A friendly admonition to Martin Marprelate, and his Mates, may plainely appeare. Tending chiefely to awake and stirre vp to repentance and amendment of life, such wicked and notorious offenders as are most grieuous to the Church, and noysome

to the common wealth. And to put all states and degrees of people in minde of their office and dutie to God, their Prince and countrie. And now to proceede as one alwayes willing and desirous what in me lyeth, to further the glorie of God, and profite his children: I haue at length finished this my first pretended worke: as a meane to incourage, strengthen & direct in the right path to eternal felicity, such weary wādring Pilgrims: as yet are weake in faith, doubtfull in conscience, or distressed in minde. Crauing thus much at thy handes (courteous Reader) that if it shall please the Lorde in mercie so effectually to blesse and fructifie these my simple trauailes, as by the helpe and meanes thereof, thou shalt conceiue in thy soule that spirituall comfort and heauenly consolation, which in heart I wish thee: then yeelde dutifull thankes to the highest, and charitably pray for me.
            
               vale in Christo. L. Wright.
            
         
      
      
         
            THE PILGRIMAGE to Paradise.
         
            Chapter 1. He that in Paradise wil taist the fruites of Diuinity, must first learne to know himselfe in the schole of humility.
            
               HVmility is a vertue springing from the feare of God: the mother of meekenesse: and sister of deuotiō: without which no man can attaine to the knowledge and feeling of his owne misery in Adam: & felicity in Christ. A Birde, except her winges be mooued downwards, can not flye vp to the top of an hill: nor man, except the affections of his hart be humbled downwards: mount vp to the towre of diuine vnderstanding. And therfore that godly father S. Augustine,
               
                  Augustin de ciuitate Dei.
                compareth heauen vnto a faire stately Pallace, with a litle dore: whereat no man can enter, except he stoupe very low.

As who should say, God reiecteth the proude, and giueth grace to the humble and lowlye.
                  Psalm. 51.
            
            The true wisedome of a Christian Pilgram, consisteth espetia
                  •
               ly, in the knowledge of his owne imperfections. Then are we said to bee righteous (saith Ierom) when we acknowledge our selues to be wicked transgressors.
                  Ierom in his first B. against Pelagius. Augustin.
                He hath much profited in this life (saith S. Augustin) that hath learned how farre he is from perfection of righteousnes.1 Tim. 1.15 For the lesse opinion a man hath of himselfe: the more trust he hath in God. And the more he feeleth in his conscience, the horror of hell:Those that feel not the horror of hell, passe litle for the ioyes of heauen. Psal. 
                  
                     •
                  1.17. the nearer he is to the ioyes of Heauen. None so neare, as the humble penitent, whose hart is most deepely wounded with the greeuousnes of sinnes: nor none so farre from true religion, as he who thinketh himselfe most perfect and very religious.
            The ioyes of Paradise are prepared, not for proud presumptuous Pharasyes, who seeme in their owne Eyes,
                  Luk. 18. most iust, pure and perfect: but poore humble Publicans, that iustly condemne, themselues, as most vile, miserable and wretched. The Sunne of man came not to call the righteous:
                  Luke. 5.32.19, 10.15 23.24 but sinners to repentance. To seeke vp none, but those that do acknowledge themselues to bee lost. To comfort and to raise vp none with his Gospel: but those which bee discomforted, and cast downe by the law. Nor to annoint and heale none with his oyle of

gladnes, but such broken and contrit hartes,
                  Esi. 61. as (for griefe of synnes) are sicke and mourne in syon.
         
         
            Chapter II. Of the lothsome deformity of nature through Adams fall.
            
               A Naturall man consisteth of three partes The spirit,As Adam in Pa
                     •
                  ed or immortall soule, endued with reason, will,1. Th. 5.23. 1 Cor. 2.11. and diuine vnderstanding. The naturall affectiōs, or powers of the soule: as indifferent spurres to prouoke, stirre vp, and pricke forward vnto vertue,
                  Ro. 8.5.13.
               
or vice: and the terrestriall body,
                  Ro. 7.23. 1. Pet. 2.11. Gala. 5.17. wherein Satan (by tempting of Adam) hath written the law of sinne.
            
               All which parts of man (at the fyrst) were in such perfect order and conco
                  •
               d, framed together: as nether the immortall spirit did conceaue any thing: the naturall powers of the soule desyre any thing: nor the terrestriall body, execute any thing, cōtrary to the wil of God. All creatures vnder heauen, being obedient to the body of man: as the subiects to the Prince. The naturall body, obedient to the reasonable soule: as the seruant to the maister. And the reasonable soule, with his affections, obedient to God the Creator: as the child to the father: till that cursed serpent our mortall enemie, found means to set them at variance,
                  Mat. 26.41. and discord. Synce which time, the nature of man became so fraill and weake: the occasions vnto euill, so many: and the illusion of Satan,1 Pet. 5.8. so prompt, and ready: that except, Gods special grace preu
                  •
               nt him: he is apt and prone vpon euery light occasion, to yeeld vnto sinne, and wickednes. Being more easily brought to con
                  •
               eaue an error, by one little word: then the truth by a long tale. And sooner seduced to consent vnto vice, by one small example: then conuerted vnto vertue, by many vehement perswasions.
            
               
                  Rom. 11.17.24And as the Iewish Church was likened vnto a garden Oliue tree: whose branches in time, growing baren: were cutt off, as vnprofitable. And the gentles though by nature wild oliues: yet being grafted in the same, were by grace,

made fruitfull. So is euery naturall man very aptly compared vnto a wild & bitter crab-tree. And as Abraham was remoued from the forest of Babilonia:
                  Gen. 11. and replanted in the fruitfull garden of Canaan.
                  Exod. 2. 
               Moses from the wood of Pharaos court: to the fieldes of Madian hils. And the Israelites from their hellish bondage in Egipt, through the red sea:
                  Exod. 12. Psal. 80.8. to the florishing land of promise. So must euery child of Adam,
               1. Cor. 10.
                     •
                   
                  Rom. 7.5.6 Mat. 15.13. Colo. 2.12. Rom. 10.14 Titus 2.15. bee remoued from the wild Wood of nature: And (by baptim) replanted in the fruitfull orchard of grace: regrafted with the sweete Garden imps of true christian doctrine: and (with the pruning knife of ecclesiasticall discipline) haue thei superfluous branches of sinne and wickednes, daily clensed and cut away:1. Cor. 2.14 Ioh. 15.1.
                     •
                   
                  Math. 3.10. or they cannot bring forth true spirituall fruits, acceptable vnto Gods diuine tast.
         
         
            Chapter 3. Of the miserie of Adams brats, and vanitie of the world.
            
               FOrasmuch as (of all other vices) that olde rooted infection of pride, vaineglorie, and presumption, is most vniuersallie grafted in man: there is no thing more necessarie or profitable to suppresse and subdue his hautie affections

then continuall remembrance what he is: from whence he came: and whether hee shall. That in calling to minde,
                  Eccle. 7. his base mettall: his wretched condition: and mortall generation: he may the rather be moued, more humblie, and lowlie, to conceiue and esteeme of himselfe.
            
               The misery of mortality.What is man? telluris inutile pondus: an vnprofitable lump of earth: like as one might saie to a peece of yse: thou wast water: thou art water: and to water thou shalt turne againe. So man was earth:
                  Gen. 3. he is earth: and to earth hee shall turne againe. Thou hast fashioned mee of mould and earth (saith Iob:
                  Iob. 10.30.) and I am become like dust and ashes. Oh homo (saith Chrisostome) si consideras, quid per o
                     •
                  , quid per nares, quid per ceteros meatus egrediatur,
               
                  Chrisost.
                
               nunquam vilius sterquilium inuenisti.
            
            What is man? 
                  •
               is matter is base, slime, and clay: his nature weake, and feeble: his birth paine, and sorow: his life vaine, and miserable: his state sliperie, & vncertaine: his time short, and tedious: his sinnes horrible, and filthie: and his ende, greeuous and lothsome.
            What is man? A mirror of miserie: a play of fortune:He is born in teares, groweth vp in sighs, liueth in paine, and dyeth in griefe. and a pr
                  •
               y of death. He is borne weping and wailing, to shew his wretchednes: he liueth laughing and toying, to bewraie his folly: and dieth sighing, and sob
                  •
               ing, to declare his weake infirmitie.
            What is man? Appulius a Philosopher, and

scholler to Plato: describeth him in this wise. Mē (saith he:) are liuing creatures, dwelling vpon the earth: hauing soules immortall: brutish seruile bodies, subiect to death: light careful minds apt to errour: vaine in labours: diuers in conditions: long or they bee wise: their time but short: and during life neuer content.
            What is the state of man? Saint Bernard describeth it in this maner. There commeth before thine eies (saith he) a man, poore, naked, and miserable: mourning that he is a man: blushing that he is naked: weeping for that he is a wretch replenished with miserie and feare
                  •
               ull for that his t
                  •
               me is but sho
                  •
               t. A great part of his life passeth away in doing that is euill: a greater part in doing nothing: and the greatest part, in doing thinges to small purpose.
            And as the life of man is vaine, transitorie, and miserable: euen so is the world: with all thinges else, wherein humaine nature taketh pleasure and delight: as health, wealth, honor,
                  Psal. 39.6. Preach. 2. wisedome, strength, beautie, or whatsoeuer.
            What is the world? A vaile of miserie: A sinck of sinne: a mould of mischiefe: a den of theeues: a court of Satan: a purgatorie of paine: a mother to the wicked: and a stepdame to the good. Where the proud and vitious are daily advanced without desert: and the humble and vertuous oppressed without cause: the weiwarde and seditious befrended, and the quiet and obedient

molested: the ignorant and foolish permitted to speake: and the wise and discreete put to silence: crafty dissemblers extolled: and simple insiocents dispised.
            What is the world? A second hell: full of ambitious desires: couetuous conceates: carefull studies: wicked willes: and diuelish intents. A cruell serpent that biteth vs with her teeth: scratcheth vs with her nailes: and swelleth vs with her poison. Much like the deceitful Laban. Who made poore Iacob serue seauen yeares for faire Rachell: and in the ende, deceiued him with foule Lea. Euen so the world promiseth health, wealth, and long life: and in the ende, deceiueth vs with pouertie, sicknes, and death.
            What is the world? Her mi
                  •
               th is but sorow: her pleasure, but paine: her wisedome but foolishnesse: and her wealth but misery. Where nothing is to be looked for, but euen a rancke of troubles, one folowing in a
                  •
               others necke. A great trauell is created for all men, (saith Iesus Sirach) and a heauie yoake vpon all mens c
                  •
               ildren.
                  Eccles. 40. Some so p
                  •
               nched with pouerty & oppressed with miserie: Some tossed and turntoiled with strife, and contention: some tormented with sickenes, sores, and contagious diseases: that if an olde man shoulde set forth the tragidie of his life, from the daie of his birth,As yeares diminish. so troubles increase. till his departure to the graue: a man would wonder that the bodie could suffer, and the h
                  •
               art could beare, so painefull,

and dolorus a pilgrimage.
            All the godly from the beginning haue tasted the troubles of their time. Adam felt his part of miserie: when his children did one kill an other, and saw the fall of his posterity, 900. yeares. Abraham felt his part of miserie: when at Gods commaundement he wandred into a straunge countrie, and suffered great troubles.
                  Gen. 12. 
               Iob felt his part of miserie: when hee sawe the spoyle and hauocke of all his goods: the distruction of his children: and his owne bodie (from toppe to toe) tormented with botches and sores: hauing nothing remaining but his wicked wise: who seemed to be left of the deuill: not to comfort, but vexe and tempt him, to blaspheme God. Ioseph felt his part of miserie:
                  Gen. 38. when he was solde of his brother, and impr
                  •
               soned without cause. Noah felt his part of miserie: being grieuouslye mocked and persecuted of the wicked. Poore Lazarus was both sicke, 
                  •
               o
                  •
               e, hungry and thirsty.
                  Luk. 16. Father Iacob. complayned that his daies were fewe and euill. Dauid said hee was a worme, and no man. Solomon was weary of his life: because all that euer he saw vnder the Sunne: was nothing but vanitie, miserie, and vexation of minde. Father Ierom complayned, that Satan sought to ouerthrowe him: and that his weake fleshe was readie to consent.
                  Ier. 15.20. The Prophet Ieremy cursed the daye of his birth. Ionas said, it was better for h
                  •
               m to die, then liue.

               Chrisostome called the daies of his life, the daies of his sorrowe. Naziensen wept that his mother had brought him forth, to see such miserable daies. Such trauell hath God giuen vnto men vnder the sunne,
                  Preach. 1. to be exercised therin.
         
         
            Chapter IIII. Of the breuitye of mans life, and certaintye of Death.
            
               ANd as the dayes of this our painefull pilgrimage, are vayne, and miserable: so are they short and tedious. The one foote no sooner on the ground: but the other readie to slip into the graue. Man that is borne of woman (saith Iob) hath but a short time to liue,
                  Iob. 14. and is full of miserie. He springeth as a flower: fadeth like a shadowe: and neuer continueth in one state.
                  Iob. 9. My daies (saith he) are more swifte then a runner. We bring our yeares to an ende (saith Dauid) as it were a tale that is tolde. We are dying continually all our life long: euery yeare, day, and houre. Our infancie lasteth a small while, and dyeth. Our youth florisheth a time, and vanisheth. Our manhood a time, and departeth. Our age a time, and by and by it is gone. The dayes
                  Psal. 90. of our life (saith the Psalmist) are three-score

yeares and tenne: and though men bee so strong, that they rubbe out till foure score: yet is their strength then but labour, and sorrow: so soone passeth it away, and we are gone. The life of man is aptly compared to a vapour: to the trace of a cloude:
                  VVis. 
                  
                     •
                  . to a shippe passing ouer the waues of the sea,Vpon this condition we came into the world to leaue it againe. tossed and beaten with tempest: to a birde that flyeth in the aire: or a shaft that is shot at a marke, and neuer staieth till it light vpon the ground. Euen so, man, assoone as he is borne, beginneth immediately, to draw to his ende.
            The godly Patriarkes who liued in the firste age of the world, saw many yeares: yet at last the dyed. Death was alwaies the ende of their song. Adam lyued 930-yeares: Seath 912: Enoch, 905: Kenan 910: Mahelaell, 895: Iared, 962: Mathusala, 969: Lamech, 777: Noah, 950: and they died saith the text. ABraham, the father of the faithfull: Dauid, a man according to Gods owne hart: Iohn Baptist, of whom our Sauiour Christ said, there hath not risen a greater amongst the children of women: y
                  •
               t they dyed. All the Prophets, Apostles, and godly martires, were greatly in Gods fauour: yet they died. Rich and poore, wisemen and fooles: learned and ignorant: godly and vngodly: all must follow the daūce of death. Many are gone before: the rest must followe after: when God doth call nature must obey. Wise Salomon, rich

               Iob, strong Sampson, and faire Absolon, haue trode the path of all flesh. Great Alexander Conquered the whole world: yet could hee finde no weapon to conquer death. The stiffest steele yeeldeth to the hammer: the strongest oake to the axe: and the stoutest heart vnto nature. And therefore, king Phillip of Macedonia wallowing in worldly wealth, and prosperity: commaunded his chamberlaine, euery daye at his vp rysing: sadly to repeate vnto him these wordes. Remember king Phillip, and forget not, that thou art a man, subiect to mortality. All flesh is grasse: and euerye man, the flower of the grasse: the grasse shall be withered, and the flower shall fall away.
            And as death is a thing of all other most certaine and sure: so is the time of d
                  •
               ath most vncertaine and doubtfull.
                  Preach. 9.13 The Lord in his word hath reuea
                  •
               ed vnto man, many notable lessons, touch
                  •
               ng the knowledge of his w
                  •
               ll: yet not the day of death: b
                  •
               cause he would haue vs liue so, as euery day mig
                  •
               t be the day of death. Knowing that as the course of this life, is the r
                  •
               ce vnto death: so is death the gate to eternal life. And therefore, as at night, we do willingly put of our garments: in hope the next morning to put them on againe:He that wil liue, must learne to die. so ought wee willingly to put of these our mortall bodies: assuring our selues that after we haue slept a while in t
                  •
               e dust: to receiue them againe immortall.
            
               
               
                  O homo Nosce Teipsum
                  
                     Behold thy selfe by me, such one was I as thou, & thou in time shalt be euen dust as I am now.
                  
               
            
            
               
               1 Cor. 15. Iohn 12.24The wheat and other seede, though it dye and rot in the ground: yet springeth vp more beautiful then before It is written how certain summer birds lye dead all winter,
                  Plinie.
                and reuiue in the spring.
                  Lactantius.
                The Phenix being burnt vnto ashes, yet of the same ashes is bred to liue againe.

                  So though our bodies layd shall be, to rot in lothsome graue:
                  Yet afterwards in glorious state, more bewty they shall haue:
                  When death hath held them downe awhile.
                  Anon they shall arise,
                  Eternally in ioy to liue
                  With Christ aboue the skyes.
               
            
         
         
            Chapter V. The passage to Paradise is aptly compared to a warfare.
            
               
                  PLato calleth a Philosophers life, a meditation of death. But it may truly be said, that the whole race of a Christian mans life: is nothing else, but a continuall warfare.Beginning and ending in the hart. For as the Israelites by bodily resistance, did assaile, fyght against, and ouercome seuen Nations, before they could obtaine a temporall inheritance, in the land of Canaan: so must Gods children, by spirituall resistance,
                  Deut. 7.1. assaile, fight against, and ouercome their

lewd lustes, wicked, appetits,1 Pet. 2.11 and fleshly affections, with the hole host of vic
                  •
               s: enemies most odious to God, and dangerous to man:
                  Iames 4.1. before they can come to inioy their eternall inheritance in the kingdome of heauen.The more contrary man is to himself, the more agreable to the will of God.
            
            
            
               The chiefe Captaine generall in this continuall conflict, is the mighty Lion of the tribe of Iuda: the prince of peace: the conqueror of death, hell, and sinne: the great Iudge of the world, and bishop of our soules: which is Christ himselfe.
            
               
               The grande Captaine of our ennemyes part: is the great red Dragon: the old crafty serpent: the deceauer of the world: accuser of his bretheren: and gouernor of darknes: which is Satan himselfe. Mighty in power: subtil in pollicy: & skilfull in war. Apt and ready (what in him lyeth) to hinder the glory of God, and saluation of man.1 Pet. 5.8. Who (like a ramping and roring lyon, seeking continually whom he may deuoure) knoweth how to vse both riches and pouerty, prosperity and aduersity health and sicknesse: strength and weakenes, bewty and deformity, as instruments and weapons, to serue his purpose. Hee tempted Adam, to eate the forb
                  •
               ddē fruit: Aaron, to make the goldē Calfe: Dauid, to commit adultry and murther: Iudas, to betray Christ: & Peter, to forsweare him.
            He is the prince of this world: hauing all those which are without or against Christ: either by ignorance, not knowing him: or by heathenish life, not following him: or by violence resist
                  •
               ng him: at his b
                  •
               cke, to take part against vs, with tooth and naile.
            
               The Lieutenants of the field: are fleshly sensuality, against spir
                  •
               tuall reason.
            
               The Sargeants of the band: the cursed children of darknes,
                  Ephe. 6 12. against the faithful ch
                  •
               ldren of light.
            
               The common souldiers: the law of our members, against the law of our mind: the effectes of the flesh, ag
                  •
               i
                  •
               st t
                  •
               e fruites of the spirite:

oppression and wrong, against right and iustice: subtill craft, and deceit,
                  Gala. 5. against true simple meaning: pride and presumption, against humility and lowlines: and all other vice against vertue.
         
         
            Chapter VI. The armour and weapons of a Christian Soldiour.
            
               NOw forasmuch as our enimies, the children of the world: are more subtill, craftie, and politicke in their generation, then the children of God:
                  Mat. 24.24. able to deceiue (if it were possible) euen the very elect. Satan can transfo
                  •
               me himselfe into an Angell of light. Pharaos sorserers could work maruelous strange wonders:
                  Exod. 7. turne a rod to a Serpent: water into bloud: and make quick Frogs. It is written that Simon Magus, could by sorserye flye in the aire: turne stones into bread: make quicke Serpents of brasse: sicles to rea
                  •
               e corne without hands: Images of stone to laugh: and dogges to sing.
            And being so many in number, as which way soeuer we turne, be sure to haue one enimie or other to incounter with vs. At our right hand, the world, the flesh, and the deuill watcheth to

intice vs to our vtter distruction. At our left hand, aduersitie, pouertie and affliction of bodie is readie to cast vs downe, into the dungeon of dispaire. Behinde vs, our sinnes are at hand, to bewray vs. Within vs, our owne conscience, belaieth to accuse vs. Before vs, are Gods iudgements read
                  •
               e to condemne vs: and hell mouth open to deuour vs.
            And seeing also that the soldiours of Satan, are so mightie in force, and strongly armed against vs: hauing on the brest plate of iniury: the girdle of falshood: the shoes of discord: the sheeld of infidelity: the helmet of mistrust: the pearcing dartes of crueltie: the cannon shotte of spitefull reproches: the arrowes of lying slaunders: and the sworde of the flesh, which is the doctrine of man: seeking continually to tempt, peruert, and vtterly confound vs.
            To resist their tyranny therefore, it standeth vs in hand to be also well and strongly armed, with the brestplate of equitie: the shielde of vndoubted faith in Christ: the helmet of assured hope:
                  Ephe. 6. the shoes of knowledge, and peace in the holy Ghost: the girdle of truth, well buckled with patience, and constancie: the cannon shotte of deepe sighes proceeding from a true penitent heart: the arrowes of bitter teares, brought forth by remorse of conscience: the pearcing dartes of humble fasting: deuout praying, charitable giuing, and vertuous liuing: and the

two edged sworde of the eternall word of God: which is liuely in operation,
                  Heb. 4.12. & entreth through euen to the diuiding of the soule, and the spirite: and the ioyntes, and the marow. Mighty and strong to cast downe holdes, and ouerthrow the imaginations of euerye thing that exalteth it selfe against the knowledge of God:2. Cor. 10.41.5 and bring into captiuity euery thought to the obedience of Christ.
            In which spirituall conflic
                  •
               , are three kinds of soldiours. Some painefull warriours: placed for a time, to be tryed in this irkesome vale of miserie, on earth. Some triumphat conquerours: for whom is appointed a crowne of victorie, in the glorious kingdome of heauen. And some cowardly fugitiues: for whō are reserued most greeuous torments, in the lothsome prison of hell. For as that professed soldiour,
                  Esay 24. which in time of battaile doth flye the field: and suffer his captaine amongst his enimies, to be buffited, and beaten downe: is but a dastardlye coward, worthy of death: so that professed christian, which in time of persecution, and trouble,
                  Math. 10.28.32. Rom. 10.9.10. doth flye the spirituall combat, and suffer Christ his louing redeemer, amongst his enimies, to be buffited, and borne downe: is but a dastardly hipocrite, worthy of eternall torments.
            Forasmuch therefore, as he is nowe readie comming in mai
                  •
               stie, and honor to muster,
                  Heb. 10.37. Math. 25.3 reward, and crowne with glorie his conquering

soldiours: and punish with seuerity, all cowardly fugitiues: whose signes and tokens (as messengers) being alreadie come before: to shewe that himselfe is not farre behind. It standeth vs vpon, to keepe our battle ray orderly: fight valiantly: watch carefully: pray hartily: belieue faithfully: hope assuredly: indure constantly: and march on charitably: to stand fast: perseuer, and quite our selues like men: the quarrell is Gods:1. Cor. 16.13. the victorie ours: the ende, the saluation of our soules. Let vs keep am
                  •
               ane course: as it were betwixt Silla and Caribdes: presumption, and desperation: traueling our painefull pilgrimage in humble obedience,
                  Phil. 2.12. with feare and trembling: alwaies ready to do our best, and trusting in Christ to performe the rest.
         
         
            Chapter VII. He that in Paradise will come to ioy with Christ, must trauell with patience vnder the crosse of Christ.
            
               AS the Israelits could not come to the land of promise,
                  Deut. 29. but by long painefull trauell through the wildernes: no more can we come to the promised land of rest:
                  Act. 14.22. but by long painefull trauel through the wildernes of tribulation.
            
               The law of Adams children, is to liue in labor:
                  Gen. 3. and the curse of Eues brats to suffer affliction: yea all mankinde do feele the biting of the serpent.
            Our elders in times past,Though these & such other familiar examples may profitably bee vsed, to helpe the weake capacity of the simple: yet no man ought to ground his conscience vpon the inuention of man, which may erre: but the truth of God which can not deceaue. before they learned their A B.C. (to put them in mind of their calling) began alwaies their fyrst lesson with Christs crosse. Who in building their churches, did imitat the fashion of Salomons temple: so as the bodies thereof, might seeme to represent the church militant: and the chancell, the church triumphant. And in the time of ignorance, was placed right ouer the doore betweene thē, a Rood, or crosse of wood: to signify, that there is no way left vs to passe from the one to the other: but onely vnder the crosse of our louing Redeemer.
            He that will tast of his glory in heauen, must first be partaker of his cuppe vpon earth. Hee that after death will reioyce at his presence,2 Tim. 2.3. must first in his life time mourne for his absence. Hee that will imbrace him in his diuine robes of honor, must thinke no skorne of his earthly ragges of contempt.
                  Luk. 9.26. Whosoeuer is ashamed of his crosse in this life,Hee that will be crowned, must not grudge to be crossed. he will bee ashamed of him in the life to come. Hee can not passe from ioy to ioy, but ether from earthly misery, to heauenly felicity: or else from earthly felicity, to infernall extremity. There is no other way left for the members,
                  Luk. 14.27. then to follow their

head.
                  Mat. 10.24.25. The Disciple is not aboue his maister: nor the seruant aboue his Lord. Seeing the good man of the house hath beene called Belsabub,
                  Luk. 7.34. glutton, and a companion of the wicked: how can the seruants looke for better entertainment?
            If the Prophets, Apostles, and godly Martirs of the primitiue Church, (who suffred so patiently the persecutions and troubles of their time) might haue come to the ioyes of heauen, by liuing here at ease in sensual pleasure and security: they were madde men so to dispise the world, and afflict their bodies as they did. Esay had his carkas cut a sunder with a woodden saw.
                  Hebr. 11. 
               Amos thrust into the temples with a naile. Iohn Baptist, beheaded. Daniel condemned to be eaten of Lyons.All that will liue godly in Christ Iesus, must suffer persecution. 2 Tim. 3.12. The three Israelites, committed to the flam
                  •
               ng fyre. Ieremie and Steeuen stoned to death. Paul, beh
                  •
               aded. Thomas (preaching the Ghospell in India) slaine with a Dart. And Symon Zelots preaching in Britany, was there crucifyed, &c.
            But these valiant and victorious conquerours, were w
                  •
               ll assured, that prosperity and aduersity, riches and poue
                  •
               ty, life and death, are all Gods giftes,
                  Iames 1.3.4 to trye, the hartes of men.
            That godly and valian
                  •
                cha
                  •
               p on Ignatius, scholler to Iohn, and Byshop of Antioch, being condemned for t
                  •
               e Gospell, to be torne and deuoured of wild 
                  •
               e
                  •
               sses:
                  Ignatius an. dom. 80. brast sodenly out in

these words. So I may finde Christ (saith he) I passe neyther for beastes, teeth, fyre, Iebet, crashing my bones, renting my body, nor all the cruell torments, the Deuill and his instruments can inuent.. Who in the middest of his greeuous panges, did valiantly comfort himselfe, saying: Iam incipio esse discipulus Christi. For as a Noble mans seruant is knowen by his maisters cognisance:Let no mā count that a greeuous misery, which Christ hath left as a badge of his blessing. so is a faithfull Christian by bearing his crosse with patience.
            It is written how a certaine Pagan on a time vsyng great iniury and outrage against a godly christ
                  •
               an, asked him in great disdaine, what fruit or profyt he receiued by his Christ. Is not this a singuler profyte (quoth he) that for all the bitter tants cruell in
                  •
               urie,An example of patience. and grieuous outrage against mee, yet I do patiently suffer, and willingly pardon thee without reuenge?
         
         
            Chapter VIII. Of true repentance with her inseperable furniture.
            
               REpentance is an inward sorrow, compunction, and mourning of the hart,
                  Psal. 51.17. 2 Cor. 7.10 and conscience for sinnes committed: and containeth three partes. Contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and reformation of life.1 Iohn. 1.8.9.10. Lyke as a man feeling his body greeuously
                  Math. 3.8.
               
infected with sicknes doth first acknowledge his disease: secondly, seeke to the Phisition for remedie: and thirdly, being cured, is carefull to temper his diet, and keepe his body from surfetting againe. So is it the manner and duty of euery christian Pilgram, feeling his soule surfeted with sinnes: first by earnest repentance to acknowledge his owne wickednes: secondly by humble, faithfull, and deuout praier to seeke vnto Christ for pardon: and thirdly by restraining and subduing his fleshly appetits and vnruly affections, to keepe himselfe from falling againe. And as when the aire is one cast with stormes, the Sunne darkened with tempest, the clowds torne with thunder, and the ground bed
                  •
               wed with raine, straight followeth calme and faire wether. So when a penitent christian, feeling his cōscience burthened with sinnes, doth humbly bewaile and confesse his faultes: the teares (like drops of raine) trickling downe his cheekes, with groning, sighing and sobbing vnto God for mercy: at last, by earnest, faithful, and deuout praier, being easily entreated and wonne: straight followeth pardō in Christ comfort of conscience, and quietnesse of mind.
            
               
                  Psalm. 40.In this manner the Prophet Dauid, confessed his sinnes to be more in number, then the hairs of his head.4 Kings. 20 
               Manasses bowing the knees of his hart vnto God, confessed his faultes to be more then the sandes of the Sea. Ezechias turned

his face to the wall, and mourned heauily. Mary Magdalyn fell downe behinde Iesus,
                  Luk. 7.
                     ••
                  . and lamented pitifully. Peter remembring the words of Christ, after he had for sworne him,
                  Mat. 26.71. went out and wept bitterly. Which godly conuersion (for that it seemeth greeuous and painfull to flesh and bloud, so to resist and striue against the corruption of nature) is of some called penance. For Christ neuer assigned any other penance or satisfaction for synnes:
                  Iohn. 8.11. but goe thy way and synne no more.
            Thus wheresoeuer true repentance with her inseperable furniture (as humble confession: faithfull prayer, and amendment of life) goeth before: their remission of sinnes (belonging only to penitent synners) do alwaies follow after. And wher acknowledging of sinnes leadeth not the way:
                  Luk. 2
                     •
                  .3. there the gates of Gods mercy is alwayes shutte.
         
         
            Chapter IX. Of Confession of sinnes.
            
               THere be foure manner of confessions allowed before God.
            The fyrst is publike: as when for some notorious crime committed) the church is greeuously offēded: the gilty offender ought then to come forth in open assembly, and there

(with an vnfained shew of repentance,2 Cor. 2.3.9 and earnest desire of pardon) to make confession of his fault. Humble thy selfe (saith sainct Ambrose) and intreat thy mother,
                  Ambrose in his 2. B. of repentance Chap. 10. the church of GOD to weepe for thee, and wash away thine offences with her teares.
            The second is, when one priuate person (by word or deede) hath done iniury, hurt, or wrong vnto an other: the party offender ought then in charitable maner to come vnto him,
                  Iames 5.16. Math 5.23.24. confesse his fault, desyre a brotherly reconcillatiō, and make satisfaction for the iniurie committed. Non remittitur peccatum (saith S. Augustine) nisi restituatur ablatum:
                  August.
                that is to say, the fault is not pardoned, without restitution (ether in effect, or affect) to the party offended.
            The third, when a man is distressed in mind, or troubled in conscience, he ought then to resort vnto his pastor, or else some other learned man, whose office and duty is by the word of God,2. Tim. 3.16 17. 2. Cor. 1.4. to instruct his mind, resolue his conscience, & comfort his weaknesse
            The fourth is a daily opening of our hartes in secret before God.
                  Prou. 24. The iust man (saith Salomon) falleth seauen times, and riseth againe. Who so hideth his sinnes (saith he) shal not prosper:
                  Prou. 28. but he that confesseth and forsaketh them, shall haue mercie.
            
               
                  Chrisost. vpon the 30. Psalm. homili. 2.Confesse thy synnes in this life (saith Chrisotome) that thou maist haue rest in the life to

come: not vnto the Preest,Auricular confession was fyrst compelled by Pope Innocent. an. dom. 1198. Psalm. 32.6. 1 Iohn 1.9. who is but thy felow seruant, but vnto God himselfe, who is able to heale them.
            I sayd I will confesse my sinnes vnto the Lord (saith Dauid) and thou forgauest the wickednesse of my fault. If wee acknowledge our sinnes (saith the Apostle) God is mercifull and iust to forgiue vs our synnes, and clense vs from all vnrighteousnes.
         
         
            Chapter X. Of faith, hope, and charity.
            
               FAith is a certainty of thinges, which are not seene:
                  Hebru. 11.1 a sure perswasion and stedfast consent of the hart and conscience: wherewith man beleeueth that, which his dull capacity cā not comprehend: and is deuided into three kindes.
            The first is called a dead or fruitlesse faith,
                  Iames. 2.19. referred only to Deuils & reprobats: who though they beleeue the story of the Bible, and all the articles of the common Creede, except remission of sinnes: yet remaine still in their damnable state.
            The second is to worke miracles:
                  Luk. 17.6. Mark. 9.23.11, 23. as with a certaine assured perswasion, to beleeue that a thing shall come to passe:
                  Acts 3.16. whereby the Apostles

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
did cast out Deuils and heale diseases: Which kind, is common as wel
                  •
                to the reprobate as to the elect.
                  Mat. 7.22.23. But the true, liuely, and iustifying faith:
                  Math. 3.17. Acts 10.43. whereby Gods wrath is pacifyed: our sinnes pardoned: our minds lightned: our harts strengthened:
                  Iames 1.6. Ro. 8.14.15. 1 Cor. 6.15.19. our praye
                  •
               s heard: our requestes granted: and we adopted the children of God, members of Christ, and Temples of the holy ghost:
                  Hebru. 11.6. Math. 16.17. Ro. 10 17. Luk. 24.45. Ro. 10.10.1.16. without which it is not possible to please him: is a syngular gift of God, whereby his holy spirit (by the preaching of his word and sacraments) doth seale and conforme in the harts and conscience of his elect, a certaine assured trust:Which proseedeth rather from the affections of the hart, then the vnderstanding of the braine. Iohn 3.16. that onely by and through the conception, byrth, merits, death, passion, resurrection, assention, & intercession of that pure innocent Lambe Christ Iesus: to haue free pardon & remission of synnes, both originall, and actuall, and raigne with him in glory for euer.
            Pope is an assured, constant, and vnmoouable expectation: which as an inseperable companion,
                  Ro. 15.4.8.24. doth stedfastly looke and long for the perfourmance of those things,1 Thes. 5.8. Titus 2.13. Heb. 10, 21. which faith belieueth to be true: and is therefore called the bloud of faith, and anker of saluation.
            Loue in generall, is a common effect of fauor and affection: and charity is loue, reduced in due order, the handmaid of faith, and mistres of all other vertues.
            And as faith beleeueth the word, and hope

waiteth for the promised reward: so charity seeketh to helpe, comfort, and releeue her neigh:
                  Math. 7.12. 1. Cor. 13.4.7. hour. To profit and do good vnto all: and to hurt or hinder none. To loue all men in Christ, and for Christes sake: and to hate none but sin,
                  Rom. 13.10. Math. 5.44. Ioh. 13.35. and for sinnes sake.
            And as the spirite of life, descending from the head, disperseth into euery part of the bodie: so that if any member shall not be partaker thereof, it cannot liue, but perish terrestrially: euen so the spirite of Christ, (being the head of his Church) so disperseath into euerye member thereof, quickning, knitting, and ioyning them together, by the vertue of concord, loue,
                  Mat. 22.12. Ioh. 13.35. and charity: that if any part, or member shall bee separate, or cut from the same: it cannot liue but perish eternally.
         
         
            Chapter XI. Of prayer and meditation.
            
               AS amongst the Iewes in olde time, those beastes onely,
                  Leu. 11. Prayer must be grounded vpon faith, and faith vpon the word of God. which chew the endde, were counted cleane, and meete for the sustenance of man: so those men onely which (by faithfull prayer, and meditation) chew the cudd of their minds: are counted righteous, and meete for the kingdome

of heauen.
            Meditation is the keye of conscience, which openeth the closet of the heart: and the eye of the soule, whereby she seeth her whole estate, defect, and danger.
            Prayer is an humble lifting vp of the minde vnto God: the fruits of repentance, and foode of faith:
                  Colo. 4.2. consisting of two partes: inuocation, and thanksgiuing. Which Christ himselfe, hath not onely in mercy ordained, as the chiefest part of Diuinity: profitably appointed it, as the surest staffe for a christiā pilgrim to s
                  •
               ay vpon:
                  Mat. 14.38. 1. Tim. 2.1. straightly commaunded it, as the strongest defence for his poore distressed children to flye vnto: and by his owne example confirmed it,
                  Luk. 22.40.41. as the onely meane to obtaine all thinges meete for the vse and profite of man:
                  Math. 7.8. Math. 6.9. but hath also prescribed, an ordinary rule, and firme (as it were his common store house of wealth and vertue) to direct our praiers according to his owne diuine wisedome. Wherein is contained all thinges necessary, both concerning his owne glory: the health of our soules: and preseruation of our bodies. Adding thereunto, a certaine assured promise, confirmed with an othe, and sealed with his owne bloud: that whosoeuer do faithfully beleeue in him: put their trust in his mercy: and depend wholy vpon his prouidence:
                  Mat. 6.30. Act. 10.43. Iohn 6.47. Mark. 11.34 Ioh. 16.23. shall haue cleane remission of sinn
                  •
               s, and eternall life. And whatsoeuer they shall profitably aske in his

name: he will assuredly here them, and graunt their requestes.
                  Psal. 50. Call vpon me in the daye of trouble (saith the Lord:) and I will heare thee, and thou shal praise me. This is the trust that we haue towardes him (saith the Euangelist) that if we aske any thing according to his will,1. Ioh. 5.14. he heareth vs. If you abide in me, and my wordes abide in you (saith our Sauiour) aske what you will, and it shall be done vnto you.
                  Ioh. 15.7. Whatsoeuer you shall aske in prayer, if you do beleeue (saith he) you shall receiue it.
                  Mat. 21, 22. The Lord is nigh vnto all that ca
                  •
               l vpon him (saith Dauid) Yea vnto all such as call vpon him faithfully. I will heare before you call,
                  Psal. 145. yea while you are but euen thinking to speake, saith the Lord.
                  Esay 65.
            
            As truely as hee heard Iobes prayer in the dunghill: Ieremy, in the clay p
                  •
               tte:
                  Iob. 42. Lam. 3. Daniel 6.3. Ionas 2. Act. 7. 
               Daniell in the Lyons denne: the three children, in the flaming fire: Iona
                     •
                  
                in the whales bellye: and Steuen vnder the stones: so truely will he heare the rest of his obedient children,All times, in al places and for all persons. Iames 1.6.7 that call faithfully vpon him in distresse, and mistrust him not. But hee that doubteth (saith the Apostle) is like a waue of the sea, tost w
                  •
               th the wind, and carried with violence. Neither let that man thinke, that he shall receiue any thing of the Lord.
            Some are not heard,Like a harper that plaieth one tune and singeth an other. because they pray with lippes onely, without the affections of the hart. Some for vngratefully abusing Gods benefites, as though got by their owne policie.
            
               Some in praying for superfluity, are iustlye denyed things necessarie. You receiue not (saith the Apostle) because you aske not.
                  Iames 4.2.3 And you aske and receiue not: because you aske amisse.
            The matter in prayer lyeth not in much saying, but well saying. It is not in the number of words,
                  Math. 6.6.7 or lowdnesse of voice: but the zealous affection of an humble penitent heart:
                  Esay. 57. Psal. 31. and the feruent groning desire of a troubl
                  •
               d spiri
                  •
               e: that as most delicate musicke, pearceth the heauens, and soundeth in Gods sacred eares: as daintie meate pleaseth his diuine tast: and as sweete incence, delighteth his heauenly smell.
            When Anna (a figure of the Church) did pray in the Temple:1. King. 1. her hea
                  •
               t and lippes did moue: but her voyce was not heard: and yet God hard her. So was Moises saide to be vehement in prayer,
                  Exod. 14. when he spake not one word.
            It is moreouer to be obserued: that our prayers for spirituall giftes, pertaining to the soule, ought alwaies to be absolute, without condition: as well assured of rem
                  •
               ss
                  •
               on of sinnes, and eternall saluation in Christ, according to his promise. But for temporall thinges pertaining to the bodie: to b
                  •
               e alwaies ioyned with this condition: that if it sha
                  •
               l please his fatherly goodnes, to graunt our petitions. Because wee are ignorant, what is most meete, and profitable for vs.
            When it pleaseth the Lord to bestowe a benefit of his children: his custome is,
                  Phil. 2.13. first to sti
                  •
               re

vp their mindes: moue their heartes: and open their lippes, humbly to pray vnto him.
                  Phil. 2.13. And then (as a louing father) so farre as shall further his owne glorie, and their saluation: to graunt their requestes. For whatsoeuer is contrarie, is vnme
                  •
               t for him to giue: and hurtfu
                  •
               l for vs to receiue.
            And though our prayers be but weake, faint,For if God shoulde straightly measure mans imperfections by the straight rule of his word, the most righteous man vpon earth should not be able to stand before him. Mat. 9.24. Math. 7.6.15 29. VVisd. 1. and full of wandring fantasies: y
                  •
               t in stirring vp our selues, what in vs lyeth: hee will no doubt, put to his helping hand: sharpen our duln
                  •
               s: strengthen our weakenes: pardon our imperfections: and accept our obedience. But contrariwise: as he is mercifull, so is he iust. As he is liberall, so is he wise. He appeared not vnto Moises, before he had runne out of Egypt, vnto the hilles of Madian. Neither will he endewe the hartes of such, with his heauenly consolatiō: as are yet possessed with worldly vanities. He will not cast pearles before swine: not the childrens bread vnto dogges; Ne
                  •
               ther giue a tast of his treasure where there is no will to receiue it. He will be found of those (saith the wise man) that tempt him not.
         
         
            
            Chapter. XII. Of true abstinence or fasting.
            
               FAsting serueth especiallye to three endes. First, to mortify, and subdue the lustes of the flesh. Secondlye, to stirre vp more feruent aptnesse,
                  Tob. 12.9. Psal. 35.13. to meditation and prayer. And th
                  •
               rdly, to be a testimony of our inward humility, and duetifull obedience to the will of God.
            We ought to fast (saith S. Ambrose) to keepe our bodies from surfetting:
                  Ambrose.
                and our soules from sinning.
            The diseases of the minde (saith S. Ierom) are to be healed with praying:
                  Ierom.
                and the lustes of of the body, with fasting. For euen as a wanton pampered horse, doth striue to cast his rider: so doth a wanton pampered bodie, by nature, resist against reason, and vertue. And as a fat foule with few fethers, is vnapt to flye in the aire: so our praiers (as it were the wings of the soule) without abstinence of bodie:
                  Luk. 2.37. Mat. 17.21. are vnapt to fly vnto heauen.
            The bodie of an obedient Christian, is the meetest temple wherein the holy Ghost delighteth to dwell.1. Cor. 6.19 Psal. 51.17. An humble penitent hart, the fittest

altar, whereon the Lord taketh pleasure, to receiue our offerings: and the mortifying of our flesh, the most acceptable sacrifice,
                  Rom. 6.12. Colo. 3.5.6 to appease the honorable maiestie of our God.
            Yet alwaies prouided, that as he is well contented with the abstinence of the godly: so much more with the conuersion of a sinner. Hee is greatly moued with the prayers of the iust: but much more, with the restitution of the iniurious. He is greatly delighted with the patience of the sicke,
                  Iames 1.3.4 Iames 2.15 but much more with the charitable hospitality of those that be whole.
            It is good to fast (saith S. Augustine) but better to giue almesse.Augustine in his 64. sermon of time. When the lustes of the flesh are mortifyed: our wronged brother satisfied: and our needy neighbour releeued: then God with our fast is well pleased.
            
               The sicke for lacke of stomach fast 
               the poore for want of meate,
               The couetuous chuffe to spare his purse Augustine in his 41 sermon, in the wildernes.
               
               the glutton more to eate.
               The apish hipocrite for praise 
               a good man for his soules health alwaies.
            
         
         
            
            Chapter XIII. A briefe summe of Christian religion.
            
               AS the wise men of the East did offer vnto Christ their costlye presents of gold,
                  Math. 2.11. frankensence, and mirre:1. Thes. 3.8 Heb. 13.15 Act. 10.4 Ephe. 4.24. 1. Thes 4.3 Math. 7.12 6.31.33. so the most pretious thing that we can present vnto him, is the golde of faith, and sure hope: the franckensence of zeale, and true deuotion: and the mirre of vertue, & charitable liuing. To honor him with due obedience: and depend wholy vpon his prouidence. Ioyning alwaies practice with knowledge deedes, with wordes: keeping, with hearing: walking with talking: and expressing, with professing.
                  Rom. 2.13. Knowing that not the hearers of the word, but the doers, shall be iustified. Not euery one that saith vnto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen:
                  Mat. 7.21. Ioh. 13.17. Luk. 11.28. but he that doth the will of my father, which is in heauen. If you vnderstand these things (saith our Sauiour) happy are you if you do them. Blessed are they that heare the word of God, and 
                  •
               eepe it.
            
               Christian duetie consisteth in knowledge of the truth, faith in Christ, and obedience to his will.He that heareth the word willingly: vnderstandeth it rightly: belieueth it faithfuly: learneth it perfectly applyeth it profitably: and keepeth it diligently: shall ioy with Christ assuredly.

And this is religion, or godlines, the ground of conscience, and true deuotion.
            The word of God propoundeth; repentance seeketh: prayer findeth: faith apprehendeth: hope assureth: and charity perfourmeth. And where faith neuer doubteth: nor hope neuer shrinketh: nor charity neuer ceaseth: there God neuer faileth. And this is the golden chaine of saluation: the true pilgrimage to Paradise, and right ladder to heauen. To know and beleeue the truth, are two winges to flye vnto ioy: and to resist vice, and practise vertue, two legges to walke to felicity.
            
               Iohn heard a voice from heauen saying: blessed are the dead which die in the Lord:
                  Apoc. 14.13 euen so sayth the spir
                  •
               t, that they rest from their labors, & their works follow them. And he that will die in the Lord, must be carefull to liue in the Lord.
            It is an infallible rule, qualis vita, finis ita: to him that liueth vertuously. God doth alwayes giue grace to dye faithfully. A ioyful death followeth a charitable life: and a happy life insueth such a death. So as hee that liueth to dye well, shall surely die to liue better: whereas he that will not frame himselfe to honor and obay the giuer of his life: is vnworthy to haue or enioy his life. And as God in olde tune,
                  Leuit. 21. was not contented to be serued with the blind, lame, and maimed of the flock: so he that carelesly imployeth the bewty and strength of his youth, in vice,

vanity, and seruice of the Deuill: as though old rotten bones, and dregs of age were good ynough to vse in the seru
                  •
               ce of God: he seldome granteth either time to liue long, or grace to dye well. Such as liue like wolues, do often dye like swine. Commonly after a dissolute life without feare of death, followeth a desperat death, without hope of life. And it agreeth with all equity, right, and reason, that such as in lewd behauiour haue passed their time:A wicked life deserueth a shamefull death. should by rygure of iustice receiue their end.
         
         
            Chapter XIIII. An exhortation to indure constant in time of tryall.
            
               IT is required in a true christian Pilgram, to be wel and strongly armed with patiēce, and girt with constancy, to abide firme and stable in the time of temptation and triall:
                  Ro. 8.36.38 39. so as nether prosperity, nor aduersity, well, nor woe, life nor death, can once moue, quaile, or discorage him.
            Worldly riches are subiect to many mishaps: bodily strength is taken away by sicknes: and by age that dayly cree
                  •
               es on, bewty is soone consumed: but a true constant mind, comforted

by Gods holy spirit: no chance or misfortune can alter or quall. Elias in the desert, Iohn Baptist in the wildernesse, and Peeter in prison with the rest of the Apostles in time of their pilgrimage, had but simple clothing, but the loines of their minds were we
                  •
               l & surely gi
                  •
               t. Whose commendations of Christ himselfe are very great: yet not so much for leauing their parents, frendes, goods, and countrie to followe him: nether for their strait kinde of liuing, or valiant corage in preaching: as for that they continued constant to the end. You are they that haue byden with mee in my temptation (saith he) and I will giue you a kingdome: bee faithfull to the end,
                  Luk. 22.2
                     •
                  .29.
               
                  Apoc. 2.10. Apoc. 21.7. and I will giue you a crown of life. He that ouercommeth, shall possesse all thinges, and I will be his God, and he shall be my sonne,
                  Apoc. 2.7. and shall eate of the tree of life, which is in the middest of Paradise of God. But hee that taketh the Plough in hand, and looke
                  •
               h back,
                  Luk. 9.62. Heb. 10.3
                     •
                  
                is vnmeete for the kingdome of heauen. Not euery one that runneth: but he that commeth to the end of the gole,1 Cor. 9.24 25. hath the garlande. Not euery one that worketh in the vine
                  •
               ard: but he that cōtinueth vntil night,
                  Math. 20. hath the penny. Not euery one that fighteth: but he that getteth the victory, hath the crowne of triumph. Not euery one that beginneth wel,
                  Mat. 10.22 and doth good for a time: but hee that indureth to the end shall be saued.
            When the Angell had wrestled and night with
                  Gen. 
                  
                     •
                  2.
               
               Iacob: at last because it drue neere day, desyred to depart: (no quoth Iacob) I will not let thee go before thou blesse me. Iacob by faith preuailed, and was therefore called Israel (that is to say) one that preuaileth with God: so all that wil be taken at the last day for true christiā Israelites: must by faithfull prayer, patience and constancy, preuaile with God.
            To become a Citizen of heauen, is an office of great honor: and no small matter to obtaine so high a calling. We may not thinke to haue that at the fyrst chop, which all the godly before vs haue obtained in long time: with great trobles, greeuous crosses, and many tears. An Oke springeth vp by litle and litle in great space of yeares: and cut downe againe by many small strokes. The soft drops of water, by often falling, do pierce through the hardest stone. By continuall perswasion, the hardnes of mans hart is molifyed: and by continuall prayers our God is easily intreated. Without great labor and long sute, a worldly benefyte is not obtained at an earthly kings hands: so many we think our selues most happy and blessed: if (when we haue paciently waited in hope, with cont
                  •
               nuall praying and intr
                  •
               ating all the dayes of our life) we may yet at length obtaine our long desired ioyes.
                  Luk. 10 20.
            
            Happy and blessed is hee whom the father of mercy endueth with his interior grace: so to

worke, runne, and perseuer: as in the ende hee may say with the Apostle:2. Tim. 4.7. I haue fought a good fyght: and got the victory. I haue finished my course: and woon the prise. Christ is to me life: and death to mee aduantage. To him with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, and thankes for euer.
         
         
            Chapter XV. A comfortable consolation to the faithfull troope of Christian Pilgrams.
            
               PLucke vp thy hart, and reioice,
                  Sach. 2.8. Psal. 6.2.9. Luk. 12.32. Ihon. 16.20 33. litle poore dispised flocke: for the Lord hath heard the voice of thy weeping: whose will and pleasure is to giue thee a kingdome.
            Great are the troubles of the righteous:
                  Psalm. 33.107. but the Lord himselfe is the defender of their cause, and will deliuer them out of all. One haire of their head shall not perish:
                  Math 10.30 for they are dearely bought. Euen as a Father pittieth his owne sonne:
                  Psal. 103. so is our God mercifull vnto them that feare him. The naturall infirmities of man, are not hid from his eies: he knoweth whereof we are made: he remembreth that we are but dust.
                  Psal. 116.13. Right deare in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Sainctes. He that

toucheth one of his obedient Children, toucheth the apple of his owne eie.
                  Zach. 2. Esay 49. Will a wife forget the child of hir wombe, or the sonne that shee hath borne: and though shee do forget, yet wi
                  •
               l not I forget thee, saith the Lord. I haue bene younge,
                  Psalm. 37. and now am olde (sayth Dauid) yet saw I neuer the righteous forsaken: nor his Children begge their bread. Yea, rather then Helias shall die for foode: he will prepare the Rauens to feede him.3 King. 17. Rather then Sampson shall decay for drinke,
                  Iudg. 15. hee will bring water out of an Asses Iawe bone, to refresh him. Rather then Israell shall starue for hunger: He wil send Manna from Heauen, to norish them. rather then his people shall perish for thirst:
                  Exod. 16. hee will turne the hard Rocke into a standing water,
                  Deutr. 8. to comfort them. Rather then any harme shall come vnto his chosen: hee will set his Angels to keepe and preserue them: and carry the poor begger into Abrahams boosome.
                  Heb. 1.14. Math. 18.10. Psalm. 34. Euk. 16.22. Esay. 54. The Mountaines shall moue, and the hilles shall fall downe: but my louing kindnes, shall neuer moue, nor fall, saith the Lord.
            
               
                  Psal. 12.5.1.They that put their trust in him (saith the Prophet) shall be euen as mount Sion, which may not bee remoued, but standeth fast for euer.
            
               1 Cor, 11.32 Not barrē trees, but fruitful are yerely beaden.And though our louing Father, whose will and pleasure is, not to cocker his children in this life: but rather to punish their sinnes, that

they should not be condempned in the world to come) do feede them for a time,
                  Esay 30. with the sowre bread of heauinesse, and bitter water of affliction: to try them in the fournace of aduersitie:
                  Prou 17. as the potters vessell in the ouen: or gold in the fyer:
                  Apoc. 3.11. yet the time of refreshing (no doubt) is euen at hand. He will come shortly, and will not tary: to wipe all teares from their eies: and turne their sorrow,
                  Apoc. 7.17. Esay 61 Math. 16.20 and miserie into ioy and felicity for euer.
            Whom the Lord loueth, him hee chasteneth:
                  Prou. 3. Tob. 12 and yet delighteth in him as a father in his sonne. Because thou wast beloued of God (saith the Angell to Tobias) it was necessary that temptation should trye thee.
            Lyke as the Heards-man, when any of his flocke are vnruly, and straye from their fellowes: sendeth forth his dogge not of mallice to hurt on deuoure them: but of loue to saue and refourme them. Euen so our heauenly Shepheard; when his sheepe goe astray, and offende him: hee sendeth out his dogge of tribulation: not of e
                  •
               uye to hurt or distroy them: but of fauor to correct and am
                  •
               nd them.
            And as the skilfull Phisitian prescribeth not one manner of dyet, nor one kinde of medecine, to all his patients: but onely that which he knoweth most meete for their bodily health, according to the complection of the man, and

quality of the disease: so where as God our only sailfull Phisitian, knowing best what is meet and expedient for the health of all men, both body and soule: doth giue vnto some prosperity, some aduersity, some health, some sicknes, some quietnes,
                  Iams. 1 12. Phil. 4.11. and some troubles: it is our duty to rest contented with his will: knowing that hee neuer faileth his children in necessity: nor suffreth them to bee tempted aboue their power.1. Cor. 10.13 Though he maketh a wound (sai
                  •
               h Iob) hee giu
                  •
               th a plaister,
                  Iob. 5. and though hee smite, hee maketh hole.
                  Gen. 32. As in wrastling with Iacob with one hande: he did comfort and strengthen him to ouercome with the other.2. Pet. 2
                     •
                  . So will hee either strengthen the rest of his obedient Children,1. Cor. 10.13 to indure and ouercome their troubles: or else open a way whereby to auoide them. And often times those thinges, which are taken for punishmentes, are rather profitable medecins. For euen as the Nurse, by annointing her brest with Aloes, doth weane hir Infant from sucking: so doth God by tribulation and aduersity: weane his Children from sensuall delightes.
            
               
                  Deutr 1.And as Moses, by striking the hard stonie Rocke, with his Rodde: brought forth plenty of Water: euen so GOD by stryking the stony Hart of Man with affliction: bringeth foorth teares of contrition. And as in the

Gold-smithes Forge, the golde is fined, while the Coales are burned: so in the Forge of temptation and trouble: the faithfull are tryed, and fined: while the wicked are hardned and consumed.
            And as the seed, which is cast vpon the land: vnlesse it indure the coldnesse of raine, frost, and snowe: can bring forth no fruit: no more can man:He that soweth in teares shall reape in ioy. Prou. 10. Esay 51.4.5 52.4. vnlesse he do patiently beare the crosse of tribulation and aduersity: bring forth true fruites of the Gospell. The patient abiding of the righteous (saith Salomon) shall be turned into gladnesse. The Lorde correcteth all those whom he loueth:
                  Heb. 12.6. Apoc. 3.19. and scourgeth euery sonne that he receiueth. So as there is no greater temptation, then neuer to be tempted: nor sorer whip, then neuer to be scourged.
            Yet such is the naturall infirmitie of man: that it God beginne a little to chastice: wee sorow and lament, as though there were none other hell. And if we florish a little in prosperity: we laugh and sing, as though there were none oth
                  •
               r heauen. Hauing more respect, how the world is inclined: then what the Lorde hath commaunded. Whereas wee shoulde not so much regard what we are here: as what here after wee shall bee. Not what we haue now: but what we shall haue, in time to come. For all that Christ dyed for, is yet behinde. His kingdome is not of this world.

The effect of his death, is not to make vs florish in this life. The ioy of Gods children, and sorrow of his enimies, beginneth not till after death.
            
               Hoc momentum, vnde pendet eternitas. This is a place of temptation and triall: a moment of time, whereof dependeth eternity of life to come. The figure of this life: withall the glory pompe,1. Cor. 7.31. 2. Cor. 5.17. 2. Pet. 3.13. and vanity thereof: shall vanish and passe away, and all thinges must be new. New heauen: new earth: new bodies: new mindes: and all thinges new: such as neither eye hath seene: eare hath heard: nor heart hath vnderstand before.
         
         
            Chapter XVI. Of the ioyfull state of Gods children after the laste iudgement.
            
               AS the worlde had a beginning: so shall it haue an ending. The heauens (saith the Apostle) shal passe away in manner of a tempest:2. Pet. 3. the eliments shall melt with heat: and the earth with all thinges therein contained shall burne with fier, and be consumed. But the Lord will crea
                  •
               e newe heauens,
                  Esay 51.8. and a new earth:
                  Esay 65.17. and the former (saith the prophet)

shall not bee remembred nor come to minde.
            I saw (saith the Euangelist) a newe heauen. and a newe earth: for the first heauens,
                  Apoc. 21. and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea.
            
            And I saw the holy citie new Ierusalem,All things shall be renewed and restored to the most excellent state of perfection, as in paradise before Adams fall. come downe from God, out of heauen, prepared as a bride, trimmed for her husband. And I heard a great voyce out of heauen saying:

beholde the tabernacle of God is with men: and he will dwell with them: and they shall be his people: and he himselfe shall bee their God with them: and shall wipe awaye all teares from their eies. And there shall bee no more death: neither sorrow: neither crying: neither shall there bee any more paine: for the first things are gone. And there shall be no night there:
                  Apoc. 22.5. and they neede no candle, neither light of the sunne, for the Lorde God giueth them light: and they shall raigne for euermore. Thy sonne shall neuer go downe (saith the Prophet) and thy name shall not be taken away:
                  Esay 60. for the Lorde himselfe shall be thine euerlasting light: and thy sorrowfull daies shall be ended.
                  Esay 30. The moue (saith he) shall then be as light as the sunne: and the sunne light shall be increased, seauen folde: and haue as much shine as in seauen daies besides.
            And as the newe heauens, and newe earth which I will make,
                  Esay 66. shall remaine before mee (saith the Lorde) so shall your seede, and your name continue: and from moneth to moneth: and from Saboth to Saboth: shall all fleshe come and worshippe before me (saith the Lord) and they shall go forth, and looke vpon the karcases of the men which haue transgressed against me: for their worme shall not die neither shall their fire be quenched: and they shall be an abhorring vnto all flesh.
            
               As the gold is desolued in the fire (saith S. Augustine) not to perish,
                  Augustine de ciuitate dei.
                but to make it more fine, and pure: so the first heauen, defiled with the pride of Angels: and the first earth corrupted with the wickednesse of man: shall vanish, passe away, and be no more seene. Not altered in verity, and substance: but changed in fashion, forme, and shape.1. Cor. 7.31 So as the nature, qualitie, and complexion, of corruptible Elemen
                  •
               s, agreeable to these our mortall bodies: shall then be transformed, to agree with our immortall, and purified bodies:1. Thes. 4.16 and so remaine for euer.
            And as we are now clothed, with the Image of Adams corruptible bodie,1. Cor. 15.48.49. subiect to death and miserie:
                  Phil. 3.21. 1. Cor. 15.52.53. so shall wee then bee clothed with the Image of Christes glorified bodie, chaunged into perfection and sincerity. When Christ shall appeare (saith the Apostle) wee shall be like vnto him, and see him as he is.1. Iohn 3.2. And though wee shall not then, as now:
                  Ierom. Mat. 22.30. Psal. 78.25. Iob. 19. bee maintained and fed with elimentall foode, but as the Angels in heauen:Not airie spitits but incorruptible bodies. Theodoret in his 2. dialoge. 1. Cor. 15.38.44. Luk. 24.39 Yet our bodies of the same humaine nature, shape, and fashion, of flesh and bones, with all partes and members of a man, as in this life. Not altered in substance: but chaunged in property. Behold my handes and my feete (saith our Sauiour his Disciples) for it is euen I my selfe: handle mee and see: for a spirite hath not flesh and bones as you

see me haue.
            
               
                  Ioh. 20.19 Anselm. in lib. de simili, Chap. 48.49.Yet such was his bodie, as he entred the chamber where they were assembled, t
                  •
               e dores being shut. Anselmus affirmeth that ye glorifie
                  •
                to ies of the iust: shall be so pure, and p
                  •
               rfect, as may easily pearce or penitrate,
                  Mat. 13.43. Daniel 12. any other body, without resistance, or danger: and in beaut
                  •
               e shall shine, as the sunne.
            And as we shall be new men: so shall we haue new sences to vnderstand thinges, not as they seeme:1. Cor. 13.12. but as they are in deede: And beholde the diuine mysterie of God, face to face. The fruition of whose glorious presence (as the originall fountaine from whence, all wisedome, gladnes, ioye, vertue, and true felicitie, do proceede) shall so rauish, content, and satisfie, euery member,1. Ioh. 14. Act. 2.28. 1. Cor. 2.9. power, and sence of bodie, and minde, with fu
                  •
               l perfection, of pleasure and delight: as neither eie hath seene: eare hath heard: tongue can expresse: nor heart imagine. In comparison whereof: all the va
                  •
               ne pleasures of this world, are but fained shewes, or darke shadowes.
            There was in the temple at Ierusalem, and so in the tabernacle, two vales. The first in the sanctuarie: and the second in sanctum sanctorum. The outward vale did signifye the couering and concealing of those mysteries, glad tydings, of the Gospell, or doctrine of grace: pertaining to the church militant.2. Cor. 3.13.14.18. Which at the death of christ

(to shewe that the same was then reueiled: the fierie sword, which kept the gate of Paradise remoued: and the way to God the Father, vnto all true beleeuers, laid open) did rent and teare in sunder.
                  Mat. 27.51
            
            The inwarde vale, did signify the couering and concealing of those diuine mysteries, which after the generall iudgement shall bee reuealed: when we shall see his glorious maiestie face to face, as he is. Which vale had foure colours,1. Cor. 13.12 signifying the foure Elements: being impediments, and lets, to keepe vs from the sight of those heauenly substances, which our immortall and glorifyed bodies, shall then behold.
            And as our Sauiour Christ,
                  Phil. 2. laide aside the pa
                  •
               t of maiestie: tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant: and hauing performed due obedience, and subiection vnto his father: is now aduanced to the highest dominion, and crowned with honor and glorie, that all knees shall bow vnto him. So after the last day,
                  Rom. 14.11 when he hath performed the offic
                  •
                of a mediator: hee shall yeelde vp into the handes of his Father,1. Cor. 15.24.25. both the kingdome, name, and crowne of glorie:Maister Caluin in his institutions. and bee content with that same glorie which he inioyed before the creation of the world: that God may be all in all.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               A Meditation of the Lords prayer.
               
                  Our Father which art in heauen: halowed bee thy name.
               
               
                  THy sacred word (oh heauenly father) wherby thou art knowne, the onely Lorde of mercy and iudgement:
                     Ro. 12.1.2. 1. Thes. 4 3. Rom. 10.17 Psal. 19.111. bee halowed, and sāctified in vs. That by meanes of hearing thine euerlasting truth: And viewing thy wondrous wor
                     •
                  es, most glorious in their kind: all states, and degrees of people, may continually be moued (with humble, thankfull, and obedient heartes) to ext
                     •
                  ll, praise, and magnify thy infynite goodnes for euer. That all may turne to thy glory, and our saluation.
               
                  Thy kingdome come.
               
               INcrease (most louing Father) thy faithfull family vpon earth:
                     Gala. 1.4. Apoc. 22.20 Mat. 24.31. 1. Thes. 4.17 and make hast to deliuer vs, from this present euill world. Come Lord quickly, to shorten these our sinfull daies, and bring our miserable pilgrimage to an end. That all may turne to thy glorie, and our saluation.
               
               
                  Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heauen.
               
               OH mercifull God, whose eternall will and pleasure is, to glorify them that glorify thee in themselues.2 Thes. 1.10 1 Cor 6.20. 1 Thes. 4 3. We beseech thy fatherly goodnes, so to frame our hartes in due obedience, to thy heauenly wil: as our cheefe study care, and delight, may be wholly applyed to the suppressing of falshod and vice: th' aduauncing of truth and vertue:
                     Luk. 14.27. and bearing with patience the crosse of our louing Redeemer after him. That al may turn to thy glory and our saluation.
               
                  Giue vs this day, our daily bread.
               
               OH most bountifull and gratious Soueraigne: at whose mercyes seat, all mankind must call, and cry for grace:
                     Math. 7.7 at whose almes-basket, both King and Keaser are driuen to begge their bread: at whose bountifull handes,
                     Psalm. 145. all liuing creatures (in due season) expect the
                     •
                  r food. We humbly beseech thee: so to cō
                  fort, norish, and releeue our soules with thy true and holesome bread of life:
                     Iohn. 6.58. as the promise of remission of sinnes, and redemption in Christ, may assuredly bee sealed in our hartes, and conscience. And at thy good will, and pleasure, giue vs thy daily blessing of food and raiment:
                     Mat. 6.31.33. with all thinges needfull for our bodily sustinance in

this life.
                     Da mihi Dō. hodie quod sufficit, & eras plurima petam, Chrisost.
                   Not desyring with couetous worldlings, to wallow in superfluity: but with Salomon, a meane contented liuing, to aide necessity. That all may turne to thy glory and our saluation
               
                  Forgiue vs our trespasses, as wee forgiue them that trespasse against vs.
               
               OH mercifull Father, who hast promised free pardon and forgiuenes of synnes, cōditionally, that we do humbly acknowledge our faultes:
                     Ioel. 2. Luk. 3.8. Math. 6.14.15. amend our liues: and shew like pity and compassion, to our bretheren that offend vs. We humbly beseech thee, so to relent and mollify, our hard stony harts, with the piercyng oile of thy interior grace: as our loue and charity towards them,
                     Luk. 17.3.4. may declare the same promise to bee thankfully receiued of vs. That all may turne to thy glory, and our saluation.
               
                  Lead vs not into temptation: but deliuer vs from euill.
               
               WE pray and beseech thee most gratious Soueraigne to bridle and restraine the furious rage of Sathan, our mortall enemy. Who like a ramping and roring Lyon,1 Pet. 8.5.9. seeketh continually to seduce and

lead vs into err
                     •
                  r, sinne, and vtter distruction. Strengthen our weakenesse:1 Cor. 10.30 quicken our dulnesse: pardō our negl
                     •
                  gence: increase our faith: and keepe vs in all truth godlinesse, and vertue. That we may alw
                     •
                  ies render vnto thy glorious maiesty (w
                     •
                  thout beginning, change, or end) all honor, power, and dominion for euer, Amen.
            
            
               A most godly and comfortable prayer in time of aduersity.
               OH eternall and most louing father, thou God of mercy and iudgement: to whom all thinges in heauen and earth, do bow and obay. At t
                     •
                  e countinance of whose glorious maiesty, the whole wo
                     •
                  ld doth tremble and quake. Who hath fashioned man of slime & earth, couered him in his mothers wombe: and redeemed him from death and hell. Who seeth the very secrets of mans harte: vnderstandeth his thoughtes: and spiest out all his wayes. To thee, oh heauenly king, I humbly bowe the knees of my hart: beseeching thy fatherly goodnes (in Iesus Christ) to heare me poore wretched child of Adam: begotten and borne in sin: disquieted with troubles: wrapt in aduersity, & oppressed with misery. Yet by thy secret purpose pertaine to thy kingdome. An vnruly sheepe of thy fold, by election and calling: an vnprofitable seruant of thy houshold by obedience and duty.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
And vnworthy sonne of thy family, by adoption and grace.
               I will call mine owne waies to remembrance: confesse mine iniquities against my selfe: and power out my complaint before thee. G
                     •
                  ue eare to my prayer O Lord: consider my distresse: and ponder the voice of my humble desires. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my hart, be alwaies acceptable in thy sight: O Lord my strength and my redemer. I haue sinned most greeuously (Oh mercifull God) against heauen, and before thee. I haue sore prouoked thyne anger, oh Lord: thy wrath is waxen hot, & thy heauy displeasure is sore kindled against me. And now in the vexation of my spirit: and the anguish of my soule (Remembring thy fatherly kindnes towards penitent sinners) I appeale to thy eternall mercy: acknowledge my wickednes: and lament my greuous offences. My hart is broken with sorrows: my life waxē old with heauines: and my yeares with mourning. How long wilt thou be angry with thy seruant to Lord: how lo
                     •
                  g shall I seeke counsell in my soul: and be so vexed in my spirit? How long shall I (poore sinfull wretch) be tossed in these troublesome floods of mortality: bewayling the tediousnes of this my yrksome pilgrimage. The infant ouercommeth his mother with crying: the child his father with weeping: and the seruant his maister with submission.

and wilt thou be no more intreated? Oh Lord, where are thy tender mercies, and louing kindnes, which hath bin euer of old? our Fathers hoped in thee, and were deliuered: they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. Thou art the father of the fatherlesse: and the helper of the frendlesse. Thou hast alwaies heard the humble desire of the poore: thou preparest their hart to call vppon thee: and thine Eares harken thereunto. Thou deliuerest them from wronge: and right deare is their bloud in thy sight. Why art thou so full of heauines then, oh my soule: & why art thou so disquieted within mee? Oh put thy trust in God: for I will yet giue him thanks, which is the helpe of my countinance, and my God. Yea though hee kill me: yet will I trust in him. I will sing vnto the Lord, so long as I liue: and will praise my God while I haue any being. He hath chastened, & corrected me: but not giuen me ouer vnto death. And therefore my hart daunceth for ioy: my flesh shall rest in hope: and in my song will I praise him. I will honor him with due obedience: serue him in feare: and reioice vnto him with reuerence. Rebuke me not in thyne anger oh Lord; neither chasten me in thy heauy displeasure. Forsake me not in mine old age, when my strength faileth me: but comfort my heauines: pitty my misery: and releeue my necessity. Clense me from my secret faultes: and pardon

the sinnes of my youth. Grant me a new hart: a new mind: a new spirit: and a new life. And I wil offer vnto thee the sacrifice of thankes geuing, and reioyce in thy saluation, oh thou most highest. Thy testimonies shal delight my soule, in the dayes of my trouble: thy statutes shall be my songes, in the house of my pilgrimage: and thy law shall be dearer vnto me: then thousands of gold and siluer. To thee oh heauenly Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost: three distinct persons in Trinitie: and one God in power, might, and maiesty: be euerlasting glory, perpetual praise: and eternall thanks for euermore, world without ende: Amen,
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               The Table of the Chapters, contained in this booke.
               Chapter I. He that in Paradise wil taist the fruites of Diuinity, must first learne to know himselfe in the schole of humility. fol. 1.
               Chapter II. Of the lothsome deformity of nature through Adams fall. fol. 3.
               Chapter III. Of the miserie of Adams brats, and vanitie of the world. fol. 5.
               Chapter IIII. Of the breuitye of mans life, and certaintye of Death. fol. 10.
               Chapter V. The passage of Paradise is aptly compared to a warfare. fol. 14.
               Chapter VI. The armour and weapons of a Christian Soldiour. fol. 17.
               Chapter VII. He that in Paradise will come to ioy with Christ, must trauell with patience vnder the crosse of Christ. fol. 20.
               Chapter VIII. Of true repentance with her inseperable furniture. fol. 23.
               Chapter IX. Of Confession of sinnes. fol. 25.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               Chapter X. Of faith, hope, and charity. fol. 27.
               Chapter XI. Of prayer and meditation. fol. 29.
               Chapter XII. Of true abstinence or fasting. fol. 34.
               Chapter XIII. A briefe summe of Christian religion. fol. 36.
               Chapter XIIII. An exhortation to indure constant in time of tryall. fol. 38.
               Chapter XV. A comfortable consolation to the faithful troupe of Christian Pilgrims. fol. 41.
               Chapter XVI.
                     Of the ioyful state of Gods children, after the last iudgement. fol. 46.
                     A meditation of the Lords prayer. fol. 52.
                     A most godly and comfortable prayer in time of aduersity. fol. 55.
                  
               
            
            
         
      
   